Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect. Surgical removal of lesions associated with intractable seizures or focal deficits from recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect has traditionally been recommended [Heros & Heros 2000, Selman et al 2000, Folkersma & Mooij 2001]; however, a recent large prospective study in Scotland reported that surgical excision increased the overall risk of short-term neurologic disability, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, and new focal neurosurgical deficits [Moultrie et al 2014], calling this practice into question.

Neuropsychological testing may be considered prior to any neurosurgical procedure.

Microsurgical techniques rely on intraoperative examination for precise localization.

Even when a large number of lesions are present, a surgical approach may be justified.

Gamma knife surgery or radiosurgery, while effective, appears to increase the risk of recurrent hemorrhage and remains unproven [Wang et al 2010, Steiner et al 2010]. Very large single lesions can be difficult to ablate, especially in the brain stem. In these instances, radiosurgery may be an option [Monaco et al 2010].

In a group of individuals with symptomatic cavernous malformations studied in Japan, radiosurgery using varying doses of radiation for deep lesions was compared with conservative (nonsurgical) management. Doses less than 15 Gray (Gy) were associated with the lowest level of complications. Complications were also lower when the lesions were of smaller size, with overall hemorrhage rates reduced initially but reverting to a rate similar to that of the natural history after the first two years post-radiosurgery [Kida et al 2015].

A study that carefully reviewed post-radiosurgery changes in individuals with CCM or AVM found that more than 30% developed radiation necrosis [Blamek et al 2010].

Seizures. Standard treatment for focal seizures using antiepileptic medication with early evaluation for surgical resection is appropriate (see Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect).

Headaches. Standard treatment and management of headaches is indicated unless the headache is severe, prolonged, or progressive, or associated with new or worsening neurologic deficits. In this circumstance, urgent brain imaging could lead to surgical management.

Neurologic deficits. Rehabilitation is indicated for those with temporary or permanent neurologic deficits.
