Cutaneous photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment for this disease or specific treatment for the photosensitivity.

Currently the only effective treatment is prevention of blistering by avoidance of light exposure, including the long-wave ultraviolet sunlight that passes through window glass or light emitted by fluorescent sources:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective window films for cars and windows at home as well as at school/work to prevent exposure to UV light

Replacement of fluorescent lights with reddish incandescent bulbs or installation of filtering screens

Reflectant sunscreens containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Note, however, that these may be cosmetically unacceptable and, in any case, do not replace strict avoidance of sun/light exposure.

Skin trauma should be avoided.

Wound care is essential to prevent infection of opened blisters. Antiseptic and topical/oral antibiotic treatment may be indicated to avoid progression to osteomyelitis and bone resorption with subsequent mutilation.

Surgical intervention may be indicated for severe mutilation (repair of microstomia, correction of ectropion, reconstruction of the nose).

Laser hair removal can be used to treat facial hypertrichosis.

Note: (1) Beta-carotene has been tried in some individuals but without significant benefit. (2) Phototherapy with narrowband ultraviolet B radiation did not show any benefit.

Ocular manifestations

Avoidance of damage to the eyelids and cornea by wrap-around sun glasses

Topical antibiotics for corneal ulcers, scleritis, and blepharitis

Artificial tears and lubricants to help prevent dry eyes in those with ectropion

Corrective surgery of eyelids to help protect the cornea from injury in those with ectropion [Katugampola et al 2012a]

Bone manifestations. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with osteoporosis [Katugampola et al 2012a].

Hemolytic anemia

Consider blood transfusions when hemolysis is significant.

Chronic transfusions (every 2-4 weeks) with a target hematocrit greater than 35% can suppress erythropoiesis and decrease porphyrin production, which reduces porphyrin levels and photosensitivity [Piomelli et al 1986].

Note: In those who receive frequent transfusions, the body iron burden can be reduced with parenteral or oral chelators [Poh-Fitzpatrick et al 1988].

Iron deficiency induced by treatment with deferasirox improved photosensitivity and hemolysis in one patient [Egan at al 2015].

Note: Although oral charcoal and cholestyramine were thought to increase fecal loss of porphyrins, a clear clinical benefit has not been shown [Tishler & Winston 1990].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only cure for CEP and should be considered in children with severe cutaneous and hematologic involvement. Autologous as well as allogeneic stem cell transplants have been performed successfully [Thomas et al 1996, Tezcan et al 1998, Harada et al 2001, Shaw et al 2001, Dupuis-Girod et al 2005, Taibjee et al 2007, Faraci et al 2008]. The age of children with CEP receiving BMT ranges from younger than one year to 13 years [Katugampola et al 2012b]. Of note, although some of the first individuals with CEP to successfully undergo BMT in childhood should be in their 20s now [Thomas et al 1996, Zix-Kieffer et al 1996], no follow-up information is available and the long-term outcome in individuals with CEP post-BMT is unknown.
