Guidelines for management have been published by the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2014] (full text).

Treatment includes care by a metabolic team familiar with the medical issues associated with long-term management of persons with GSD. At a minimum, such a team should include the following:

Metabolic specialist familiar with the multisystem nature of GSDI. This individual should monitor current medical issues while providing anticipatory guidance and feedback regarding potential future medical issues (e.g., malignant transformation of liver adenomas, kidney stone management).

Metabolic nutritionist who monitors nutritional adequacy, weight management, food choices, and timing of cornstarch and food intake, and who works with the individual and/or family to assure understanding of the parameters of compliance at different life stages

Health care provider (nurse, genetic counselor, physician assistant) familiar with the inheritance of GSDI who can address questions related to implications of this diagnosis for other family members and future childbearing of the affected person. Such an individual may focus on health care compliance by assisting affected children to transition to independent understanding and management of their GSDI-related health care issues.

Care teams often establish relationships with additional health care workers including:

Medical social worker to assist with formula acquisition and access to community-based services (e.g., access to regular exercise and physical activity plans) and provide early intervention for long-term health management and wellness;

Psychologist with experience in helping affected individuals cope with eating disorders and chronic illness.

Medical Nutrition Therapy Goals

Maintain

normal glucose levels and prevent hypoglycemia:

Frequent daytime feedings. Small frequent meals and snacks high in complex carbohydrates with additional feedings between meals and before bedtime are recommended (monitoring of blood glucose concentration may help adjust feeding schedules to meet individual needs).

Nighttime intragastric continuous glucose infusion through a nasogastric tube or a gastrostomy tube. An optimal infusion should provide 8-10 mg/kg/min glucose in an infant and 6-8 mg/kg/min glucose in an older child.

Uncooked cornstarch orally can be started during infancy [Wolfsdorf & Crigler 1999, Weinstein & Wolfsdorf 2002]. Cornstarch should be given between meals or before bedtime so as not to interfere with appetite at meal time.

Argo® is the preferred brand in the United States in terms of both taste and sustainability. Other brands should be used with caution, and randomly switching between brands is not recommended. A modified cornstarch, waxy maize extended-release cornstarch, Glycosade®, is available in Europe and the United States for overnight treatment [Ross et al 2016].

There is no consensus on the age at which cornstarch therapy should be initiated but a trial is often introduced between ages six months and one year. Amylase is required to digest cornstarch and may not be present until age two years.

The severity and recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes determines the timing of cornstarch therapy initiation via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube in infancy and childhood and oral ingestion in teenagers and adults.

Note: Recommendations for uncooked cornstarch dosing are: 1.6 g/kg body weight every four hours for infants, 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight every six hours for young children through puberty, and 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight given before bed time for adults. Dosing for modified cornstarch should be decided under the guidance of a metabolic treatment team using frequent glucose monitoring.

Provide

optimal nutrition for growth and development:

Complex carbohydrates (60%-70% of recommended total energy intake) including cornstarch and starches from whole-grain bread, rice, and potatoes for children and adolescents and rice cereals for infants

Note: (1) Intake of sucrose and fructose should be restricted for infants and older children. Avoid sugar, fruits, fruit juice, high-fructose corn syrup, sorbitol, cane juice, and other foods that cannot be broken down into glucose. (2) Intake of lactose and galactose should be limited. One serving per day for an older child usually entails 1.5 ounces of cheese OR 1 cup of yogurt OR 1 cup of skim milk. (3) Blood glucose monitoring for hypoglycemia is important so that overtreatment with cornstarch may be avoided. If excess weight gain occurs, consider decreasing the amount of cornstarch gradually over time and mixing cornstarch in water instead of Prosobee® or Tolerex®.

Protein (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) of high quality, high biologic value (e.g., protein low in fat). Soy formula (Prosobee®) and soy milk (lactose/galactose free) can be used both in infancy and childhood for carbohydrate and protein needs.

Note: (1) Avoid soy milks that are sweetened with sucrose; the ones with rice syrup or brown rice syrup can be taken. (2) Soy milk mixed with cane sugar should be avoided.

Fat (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) as part of a low-fat diet that includes heart-healthy fats such as canola oil and olive oil. Note: Families need explicit guidelines on fat intake as part of monitoring total energy intake and avoiding excessive weight gain.

Calcium and vitamin D supplements to support bone growth and mineralization. If the individual is not on calcium-fortified soy milk, calcium citrate or calcium carbonate with vitamin D is recommended to meet RDA for age needs and to prevent nutritional deficiencies.

Iron supplements in complete multivitamins with minerals (100% RDA iron and zinc) to avoid anemia and iron deficiency

Treatment of Other Manifestations

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is used to prevent gout when dietary therapy fails to completely normalize blood uric acid concentration, especially after puberty.

Lipid-lowering medications, such as HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and fibrate (e.g., Lipitor®, gemfibrozil), are used when lipid levels remain elevated despite good metabolic control, especially after puberty.

Citrate supplementation may help prevent or ameliorate nephrocalcinosis and the development of urinary calculi.

In young children, an initial dose of 1 mEq/kg/day in liquid form divided into three doses should be instituted. The dose should be increased based on urinary citrate excretion.

In older children and adults, potassium citrate tablets can be started at a dose of 10 mEq/3x/day. Citrate use should be monitored as it can cause hypertension and life-threatening hyperkalemia in affected individuals with renal impairment. Sodium levels should also be monitored.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as captopril are used to treat microalbuminuria, an early indicator of renal dysfunction.

Kidney transplantation can be performed for ESRD.

Hepatic adenomas can be treated with surgery or other interventions including percutaneous ethanol injections and radiofrequency ablation.

Liver transplantation can be considered when other interventions have failed.

Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can be used to treat recurrent infections:

G-CSF may increase the number and improve the function of circulating neutrophils.

G-CSF may improve the symptoms of Crohn's-like inflammatory bowel disease in individuals with GSDIb.

G-CSF should be administered subcutaneously starting at 1.0 μg/kg given daily or every other day. The G-CSF dose should be increased stepwise at approximately two-week intervals until the target absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of greater than 500 to up to 1.0 x 109/L is reached.

Standard management of individuals with platelet dysfunction/von Willebrand disease include antifibrinolytics and deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP), which acts by stimulating factor VIII from endothelial cells and improving von Willebrand factor activity and the platelet release reaction. However, DDAVP should be used with caution due to the risk for fluid overload and hyponatremia.
