Management guidelines have been developed [Gagnon et al 2010].

No specific treatment exists for the progressive weakness in individuals with DM1.

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help evaluate affected individuals regarding the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses. Orthopedic surgery may benefit children with musculoskeletal deformities [Canavese & Sussman 2009].

Special education evaluation is indicated for children with DM1.

Increased weakness in DM1 has been associated with both hypothyroidism and certain cholesterol-lowering medications (i.e. statins); thus, some strength may return if these causative factors are eliminated.

Myotonia in DM1 is typically mild to moderate and rarely requires treatment [Ricker et al 1999]. Anecdotally, some individuals have responded to mexilitene or carbamazepine. Logigian et al [2010] found mexilitene 150-200 mg TID effective and safe for treating myotonia.

Pain management can be an important part of DM1 treatment. Different medications and combinations of medications work for some individuals, although none has been routinely effective; medications that have been used include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids, and tricyclic antidepressants. When used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, low-dose analgesics may provide relief.

Consultation with a cardiologist is appropriate for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to other symptoms in individuals with DM1. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Sovari et al 2007].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. Recurrence after surgery has been reported [Garrott et al 2004].

Males with low serum concentration of testosterone require hormone replacement therapy if they are symptomatic.

In most cases, surgical excision of pilomatrixoma including clear margins and its overlying skin is the preferred treatment [Cigliano et al 2005].

An extensive review found no evidence for successful treatment of hypersomnia with routine psychostimulants [Annane et al 2006], although others have reported benefit [Talbot et al 2003, Wintzen et al 2007].
