Hyperuricemia. The overproduction of uric acid must be controlled to reduce the risk for nephrolithiasis, urate nephropathy, gouty arthritis, and tophi. Overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid catalyzed by xanthine oxidase. The dose of allopurinol is adjusted to maintain the uric acid within normal limits.

Note: Control of serum concentration of uric acid from birth using allopurinol has no effect on behavioral and neurologic symptoms.

Allopurinol therapy results in the accumulation of hypoxanthine and xanthine; xanthine may also form stones. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid periods of relative dehydration that could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system. Stones that develop in allopurinol-treated patients are usually composed of xanthine. A uric acid stone is an index of too little allopurinol. Hypoxanthine is soluble. Therefore, oxypurine analysis is useful in adjusting doses to maximize hypoxanthine. The allopurinol metabolite oxypurinol is also insoluble, and oxypurinol crystalluria has been observed with dehydration. Its concentration can also be monitored by oxypurine analysis of the urine.

Renal stones that form despite allopurinol may require lithotripsy or surgery.

Neurologic dysfunction. Spasticity can be managed by the administration of baclofen or benzodiazepines.

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Currently, no uniformly effective intervention for managing the neurobehavioral aspects of the disease exists. Self-injurious and other deleterious behaviors are best managed by a combination of physical, behavioral [Olson & Houlihan 2000], psychiatric [Harris 2007], and medical interventions.

Because stress increases self-injury, behavioral management through aversive techniques (which reduce self-injury in other conditions) actually increases self-injury in individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Virtually all affected individuals require physical restraints to prevent self-injury and are restrained more than 75% of the time, often at their own request and sometimes with restraints that would appear to be ineffective as they do not physically prevent biting. Families report that affected individuals are at ease when restrained.

Sixty percent of individuals have their teeth extracted to avoid self-injury through biting. Families have found this to be an effective management technique. More conservative than tooth extraction are vital pulpotomy and coronal resection, which maintain the root portion of the tooth in the bone, an approach that may preserve alveolar bone [Lee et al 2002].

Behavioral extinction methods may be useful in a controlled setting for reducing self-injury, but seldom transfer well to the home setting [Harris 2007].
