For all phenotypes

Critical care: standard management of manifestations such as seizure or apnea

Note: A seizure care plan, with provision of rescue therapy for prolonged seizures if indicated, is strongly recommended for those in whom epilepsy has been confirmed by either electrodiagnostic testing or highly suggestive clinical features.

Occupational therapy to maximize motor function

Speech therapy for dysarthria

RDP. In a few patients with RDP decreased spasms have been noted with high-dose benzodiazepines. Dosing should be judged by the physician on an individual basis.

Standard therapies for the following are appropriate:

Seizures

Dysphagia

Psychotherapy for mood disorder (such as depression and anxiety), substance abuse, and/or psychosis

Two individuals treated with deep brain stimulation [Kamm et al 2008] did not show marked improvement [A Brashear, personal communication].

AHC. Medical treatment generally involves the following [Neville & Ninan 2007]:

Episode prophylaxis (avoiding triggers; reducing the frequency and/or severity of recurrent paroxysmal episodes by sleep – either natural or induced with daily prophylactic medications):

Prophylactic medications

Flunarizine. Symptomatic benefit in reducing the frequency and/or severity of the recurrent paroxysmal episodes of neurologic dysfunction has been reported with flunarizine [Silver & Andermann 1993, Sasaki 2001]. Flunarizine has been examined in a few small series of patients, and is reported to decrease the frequency and/or severity of the episodic dystonic and/or plegic episodes. In spite of the lack of well-designed placebo-controlled trials, flunarizine has remained the most commonly prescribed therapy for prophylaxis of episodic neurologic dysfunction in AHC for more than two decades. Note that abrupt withdrawal of the medication has been associated with deterioration in clinical status [Sweney et al 2009, Sasaki et al 2014a].

Topiramate is another commonly prescribed agent for prophylaxis [Jiang et al 2006, Chi et al 2012].

Sleep. Placing the affected individual in a quiet, dark room or putting a child down for a nap can help alleviate severe episodes and/or promote an earlier recovery.

Acute attack management with use of various rescue medications including:

Benzodiazepines, which are commonly used and reported to be of some benefit in increasingly the tolerability of episodes, especially for severe or prolonged dystonic episodes

Chloral hydrate

Other sleep inducers

A low threshold for suspicion of seizure activity is critical, particularly in the setting of either recurrent brief or more prolonged tonic or dystonic episodes associated with alterations in consciousness or apparent awareness of their environment. Epilepsy management utilizes existing anticonvulsants.

Recently, two separate reports described patients with AHC who responded to a ketogenic diet [Ulate-Campos et al 2014, Roubergue et al 2015].

CAPOS syndrome. Symptomatic treatment includes hearing and visual aids.
