Individuals with ATS benefit from a coordinated approach of multidisciplinary specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. If feasible, individuals with ATS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Cardiovascular. In managing the cardiovascular features of ATS the following should be kept in mind:

Clinical history studies are limited.

Vascular disease is widespread and requires repeated imaging of the complete arterial tree from head to pelvis by MRA or CTA.

It is currently not known whether arterial dissections or thrombosis is the main cause of ischemic events.

As is common practice in the treatment of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, hemodynamic stress on the arterial wall can be reduced through use of beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and angiotensin II receptor 1 (ATIIR1) antagonists such as losartan, when titrated to effect. While ATIIR1 antagonists may have an additional beneficial effect by attenuating TGFβ signaling in the arterial wall, the role of TGFβ signaling in ATS is unclear (see Molecular Genetic Pathogenesis). Importantly, the efficacy of these treatments has not been established in ATS and caution is warranted when using blood pressure-lowering medications in the presence of arterial stenosis (anatomic or functional due to severe tortuosity) – especially renal artery stenosis, as these medications may confer a risk for renal failure.

Aneurysms and focal stenoses are amenable to surgical intervention.

For aortic root aneurysms, a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation can be used. No data are available on the aortic diameter at which intervention is appropriate; thus, decision making should also include assessment of the family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit.

For focal stenoses of the aorta and aortic branches, surgery, catheterization, or a hybrid of the two (transcatheter-surgical procedure) may be used [Santoro et al 2008, Vicchio et al 2008].

Pulmonary artery stenosis resulting in pulmonary hypertension may be treated by catheterization and/or surgery.

Skeletal. Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist. Surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

At the patient’s discretion, orthotics may be used for severe pes planus.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of ATS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is essential, and evaluation of keratoconus is necessary.

Other

Hernias may recur after surgical repair. A supporting mesh can be used in the surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Careful postoperative evaluation of (surgical) wounds is necessary as wound healing may be delayed. Note that stitches should avoid traction and should remain in place for approximately ten days.

Emphysema is treated symptomatically. Of note, positive pressure ventilation may cause emphysematous changes to progress.

Individuals with ATS can and should remain active with aerobic activities (e.g., swimming) performed in moderation.
