Acroparesthesia

Diphenylhydantoin. The severe pain of such episodes in affected males and heterozygous females often responds to low-maintenance doses of diphenylhydantoin by reducing the frequency and severity of the periodic crises of excruciating pain and constant discomfort. A potential side effect of diphenylhydantoin is gingival hypertrophy.

Carbamazepine has similar effects. The combination of the two drugs may also significantly reduce the frequency and severity of the pain. Dose-related autonomic complications with carbamazepine include urinary retention, nausea, vomiting, and ileus.

Gabapentin has been demonstrated to improve pain [Ries et al 2003].

Renal disease. Renal insufficiency is the most frequent and serious late complication in males with the classic phenotype. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be used in those with evidence of renal involvement, especially to reduce proteinuria [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014, Warnock et al 2015].

Chronic hemodialysis and/or renal transplantation have become lifesaving procedures. The engrafted kidney remains histologically free of glycosphingolipid deposition because the normal alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme activity in the allograft catabolizes endogenous renal glycosphingolipid substrates. Therefore, successful renal transplantation corrects renal function.

Reviews of the registries of the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplantation Association and the United States Renal Data System support excellent outcomes for renal transplantation in individuals with Fabry disease. For example, during the ten-year period from 1988 to 1998, 93 individuals who underwent renal transplantation were reported to the US registry. Compared to a matched control group, recipients with Fabry disease had equivalent five-year life survival (82% vs 83%) and graft survival (67% vs 75%), respectively.

Note: (1) Immune function in males with Fabry disease is similar to that in other individuals with uremia, obviating any immunologic contraindication to transplantation in this disease. Autoimmune conditions have, however, been reported to occur at an increased frequency in individuals with Fabry disease [Martinez et al 2007]. (2) Transplantation of kidneys from female heterozygotes should be avoided, as the organs may already contain significant substrate deposition; all related potential donors must be evaluated to exclude affected males and heterozygous females.
