For all congenital disorders of N-linked glycosylation and most multiple-pathway disorders except MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib)

Failure to thrive. Infants and children can be fed any type of formula for maximal caloric intake. They can tolerate carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Early in life, children may do better on elemental formulas. Their feeding may be advanced based on their oral motor function. Some children require placement of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube for nutritional support until oral motor skills improve.

Oral motor dysfunction with persistent vomiting. Thickening of feeds, maintenance of an upright position after eating, and antacids can be helpful for children with gastroesophageal reflux and/or persistent vomiting. Consultation with a gastroenterologist and nutritionist is often necessary. Children with a gastrostomy tube should be encouraged to eat by mouth if the risk of aspiration is low. Continued speech and oral motor therapy aids transition to oral feeds and encourages speech when the child is developmentally ready.

Developmental delay. Occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy should be instituted. As the developmental gap widens between children with CDG and their unaffected peers, parents, educators, and therapists need continued counseling and support.

"Infantile catastrophic phase." Very rarely, infants may have a complicated early course presenting with infection, seizure, or hypoalbuminemia with third spacing that may progress to anasarca. Some children are responsive to aggressive albumin replacement with Lasix®; others may have a more refractory course. Symptomatic treatment in a pediatric tertiary care center is recommended. Parents should also be advised that some infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) never experience a hospital visit while others may require frequent hospitalizations.

Strabismus. Consultation with a pediatric ophthalmologist early in life is important so that potential eye abnormalities can be diagnosed and therapies that preserve vision (glasses, patching, or surgery) can be instituted as needed.

Hypothyroidism. Although children with CDG are usually chemically euthyroid [Martin & Freeze 2003], thyroid function tests are frequently abnormal. However, free thyroxine analyzed by equilibrium dialysis, the most accurate method, has been reported as normal in seven individuals with CDG. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism and L-thyroxine supplementation should be reserved for those children and adults with elevated TSH and low free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis.

Renal issues. Bilateral hyperechoic kidneys are often seen on ultrasound in children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Enlarged kidneys, renal cysts, and congenital nephrotic syndrome have been reported in individuals with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and other forms of CDG.

Baseline renal ultrasound should be performed on all affected children at the time of diagnosis [Grünewald 2009, Sinha et al 2009].

While proteinuria in affected children is extremely rare, routine urinalysis to evaluate for proteinuria is recommended after diagnosis. Follow-up urinalysis should be considered in the first three years of life or if clinical signs indicate.

Stroke-like episodes. Supportive therapy includes intravenous hydration, maintenance of normal blood glucose, and physical therapy during the recovery period.

Coagulopathy. Low levels of coagulation factors, both pro- and anticoagulant, rarely cause clinical problems in daily activities but must be addressed when an individual with CDG undergoes surgery. Consultation with a hematologist is recommended to document the pro- and anti- clotting factor levels and coagulation status. Discussion of the coagulation status and management issues with the surgeon is important. When necessary, infusion of fresh frozen plasma corrects the factor deficiency and clinical bleeding. The potential for imbalance of the level of both pro- and anticoagulant factors may lead to either bleeding or thrombosis. Care givers, especially of older affected individuals, should be taught the signs of deep venous thrombosis, which can occasionally be mistaken for injury from trauma in individuals with intellectual and communication disabilities.

Immunologic status. Most individuals affected with CDGs have functional immune systems; however, children with rare types of N-linked CDG have recurrent or unexpectedly severe infections and should be evaluated by an immunologist. Unless otherwise indicated, full pediatric vaccinations are recommended for affected children and adults.

Additional management issues of adults with CDG

Orthopedic issues — thorax shortening, scoliosis/kyphosis. Management involves appropriate orthopedic and physical medicine management, well-supported wheel chairs, appropriate transfer devices for the home, and physical therapy. Occasionally, surgical treatment of spinal curvature by an experienced team is warranted.

Independent living issues. Young adults with CDG and their parents need to address issues of independent living. Aggressive education in functional life skills and/or vocational training help the transition when schooling is completed. Independence in self-care and the activities of daily living should be encouraged. Support and resources for parents of a disabled adult are important aspects of management.

Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVT has been reported in several adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) and should be kept in mind in the management of all individuals with CDG. Rapid diagnosis and treatment of DVT are essential to minimize the risk of pulmonary emboli; sedentary affected adults and children are at increased risk for DVT.
