Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Standard treatment for MTC is surgical removal of the thyroid and lymph node dissection [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009, National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Current NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of therapeutic external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for incomplete tumor resection or extrathyroidal extension with positive margins [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Two kinase inhibitors – vandetanib and cabozantinib – have been shown to improve progression-free survival and in some cases cause disease regression in unresectable or advanced metastatic MTC [Elisei et al 2013, Wells et al 2013].

All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy need thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

Autotransplantation of parathyroid tissue is not typically performed at the time of thyroidectomy unless there is evidence of hyperparathyroidism [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Pheochromocytomas detected by biochemical testing and radionuclide imaging are removed by adrenalectomy, which may be performed using video-assisted laparoscopy. Historically, some specialists recommended bilateral adrenalectomy at the time of demonstration of tumor on just a single adrenal gland because of the strong probability that the other adrenal gland would develop a tumor within ten years. However, because of the risk for adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis following bilateral adrenalectomy, most experts now recommend unilateral adrenalectomy in unilateral tumors and cortical-sparing adrenal surgery with close monitoring of the remnant tissue in persons with one remaining adrenal gland or bilateral pheochromocytoma [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Hypertensive treatment prior to adrenalectomy involves the use of α- and β-adrenergic receptor blockade [Pacak et al 2005].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia diagnosed at the time of thyroidectomy is treated either with resection of the visibly enlarged parathyroid gland(s), subtotal parathyroidectomy, or total parathyroidectomy with forearm autograft [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, in most individuals with MEN 2A, hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed many years after thyroidectomy.

Individuals with biochemical evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism who have undergone prior thyroidectomy should have preoperative localization with excision of the localized hypertrophied parathyroid glands and forearm autotransplantation.

Therapy with medications to control primary hyperparathyroidism should be considered in individuals with a high risk for surgical mortality, limited life expectancy, or persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism after one or more surgical attempts [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].
