The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia to reduce the risk of central nervous system complications. Because onset of hypoglycemia is occasionally delayed for several days, or even months, parents should be informed of the symptoms of hypoglycemia so that they can seek appropriate medical attention.

Abdominal wall repair for omphalocele soon after birth. Generally, this surgery is well tolerated.

Management of difficulties arising from macroglossia:

Anticipation of difficulties with endotracheal intubation [Kimura et al 2008]

Assessment of respiratory function, possibly including sleep study to address concern regarding potential sleep apnea

Management of feeding difficulties using specialized nipples such as the longer nipple recommended for babies with cleft palate or, rarely, short-term use of nasogastric tube feedings

Follow up by a craniofacial team including plastic surgeons, orthodontists, and speech pathologists familiar with the natural history of BWS. Tongue growth does slow over time and jaw growth can accelerate to accommodate the enlarged tongue. Some children benefit from tongue reduction surgery; however, surgical reduction typically affects tongue length but not thickness; residual cosmetic and speech issues may require further assessment/treatment [Tomlinson et al 2007].

Orthodontic intervention as needed in later childhood/adolescence

Assessment of speech difficulties

Management of cleft palate following standard protocols

Referral to a craniofacial surgeon if facial hemihyperplasia is significant

Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon if hemihyperplasia results in a significant difference in leg length. Surgery may be necessary during early puberty to close the growth plate of the longer leg in order to equalize the final leg lengths.

Treatment of neoplasias following standard pediatric oncology protocols

In some individuals with BWS, developmental anomalies of the renal tract are associated with increased calcium excretion and deposition (i.e., nephrocalcinosis). In individuals with evidence of calcium deposits on renal ultrasound examination, assessment for hypercalciuria and a CT scan of the kidneys may be helpful.

Referral to a pediatric nephrologist if urinary calcium is elevated and/or a structural renal anomaly is identified

Referral of children with structural GI tract abnormalities to the relevant specialist

Management of cardiac problems following standard protocols

Standard interventions such as infant stimulation programs, occupational and physical therapy, and individualized education programs for children with developmental delay
