Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure [Pope et al 2012].

Families must decide which of the many correct and effective methods of bandaging works best for them. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers may include any the following:

Ordinary Band-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Non-stick products (e.g., Telfa® or N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®)

A secondary layer providing stability for the primary layer and adding padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Conform®, Kerlix®,) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer (usually with some elastic properties) that ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Tubifast®, Coban® or elasticized tube-gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Various lubricants and antimicrobial agents such as topical antibiotics, silver, or honey are often added to the contact layer to prevent and treat infection and promote healing.

In infants and children with RDEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes et al 1996, Stehr et al 2008]. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Castillo et al 2002, Kay & Wyllie 2002, Azizkhan et al 2006].

Other. Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

Anemia is a chronic problem with RDEB and can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.

Other nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed:

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Selenium and carnitine replacement to help prevent dilated cardiomyopathy

Zinc replacement to enhance wound healing

Good prophylactic dental care is essential to insure the ability to eat and to allow for adequate caloric intake [Harris et al 2001].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Occupational therapy may be helpful in preventing progressive hand contractures. Splinting of the hands can be problematic because of skin fragility. Surgical release of fingers by several methods has been described; it often needs to be performed repeatedly [Marín-Bertolín et al 1999, Glicenstein et al 2000].

Psychosocial support including social services and psychological counseling is essential.
