Standards of care and management of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy were agreed upon at the 171st ENMC International Workshop. A consensus on the following topics and the recommendations from that conference [Tawil et al 2010] are outlined below:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation

Consultation with a physical therapist is indicated.

Establishment of follow-up frequency is important at the time of diagnosis. Individuals with FSHD should be seen at a frequency based on their disease severity, which for some will be frequent initially, and may include occupational and speech therapy in infantile onset forms of FSHD. For others with mild involvement, annual visits would be appropriate.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation consultations can help establish appropriate exercise regimens and assistive devices that may enhance mobility and reduce the risk of falls in home environments.

Exercise in FSHD

Exercise with moderate weights is not detrimental to individuals with FSHD [Milner-Brown & Miller 1988, van der Kooi et al 2004].

Aerobic training (when possible) has been beneficial to affected individuals [Olsen et al 2005].

Any type of exercise regimen should be instituted under the guidance of a physical therapist and personalized according to the individual’s disease symptoms, age, and cardiovascular status.

Pain. Chronic pain should be managed by physical therapy and medication as necessary.

Respiratory dysfunction. Ventilatory support such as BiPAP should be considered as necessary for those with hypoventilation.

Hearing loss. Standard therapies for hearing loss, including amplification if necessary, are appropriate.

Ophthalmologic disease. Exposure keratitis may occur in individuals who sleep with their eyes partially open. Use of lubricants to prevent drying of the sclera or in more severe cases taping the eyes shut during sleep may be required.

Orthopedic intervention

Ankle/foot orthoses can improve mobility and prevent falls in individuals with foot drop.

Surgical fixation of the scapula to the chest wall often improves range of motion of the arms, although this gain can be short-lived in individuals with rapidly progressive disease [Diab et al 2005, Krishnan et al 2005, Giannini et al 2006]. Evaluation of such individuals prior to surgery is warranted to assure a functional and sustained benefit.
