Cystoid macular edema (CME). Some therapeutic success has been reported with both systemic and topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (oral acetazolamide [Diamox] or topical dorzolamide); however, rebound edema can occur with continued use [Fishman & Apushkin 2007].

Cataracts. Approximately 50% of individuals with RP develop cataracts that eventually require lens extraction (with visual improvement in the majority). However, since visual acuity can be reduced because of the incipient cataract or concomitant macular sequela of RP (CME or defects of the retinal pigment epithelium), determining which is the major cause of reduced vision can be difficult. In the presence of macular disease, extraction of lenses when cataracts are in the early stage may not always improve the quality of vision, particularly in younger individuals who still have reasonable accommodation for near tasks.

The timing of lens extraction may change as an individual ages and the visual field becomes more constricted: most individuals with RP with a visual field greater than 10° are not greatly incapacitated by mild to modest posterior subcapsular cataracts, whereas those with a visual field of less than 10° usually report significantly improved vision following lens extraction [Jackson et al 2001].

Patients with retinitis pigmentosa are at a greater-than-average risk for postoperative inflammation and induced CME. Thus, it is important at the time of lens extraction to avoid unnecessary manipulation of the iris; following surgery it is important to administer anti-inflammatory agents longer than would be indicated for individuals who do not have RP.

Optical aids. Because of the concern of acceleration of retinal degeneration from short wave-length light exposure, use of UV-A and UV-B blocking sunglasses is recommended. Use of CPF 550 lenses (Corning Photochromic Filter, developed by Corning Medical Optics), which filter out 97%-99% of the spectral and ultraviolet energy below 550 nm wavelength, has been promoted for individuals with RP to increase eye comfort by reducing glare and internal light scatter, to improve contrast, and to reduce adaptation time from light to dark and vice versa.

Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks.

Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields.

Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with RP. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.

Google Glass® allows minification of the visual field so that a wider field of view can be seen by patients with loss of peripheral vision. A relatively new wearable device called eSight® provides a live video stream which can be adjusted in terms of magnification, contrast, color, and brightness, to allow optimal vision for the wearer. However, its current cost limits widespread use.

Retinal prostheses. A number of retinal prosthetic devices that can be implanted in an epiretinal, subretinal, or suprachoroidal location to electrically stimulate either the bipolar cells or retinal ganglion cells have been developed for (for review, see Hadjinicolaou et al [2015]). These devices have had varying success in facilitating the perception of light, shapes, and movement in patients with end-stage RP. One such device, the Argus II®, has been FDA approved and is in clinical use in a limited subset of patients with vision of light perception or worse (no light perception) in the United States and Europe. As such, this is the first FDA-approved treatment for retinitis pigmentosa [da Cruz et al 2016].

Agencies for the visually impaired. In the US, publicly funded agencies at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Other. Prolonged light deprivation is not effective in altering the progression of RP.
