Pharmacologic treatment focuses on improving pain and correcting bone deformation.

In children, treatment generally begins at the time of diagnosis and continues until long bone growth is complete.

Treatment for most children consists of oral phosphate administered three to five times daily and high-dose calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Two different regimens have been used, but have not been compared:

Low dose. Treatment is generally started at a low dose to avoid the gastrointestinal side effects of diarrhea and gastrointestinal upset. The doses are then titrated to a weight-based dose of calcitriol at 20 to 30 ng/kg/day administered in two to three divided doses and phosphate at 20 to 40 mg/kg/day administered in three to five divided doses [Carpenter et al 2011].

High dose. Some clinicians favor a high-dose phase of treatment for up to a year. The high-dose phase consists of calcitriol at 50-70 ng/kg/day (up to a maximum dose of 3.0 µg daily) along with the phosphate [Sabbagh et al 2014].

Doses are adjusted based on (1) evidence of therapeutic success including reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase activity, changes in musculoskeletal examination, improvement in radiographic rachitic changes, and (when possible) improved growth velocity; and (2) evidence of therapeutic complications including hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Note: Normalization of the serum phosphate concentration is not a therapeutic goal as normal serum phosphate concentration frequently indicates overtreatment and increases the risk for treatment-related complications.

Jehan et al [2008] described differences in growth during treatment that are associated with different vitamin D receptor promoter haplotypes, providing a possible explanation for some of the clinical variability observed in XLH.

After growth is complete, lower doses of the medications can be used to reach the treatment goals.

In adults, the role of treatment has not been well studied; treatment is generally reserved for individuals with symptoms such as skeletal pain, upcoming orthopedic surgery, biochemical evidence of osteomalacia with an elevated alkaline phosphatase, or recurrent pseudofractures or stress fractures [Carpenter et al 2011]. The calcitriol doses that are frequently employed in adults are in the range of 0.50 to 0.75 µg daily; the phosphate is given as 750 to 1000 mg/day in three to four divided doses. As with children, the phosphate dose is slowly titrated to avoid gastrointestinal side effects, starting at 250 mg/day and titrating up by 250 mg/day each week until the final dose is reached.

Orthopedic treatment. Despite what appears to be adequate pharmacologic therapy (see following Note), some individuals have persistent lower-limb bowing and torsion, which may lead to misalignment of the lower extremity. In these individuals, surgical treatment is frequently pursued. No control trials of the different surgical techniques have been undertaken; the literature consists of case series. Note: Poor compliance with pharmacologic therapy during childhood and the teen years may be one factor for persistent lower-limb deformities.

In prepubertal children who have not yet reached their peak growth velocity (generally before age 10 years), stapling or toggle plate insertion can be considered as a minimally invasive method of reversible hemi-epiphysiodesis [Novais & Stevens 2006]. Note: The risk with this procedure is prematurely stopping growth.

In older children and adults, surgical techniques reported include distraction osteogenesis by external fixation, acute correction by external fixation with intramedullary nailing, internal fixation with intramedullary nailing, and acute correction by intramedullary nailing [Song et al 2006, Petje et al 2008].

Additionally, total hip and knee arthroplasty is sometimes required because of degenerative joint disease and enthesopathy. Treatment in adults has not been shown to influence enthesopathy [Connor et al 2015].

Craniofacial treatment. Although hypophosphatemic rickets is a rare condition, a recent review from three neurosurgical centers reported on ten patients treated over twenty years and recommended prompt referral to a craniofacial specialist when head shape abnormalities are seen in patients with this disorder [Vega et al 2016].

Dental treatment. Because individuals with XLH are susceptible to recurrent dental abscesses which may result in premature loss of decidual and permanent teeth, good oral hygiene with flossing and regular dental care and fluoride treatments are the cornerstones of prevention. Pit and fissure sealants have been recommended but have not been well studied. A recent study has suggested that treatment of adults with phosphate and calcitriol can improve the severity of dental disease [Connor et al 2015].

Sensorineural hearing loss has been reported in persons with XLH; individuals with this complication are treated in a standard manner. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview, Management.
