Management requires a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, child development, nutrition, and clinical genetics.

Management of Neurologic Manifestations in Neonatal Multisystem Disease

Hypotonia may be significant. Therefore, ongoing monitoring of gross motor development and skills with the intervention of appropriate therapies is appropriate in these children.

Management of Liver Involvement in both Neonatal Multisystem Disease and Isolated Hepatic Disease

Management of liver disease should be guided by the results of initial evaluation in consultation with a hepatologist.

Children with cholestatic liver disease or renal disease are at significant risk of nutritional insufficiency; therefore, a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic and renal dysfunctions should be involved in their care:

Formulas with an enriched medium-chain-triglyceride content may provide better nutritional support for infants with cholestasis than formulas with predominantly long-chain triglycerides [Feranchak & Sokol 2007].

Cornstarch may reduce symptomatic hypoglycemia in individuals with isolated hepatic disease.

Fractional meals and enteral nutrition during the night can result in good nutritional control [Dimmock et al 2008b].

Affected individuals often develop life-threatening liver failure, but the benefits of liver transplantation are disputable because of the frequent severe neurologic involvement due to the underlying mitochondrial disease. A total of 14 individuals with DGUOK deficiency were reported to have undergone liver transplantation.

The one-year survival rate was 64%.

Five of the 14 survived longer than five years.

Eight of the 14 died within two years of transplantation from severe pulmonary hypertension (3/8), neurologic degeneration (2/8), procedure-related complications (2/8), and early postoperative multi-organ failure (1/8).

Although survival after liver transplantation for DGUOK deficiency is lower than survival after liver transplantation for other indications, a significant proportion of affected individuals survived more than five years despite initial neurologic abnormalities. Nevertheless, a decision to perform liver transplantation for individuals with DGUOK deficiency remains difficult because neurologic manifestations may occur and/or worsen after liver transplantation despite their absence before transplantation [Grabhorn et al 2014].
