The goal of treatment is to prevent hematologic, immunologic, and neurologic deficits and to optimize the cognitive development of children with this disorder. Complete reversal of the systemic consequences of folate deficiency is easily achieved. While correction of the neurologic consequences is more difficult, favorable neurologic outcomes are possible when adequate treatment is initiated promptly.

“Folates” refers to a family of B9 vitamin compounds that are interconvertible in a series of intracellular biochemical reactions. Folate can be effective when administered by oral or parenteral routes; however, much higher oral than parenteral doses are required to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The parenteral route is probably more effective in achieving CSF folate levels appropriate to the age of the affected individual. In either case, achieving CSF folate levels in the normal range for the age of the affected individual is challenging [Torres et al 2015].

Folate Formulations

Based on the current understanding of folate transport and metabolism, the following reduced folates can be used to treat HFM:

5-formyltetrahydrofolate (5-formylTHF), also known as folinic acid or Leucovorin®, is a racemic stable form of folate. The active isomer is found in low quantities in normal human tissues. Leucovorin is available in oral and parenteral formulations. There is considerable experience in dosing with this folate form (see Folate Dosing).

The active isomer of 5-formylTHF, (6S)5-formylTHF (also known as Isovorin® or Fusilev®), is available for parenteral administration. Anecdotal observations suggest that the active isomer may be more effective for treatment when there is refractory neurologic disease. The biologic impact of the active isomer is twice that of the racemic mixture when the dose is the same.

The physiologic folate predominant in blood and tissues, (6S)5-methyltetrahydrofolate or (6S)5-methylTHF, is now available commercially as Metafolin® and Deplin®. Neither drug is available for parenteral administration. Published information on the use of (6S)5-methylTHF for the treatment of HFM is not available, although the dosing should be comparable to that of (6S)5-formylTHF. The formulation of Metafolin® is too low (800 µg) to make this agent feasible for the treatment of HFM. Deplin® is available as a 15-mg tablet.

Note: If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Folate Dosing

Because HFM is rare, controlled studies to establish optimal treatment have not been possible. The oral dose of 5-formylTHF required to overcome the loss of PCFT-mediated intestinal folate absorption appears to vary from individual to individual. The dose required to obviate the neurologic consequences is much higher than that needed to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The dose should be guided by its effect on trough CSF folate concentrations. The end-point is CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to the normal range for the affected individual’s age:

The reported oral dose of 5-formylTHF associated with a “good” outcome is approximately 150-200 mg daily [Geller et al 2002]. Much higher doses have been used as well [personal communication to Author]. A reasonable starting oral dose of 5-formylTHF in an infant could be 50 mg or 10-15 mg/kg given daily as a single dose.

Note: Normal CSF folate is approximately 100 nmol/L for infants to age two years, decreasing to approximately 75 nmol/L by age five years and to approximately 65 nmol/L by age 19 years [Verbeek et al 2008].

The parenteral dose required to achieve adequate blood folate levels is much lower than the oral dose. With intramuscular injections of approximately 1.0 mg/day of 5-formylTHF, the anemia will fully correct; however, the endpoint for treatment is based on the CSF folate level, which will require much higher folate doses [Torres et al 2015].
