NICCD. The symptoms in most children with NICCD resolve by age 12 months following supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins and use of lactose-free and MCT-enriched therapeutic formulas [Ohura et al 2003, Song et al 2010, Hayasaka et al 2012, Zhang et al 2014a].

Two sibs improved after switching from breast milk to formula, which has higher proline content [Ben-Shalom et al 2002].

Some children with NICCD improve without treatment, which could be the effect of reduction of breast milk and/or common formulas while simultaneously introducing solid supplements such as eggs and meat, which are rich in protein and lipid and therefore beneficial for citrin-deficient individuals [Song et al 2010].

The treatment with therapeutic formulas is not lifelong. Most infants with NICCD will recover clinically and biochemically by age one year, at which point protein- and lipid-enriched textured or solid supplements could be introduced. Whether continued treatment beyond a year can reduce the likelihood of the FTTDCD and CTLN2 phenotype is currently unknown.

Moreover, zinc deficiency is common in NICCD, and thus zinc supplementation should be encouraged when laboratory evidence indicates zinc deficiency, especially in individuals with marked failure to thrive.

Four infants with NICCD and severe liver dysfunction were diagnosed as having tyrosinemia of unknown cause and underwent liver transplantation at age ten to 12 months [Tamamori et al 2002, Kobayashi et al 2006].

FTTDCD. Few treatment measures have been described for this novel citrin-deficient phenotype.

A toddler with FTTDCD was fed in accordance with his own food preferences (including aversion to rice and fondness for fish); FTT improved gradually, with weight for age recovering beyond the third percentile at age three years. The dyslipidemia also improved gradually [Song et al 2009a].

In addition to dietary treatment, administration of sodium pyruvate may be effective in correcting growth restriction [Mutoh et al 2008, Saheki et al 2010]. Sodium pyruvate reduces the NADH/NAD+ ratio in the hepatocyte, a pivotal alteration for citrin deficiency development, and this could be associated with its ameliorating effect on growth restriction.

CTLN2. The most successful therapy to date has been liver transplantation [Ikeda et al 2001, Kasahara et al 2001, Yazaki et al 2004, Hirai et al 2008], which prevents episodic hyperammonemic crises, corrects the metabolic disturbances, and eliminates preference for protein-rich foods [Kobayashi & Saheki 2004]. Nearly all individuals with CTLN2 required liver transplantation in the past; however, the introduction of arginine and sodium pyruvate and medium chain triglyceride (MCT) oil administration has altered the situation. Other treatments include the following:

Administration of arginine (5-10 g/day) was reported to be effective in decreasing blood ammonia concentration.

Reducing calorie/carbohydrate intake and increasing protein intake ameliorates hypertriglyceridemia [Imamura et al 2003].

Administration of sodium pyruvate (4-9 g/day) was effective in decreasing frequency of hyperammonemic episodes and improving growth in several cases [Mutoh et al 2008; Saheki et al 2010; Yazaki et al 2010; Ohura et al, personal communication; Okano et al, personal communication].

Administration of MCT oil (Mactone oil containing 85% MCT; 45 mL/day) was associated with complete recovery with all normal laboratory findings or improved with no hyperammonemic symptoms [Hayasaka et al 2014].
