Guidelines for the management of MPS I have been developed [Muenzer et al 2009].

Supportive or symptomatic management can improve the quality of life for affected individuals and their families.

Infants with severe MPS I require a stimulating environment to promote early learning, as some skills may be retained during the period of general deterioration.

Skeletal. Physical therapy is a critical aspect of MPS I therapy [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010a]. Range of motion exercises appear to offer some benefits in preserving joint function, and should be started early. Once significant joint limitation has occurred, increased range of motion may not be achieved without hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).

Various orthopedic approaches can be undertaken, particularly in individuals with attenuated disease. Joint replacement and atlanto-occipital stabilization may be necessary. These procedures must be performed at appropriate times in the individual's clinical course and must take into account the presence of other disease complications.

Carpal tunnel syndrome should be treated especially in individuals with attenuated MPS I and individuals with severe MPS I who have had HSCT. Most individuals lack typical symptoms (pain, tingling, or numbness) until severe compression occurs [Haddad et al 1997, Van Heest et al 1998, Bahadir et al 2009]; thus, nerve conduction studies should be used early in the course of disease to identify persons with carpal tunnel syndrome at a time when surgical release may be most beneficial. Surgical decompression of the median nerve results in variable restoration of motor hand activity [Van Heest et al 1998]. Intervention at an early stage, prior to severe nerve damage, optimizes outcome; repeated surgery may be required.

Ophthalmologic. Wearing peaked caps or eye shades can help reduce glare resulting from corneal clouding. Corneal transplantation is successful for individuals with attenuated disease, although donor grafts eventually become cloudy. Individuals with clear grafts may still experience poor vision because of involvement of the retina and/or optic nerve [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Cardiovascular. Cardiac valve replacement should be considered early.

Hearing loss. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy correct eustachian tube dysfunction and decrease upper airway obstruction. Early placement of ventilating tubes is recommended in severely affected individuals. Hearing aids should also be considered.

ENT (otolaryngologic). Sleep apnea may require tracheotomy or high-pressure continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) with supplemented oxygen. Tracheostomy is often required to maintain the airway and control pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

Gastrointestinal system. Some gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea and constipation) can be controlled by diet, including control of the amount of roughage. Increased roughage and the conservative use of laxatives may ease constipation.

Hydrocephaly. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure and progressive ventricular enlargement indicate a shunting procedure. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting in individuals with MPS I who have moderate to severe hydrocephalus is generally palliative and improves quality of life.

Other. Progressive compression of the spinal cord with resulting cervical myelopathy should be aggressively and quickly evaluated in individuals with attenuated disease or those who have had HSCT. Early surgical intervention may prevent severe complications.
