Eyes

The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia (far-sightedness) or myopia (near-sightedness), and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors can improve visual acuity.

Strabismus surgery is usually not required but can be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus is marked or fixed. The surgery is not always successful.

Aids such as hand-held magnifying devices or bioptic lenses are helpful adjuncts in the care of visually impaired individuals with HPS.

Preferential seating in school is beneficial, and a vision consultant may be useful.

Skin. Treatment of skin cancer does not differ from that in the general population.

Bleeding

Humidifiers may reduce the frequency of nosebleeds.

Oral contraceptives can limit the duration of menstrual periods. Menorrhagia has been treated with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system [Kingman et al 2004] and with recombinant factor VIIa [Lohse et al 2011].

Treatment of minor cuts includes placing thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® over an open wound that fails to clot spontaneously.

For more invasive trauma, such as wisdom tooth extraction, DDAVP (1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, 0.2 µg/kg in 50 mL of normal saline) can be given as a 30-minute intravenous infusion just prior to the procedure. The use of DDAVP may or may not improve the bleeding time [Cordova et al 2005]. For extensive surgeries or protracted bleeding, platelet or red blood cell transfusions may be required.

Pulmonary fibrosis

When the pulmonary disease becomes severe, oxygen therapy can be palliative.

One individual with HPS-1 remains well after undergoing lung transplantation [Lederer et al 2005]. The authors know of several additional successful lung transplantations.

Colitis. The granulomatous colitis of HPS resembles Crohn's colitis and, as such, may respond to steroids and other anti-inflammatory agents [Mora & Wolfsohn 2011]. Remicade® has also been used with benefit [Erzin et al 2006, Felipez et al 2010].

Immunodeficiency. When present, immunodeficiency is typically responsive to granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF).
