Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings

Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem.

Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment.

Prism glasses may improve the compensatory head position in mild cases. They are more likely to be tolerated by older persons.

Correction of hypermetropic refractive error in children may reduce the angle of strabismus and thus decrease the angle of head turn.

Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle surgery)

To correct or improve compensatory head posture

To improve alignment in primary gaze position

To improve upshoot or downshoot

Note: Surgery does not generally improve abduction of the affected eye, though transposition procedures may provide partial improvement in some cases.

Principles of surgical approach as reviewed in 

Kekunnaya et al [2015]

Type 1 and type 3. If head turn is present, consider recession of the medial rectus muscle or horizontal transposition of the vertical rectus muscles. Vertical rectus muscle transposition may be augmented, either with posterior augmentation sutures on the transposed muscles, or with botulinum toxin injections into the medial rectus muscle. Both the superior and inferior rectus muscles may be transposed, or alternatively the superior rectus muscle alone may be transposed in combination with a medial rectus muscle recession. If up- and/or downshoot occurs in adduction, or if globe retraction is severe and creates a deformity, consider recession of both the medial and lateral rectus muscles. Y-splitting of the lateral rectus muscle may decrease the amount of recession required.

Type 2. If head turn is present, consider recession of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle if the affected individual fixates with the uninvolved eye, and the contralateral lateral rectus if the affected individual fixates with the involved eye. If upshoot or downshoot occurs in adduction, consider recession of the lateral rectus muscle, possibly with Y-splitting.
