Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation

The general therapies for nephrolithiasis benefit all individuals with PH1. Early diagnosis and initiation of conservative therapy are critical in preserving adequate renal function for as long as possible [Fargue et al 2009].

The following recommendations are universally embraced, and those listed here can all be found in the following recent reviews [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013].

Drinking large volumes of fluid (2-3 L/m2/24 hours) at regular intervals over the entire day/night prevents calcium oxalate supersaturation and is effective for all genotypes. Note that small children may require gastrostomy or nasogastric tube insertion for both feeds and fluid supplementation. Extreme care should be taken during any illness that could lead to hypovolemia or decreased oral fluid intake; patients should be advised to seek early medical attention.

Alkalinzation of urine (pH 6.2-6.8) to inhibit calcium oxalate crystallization can be targeted using oral potassium citrate at a dose of 0.1-0.15 mg/kg or 0.3-0.5 mmol/kg per day in 3-4 divided doses so long as the GFR is preserved. When the GFR is reduced or concerns about potassium levels ensue, alkalinization can be achieved with sodium citrate.

Moderate doses of pyrophosphate-containing solutions may also inhibit crystal formation, and may be dosed as 20-30 mg/kg per day of phosphate.

Drugs such as thiazides can decrease urinary calcium excretion and may inhibit stone formation, in particular in patients with PH3.

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D is to be avoided as both may promote stone formation.

Supplementation of dietary calcium (300 mg) or provision of supplemental calcium (300-500 mg) at each meal significantly has been shown to decrease urinary calcium oxalate without altering calcium excretion [Penniston & Nakada 2009]. While promising, this strategy remains unproven in individuals with PH1.

Dietary restriction of oxalate as such is not supported as being an effective therapy for patients with PH1, although the principle of careful food choices (avoid high oxalate food and drink) would seem reasonable.

Treatment of Kidney Stones

The stone type most prevalent in PH1 is calcium oxalate monohydrate or whewellite [Daudon et al 2008].

Patients must be counseled regarding the different success rates among the following three surgical modalities:

Shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) is a viable first option, but only if patients are willing to accept a lower success rate and higher rate of subsequent endoscopic surgery.

For larger, bulky stone burdens (>15 mm), percutaneous nephrolithotomy should be considered as first-line therapy.

Ureteroscopy holds a very good record for success of stone clearance with minimal complication rates and may be supplanting SWL as first-line therapy at many centers.

SWL. While SWL is often the first choice for treatment of kidney stones given its minimally invasive nature and requirement for only sedative anesthesia, its value has been questioned as the first-line treatment for stones in children with PH1 and PH2 as calcium oxalate monohydrate stones are among the hardest stones, and are thus more likely to be resistant to extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) [Williams et al 2003].

A retrospective review of 36 individuals with PH who were treated with SWL between 1987 and 2009 in Birmingham, UK revealed that those who were treated with SWL required more subsequent treatments to render them stone free [Al-Abadi & Hulton 2013]. Whereas SWL was effective in 43%, repeat SWL was required in 61%. Stones in the lower pole of the kidney or parenchymal stones did not respond as well to SWL as stones in other locations. There is good evidence that any given stone(s) should not be treated with more than two SWL sessions, particularly if no change is observed with treatment [Pace et al 2000].

Ureteroscopy. Of note, in the endourology literature the trend is toward endoscopic treatment (ureteroscopy) over SWL for all stone types because of its higher success rate, but with the recognition of a potentially higher complication rate and longer hospital stay [Aboumarzouk et al 2012, Matlaga et al 2012].

Percutaneous nephrolithotomy and ureteroscopy. In the cohort of Al-Abadi & Hulton [2013], percutaneous nephrolithotomy or ureteroscopy both resulted in better stone-free rates and lower retreatment rates. While the two latter modalities are more effective at rendering the patient stone free, they have higher rates of potential complications than SWL. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is still the best modality for large, bulky stone burdens.

Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis

AGT is a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme. Approximately 10%-30% of individuals with PH1 respond to treatment with pyridoxine (vitamin B6, precursor to PLP as defined by a greater than 30% reduction in plasma oxalate concentration or normalization of urinary oxalate excretion after a minimum of three months of maximal therapy [Watts et al 1985, Leumann & Hoppe 2001]. Of this group, only 40% show normalization and the other 60% a partial reduction in the concentration of plasma and urine oxalate [Toussaint 1998].

Monico et al [2005b] showed that the presence of the p.Gly170Arg pathogenic variant was associated with pyridoxine responsiveness — homozygotes showing normalization (urine oxalate concentration <0.5-0.7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) and compound heterozygotes demonstrating a partial reduction in plasma oxalate concentration by at least 30% of prior documented levels. The same result was seen in patients with at least one p.Phe152Ile pathogenic allele.

At present, two different approaches are used to titrate the pyridoxine dose:

A stepwise increase from initial low levels (1-2 mg/kg/day) [Bobrowski & Langman 2008]

Initial high doses to maximize oxalate removal, with subsequent reduction to establish the minimal effective dose

With either approach, doses of pyridoxine in the range of 5 mg/kg/day appear adequate in the treatment of those likely to respond, with no additional benefit expected at doses higher than 10 mg/kg/day [Monico et al 2005b, Bobrowski & Langman 2008, Hoppe et al 2009]. In adults, a dose of 500 mg is felt to remain below the toxic range. Paresthesias, a known complication of large doses of pyridoxine [Toussaint 1998], have only developed in one individual on a dose of 2.1 mg/kg/day and resolved following discontinuation of the drug.

Pyridoxal phosphate levels may be followed in individuals to ensure that adequate absorption is occurring [Harambat et al 2011].

Individuals responsive to pyridoxine should continue this therapy to decrease the burden of oxalate on the kidney, even when on hemodialysis or following successful kidney transplantation.

Note: It is recommended that all patients with PH1, even those diagnosed in ESRD and on dialysis, receive a minimum three-month trial of pyridoxine at the time of initial diagnosis [Milliner 2005].

Dialysis

The issues related to the removal of oxalate and current modalities of dialysis are quite complex. Interested readers are directed to two papers outlining the specific details of extracorporeal removal of oxalate [Cochat et al 2012, Plumb et al 2013].

In brief, despite the small size of the oxalate molecule (90 daltons), the rate of oxalate production in persons with PH1-related ESRD (4-7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) vastly outstrips the ability to remove it via conventional dialysis in adults (1-2 mmol/1.73 m2/day) or children (3-4 mmol/1.73 m2/day). The sequestration of oxalate in tissue compartments outside the vascular space makes it difficult to effectively remove it from the body. Current guidelines suggest that the intent of dialysis is to reduce and maintain the plasma oxalate level as long as possible below 30-45 µmol/L (the calcium/oxalate supersaturation threshold at which tissue deposition occurs).

While more aggressive strategies using high flux dialyzers, daily hemodialysis (HD), combined HD and peritoneal dialysis (PD), hemodialfiltration, and even charcoal perfusion have all been reported [reviewed in detail by Plumb et al 2013], the end result is that while plasma removal rates of oxalate can be achieved in the range of greater than 60%, the total body store of oxalate rebounds (in general) to a level of 80% of the predialysis levels within 24 hours of the last HD run.

A case report of one patient treated with aggressive HD (8-10 hrs, 7 nights/wk) does suggest that this level of intense dialysis allows for maintenance of the pre-dialysis oxalate levels at or just below the tissue saturation point (30-45 µmol/L), but further studies are needed before these data can be confirmed [Plumb et al 2013].

Despite the limitations of dialysis, Cochat et al [2010] have suggested six situations in which dialysis may be indicated:

When PH1 is not yet diagnosed in an individual requiring dialysis for other reasons

In a small child/infant with oxalosis awaiting liver/kidney transplantation

As a strategy to deplete body oxalate burden preceding or after liver transplantation

As an adjunct therapy to decrease oxalate burden in the presence of delayed or poor renal function after liver/kidney transplantation

In older individuals if liver/kidney transplantation is not deemed an option

In countries with no access to organ transplantation [Cochat et al 2006]

Organ Transplantation

As neither maintenance hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), nor a combination of the two clears oxalate quickly enough to prevent systemic oxalosis in an individual with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) lower than 25-30 mL/min/1.73 m2 [Thamilselvan & Khan 1998], organ transplantation is an acceptable option for disease therapy or perhaps cure [Marangella et al 2001]. Much discussion has occurred regarding the best transplantation strategy for an individual with PH1.

The following recommendations and suggested approaches to this issue are all well summarized in three current reviews of PH1 [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013]. Specific percentages and outcome numbers can be extracted from these papers.

The reader is strongly encouraged to review (and consider as current best practice level recommendations) the recently published suggestions on organ transplant of non-pyridoxine sensitive patients with PH1 from the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium [Cochat et al 2012]. These guidelines (see Table 7) also take into consideration the patient’s age (infantile form), residual GFR, and evidence of systemic oxalate deposition in extrarenal organs.

Table 7. 

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

Transplantation (Tx) Options:

Simultaneous liver - kidney

Sequential liver - kidney

Isolated kidney

Isolated liver

Hemodialysis (HD) Strategy:

Perioperative ± postoperative based on POx & GFR

Standard HD after liver Tx aiming at POx <20 µmol/L

Preoperative & perioperative

Sometimes perioperative

CKD Category / Residual GFR

CKD Category 3 (30<GFR<59)

No

No

No

Option in carefully selected patients

CKD Category 4 (15<GFR<29)

Yes

Option

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

CKD Category 5 (GFR <15)

Yes

Yes

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

Infantile form (ESRD <2 yrs)

Yes

Yes

No

No

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

The three organ transplantation strategies that have been considered and implemented in the past are:

Isolated kidney transplantation (restores oxalate excretion to "normal");

"Preemptive" liver transplantation before end-stage renal disease (restores AGT enzyme activity, decreases ongoing oxalate synthesis); or

Combined liver-kidney transplantation, either concurrent or sequential (reduces oxalate synthesis and increases oxalate excretion).

In almost all other situations, the current recommendations are for dual liver/kidney transplant in patients with PH1. In the majority of these situations, the only three issues to be considered are:

Order of transplant (liver/kidney and sequential vs concurrent);

Timing of transplant (at what level of renal dysfunction to consider liver transplant); and

Use of deceased vs. living donors for either or both organs.

Certainly the overall survival numbers for any version of dual transplant greatly outstrip those seen from historic results for isolated kidney transplant: adult five-year survival numbers for kidney vs dual transplant are 45% vs 67% [Bergstralh et al 2010]; those for children are 14% vs 76% [Harambat et al 2012].

Isolated liver transplant as such may be a consideration with respect to a patient with significant residual renal function (e.g., GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or above), with the presumption that decline in renal function will be arrested and only a single organ transplant required. However, in such scenarios the concerns regarding risk of liver transplant morbidity and mortality in the face of an uncertain rate of decline in renal function often delay the decision to proceed to a point at which it is clear that dual transplantation will still be required.

In general it is believed that simultaneous liver/kidney transplant is the most logical for any patient, adult or child, with CKD Category 4 or below, given the need for renal function to excrete the body burden of oxalate. That decision, however, may be mitigated by concerns for patients with CKD Category 5 or on dialysis, as they often face severe oxalate burden that can overwhelm a new renal graft following transplant and lead to graft failure caused by oxalate stones/deposition. The choice in such patients, and often in small children/infants where anatomy may preclude a simultaneous approach, is to proceed with a sequential liver transplant followed at an indeterminate time later by a single kidney transplant.

Most of the published literature still reports the majority of organs used as being from deceased donors; however, living/living related donation of a split liver graft if the recipient is small enough and/or living donor kidney is certainly a viable alternative in some situations. Note: The appropriateness of using a parent or sib who is heterozygous for a AGXT pathogenic variant as a donor remains unclear in the literature.

Finally, the importance of establishing the diagnosis of PH1 before transplantation is illustrated by two recent reports of individuals with undiagnosed late-onset PH1 who received isolated kidney transplants and subsequently experienced unexpected rapid recurrence of stones and systemic oxalosis. In both cases a diagnosis of PH1 was made post transplant [Kim et al 2005, Madiwale et al 2008].

It is also important to note that in all forms of transplantation, in particular isolated kidney, the individual must:

Be monitored closely and even dialyzed following surgery to prevent further calcium oxalate deposition in the kidney graft from mobilization of the body burden of oxalate;

Continue pyridoxine supplementation to promote excretion of the total body store of oxalate if responsiveness has been documented prior to transplantation [Marangella 1999].
