Whether the intent is to prolong life or to let the disease run it natural course, an extended period of nursing care with changing needs can be anticipated. Supportive therapies to maximize the retention of physical and neuromuscular functions help avoid many end-stage care problems.

Every effort should be made to maintain intellectual abilities, neuromuscular function, and mobility as long as possible. Provision of an enriched environment and an aggressive physical therapy program provides an optimized quality of life at all stages of the disease. The parents and/or caregivers should be aware of the likely progression of the disorder in order to anticipate decisions concerning walking aids, car seats, wheelchairs, suction equipment, swallowing aids, feeding tubes, and other supportive measures.

Specific findings such as seizures and contractures should be treated with antiepileptic drugs and muscle relaxants, respectively. Gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and drooling are common problems which may be helped by specific medications.

The Evanosky Foundation has a very helpful document, Suggestions for Caring for a Child with MLD (pdf), based on their family’s experience.

Because MLD affects the whole family, management should include a team of professionals to provide genetic counseling and family support through what is often a long disease process. Even children with late-infantile MLD may survive for five to ten years with progressive loss of function and continually changing care needs.

Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. A pediatrician or family physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans. The usual regime of age-appropriate vaccinations, flu shots, nutritional support, and other typical medical care need be provided. Dental care is important and is often difficult to obtain. Pulmonary function and vision may also need attention.

It is important for most families to develop a network of support services and establish contact with other families who have faced similar situations.
