Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with PTLS, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: audiology, cardiology, dental, developmental pediatrics, endocrinology, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, clinical genetics, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, physical medicine and rehabilitation, psychiatry, sleep medicine, speech pathology, and urology.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Strabismus and/or refractive errors

Standard treatment as recommended by ophthalmologist

Dental crowding / malocclusion

Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist

Evidence of sleep apnea

Standard treatment as indicated

Assess for iron deficiency if excessive periodic limb movements are identified on sleep study.

Poor weight gain / failure to thrive

Feeding tube in the short term if required for nutrition & growth

Diet diary & calorie counts may be requested.

Hypoglycemia, short stature, evidence of growth hormone deficiency

Standard treatment(s) as recommended by endocrinologist

Cardiac anomaly, dilated aortic root/aortopathy, and/or ECG abnormality

Standard treatment as recommended by cardiologist

Renal anomaly and/or vesicoureteral reflux

Standard treatment as recommended by nephrologist/urologist

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. A “full individual evaluation” (FIE) will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently integrated into an individualized education plan (IEP).

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district generally until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including medical and financial guardianship, financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life and integration into community. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize strength and mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis). Aquatic therapy and hippotherapy (therapeutic horseback riding) may also be considered.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Physical medicine and rehabilitation evaluations may be warranted [Neira-Fresneda & Potocki 2015].

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended to address difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and handwriting.

Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control and/or sensory aversions, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth.

Communication issues. Consider:

Speech and language therapy to address receptive and expressive language deficits, articulation abnormalities, and verbal apraxia;

Evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.
