A multidisciplinary approach to the long-term management of this progressive disorder is optimal [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015].

As first principle, risk factors that exacerbate the movement disorder should be avoided, including patient discomfort, poor body positioning, and pain (e.g., from constipation, urinary retention, pressure sores, undetected fractures). Early referral for nasogastric feeding or percutaneous gastrostomy is appropriate if oral feeding becomes problematic.

Treatment for the palliative control of symptoms includes the following [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015]:

Tetrabenazine and benzodiazepines may be useful in controlling chorea and dyskinesia in early stages of the disease. Chloral hydrate may also help during exacerbations or to aid sleep.

Dystonia is more difficult to control and treatment often includes pramipexole and ropinirole as first-line agents (as few patients respond to levodopa/carbidopa and any response is usually modest and not sustained).

Adjuncts, such as the anticholinergic trihexyphenidyl, are often needed. Baclofen, gabapentin, and clonidine may also be tried for severe dystonia.

Benzodiazepines and chloral hydrate can be useful for exacerbations of dystonia or status dystonicus. Although the role of atypical tranquilizers (e.g., zopiclone) is not yet established, they have been used successfully in individual cases.

Surgical interventions such as intrathecal baclofen and deep brain stimulation have been used on rare occasions late in the disease course when dystonia is severe; therapeutic benefit is limited [Kurian et al 2009].

Optimum management of tone with medical therapies and regular physiotherapy evaluation reduce risk of contracture development. Focal botulinum toxin may be considered for emerging limb contractures and to prevent hip dislocation.

For the treatment of vomiting, anti-emetics such as the anti-serotoninergic agents (e.g., ondansetron) potentially have fewer side effects than other agents.

Treatment of status dystonicus. Standard protocols are used in an intensive care setting. Anesthetic agents, GABA-ergic medication (including GABA-A receptor agonists such as benzodiazepines, GABA-enhancing medications such as gabapentin or phenobarbitone, and GABA-B receptor agonists like baclofen), further anticholinergics, and alpha adrenergic agents such as clonidine may be used. For severe life-threatening or medically intractable status dystonicus, intrathecal baclofen and pallidal deep brain stimulation may be considered.
