Skin. The skin needs to be protected from shearing forces and caretakers need to learn how to handle the child with EB [Denyer 2010, Pope et al 2012].

New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

OrdinaryBand-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Other. The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007, Ida et al 2012].

Gastroesophageal reflux disease, when present, should be treated as in the general population.

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Treatment of granulation tissue can be attempted with high-potency topical steroids, silver nitrate, electrocautery, or autologous skin grafts.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].

Pain management becomes an important part of daily care [Goldschneider & Lucky 2010]. In those with difficult-to-control pain, referral to a pain management specialist can be considered.

Dental care is necessary because of inherent enamel abnormalities [Kirkham et al 2000, Krämer et al 2012].

Urologic and renal problems may be serious in this population [Kajbafzadeh et al 2010]. For those affected individuals who survive, referral to a urologist may be considered.
