The primary goal of treatment is to decrease IOP to prevent vision-threatening complications including corneal opacification and glaucomatous optic atrophy. Early treatment to control IOP will reverse some of these complications in children. A Cochcrane review analyzed the literature that addressed the surgical management of congenital glaucoma but could not draw any conclusions from the analysis [Ghate & Wang 2015].

Surgical treatment. The following approach is based on the work of deLuise & Anderson [1983], Ho & Walton [2004], Bowman et al [2011], Sharaawy & Bhartiya [2011], and Al-Obeidan et al [2014].

PCG is almost always managed surgically. The primary goal of surgery is to eliminate the resistance to aqueous outflow caused by the structural abnormalities in the anterior chamber angle. This goal may be accomplished through an internal approach (goniotomy) or an external approach (trabeculotomy or trabeculectomy).

In goniotomy, the surgeon visualizes the anterior chamber structures through a special lens (goniolens) to create openings in the trabecular meshwork. The goal of the procedure is to eliminate any resistance imposed by the abnormal trabecular meshwork. A clear cornea is necessary for direct visualization of the anterior chamber structures during this procedure.

In trabeculotomy, the trabecular meshwork is incised by cannulating Schlemm's canal with a metal probe or suture via an external opening in the sclera.

In trabeculectomy, a section of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal is removed under a partial thickness sclera flap to create a wound fistula [Morales et al 2013, Chen et al 2014a].

In deep sclerectomy the dissection of a deep scleral flap, deroofing of Schlemm's canal, and preserving the structural integrity of the trabecular meshwork results in improved aqueous outflow outside the anterior chamber.

Note: In contrast to goniotomy, deep sclerectomy, trabeculotomy, and trabeculectomy can be performed in individuals with advanced glaucoma and cloudy corneas.

Glaucoma drainage implants or cyclodestruction may be used to control IOP when initial surgical procedures have failed.

More than one surgical intervention may be necessary to control IOP; thus, significant morbidity is associated with both PCG and the currently available surgical treatment options. Individuals with milder forms of disease who present later in childhood often do well with a single surgical procedure and have an excellent visual prognosis later in life.

Clarity of the cornea and other ocular media, control of the ocular dimensions (corneal diameters and axial lengths), and optic nerve damage are important indicators of the course of the disease following surgery. Reported success rates for each (initial) procedure are approximately 80%. Infants with elevated IOP and cloudy corneas at birth have the poorest prognosis. The most favorable outcome is seen in infants in whom surgery is performed between the second and eighth month of life. With increasing age, surgery is less effective in preserving vision.

Medications. Beta-blockers (e.g., timolol), parasympathomimetics (e.g., pilocarpine), sympathomimetics (e.g., adrenergic agonists and alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandin agonists have all been used. These medications, particularly the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists, may have severe side effects and must be used with caution in infants and children [Maris et al 2005, Papadopoulos & Khaw 2007].

Surgery should not be delayed in an attempt to achieve medical control of IOP.

Medication may be used preoperatively to lower the IOP to prevent optic nerve damage, to reduce the risk of sudden decompression of the globe, and to clear the cornea for better visualization during examination and surgery.

Postoperatively, medication may help control IOP until the success of the surgical procedure is established.

Medical therapy is also used when surgery may be life threatening or has led to incomplete control of the glaucoma [deLuise & Anderson 1983].

Treatment of refractive errors. Amblyopia from uncorrected refractive errors often associated with PCG must be treated to obtain optimal visual function.
