In the absence of curative treatment, current management is focused on the following:

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation, hypersplensim, and lymphomas

Management of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases [Madkaikar et al 2011, Rao & Oliveira 2011, Teachey 2012]

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation and hypersplenism

Manifestations of lymphoproliferation require close clinical observation, as well as serial CT and PET scans every two to three years.

Biopsy is indicated whenever there is a clinical suspicion of lymphoma.

Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs do not decrease lymphadenopathy long term in individuals with ALPS, and are generally reserved for severe complications of lymphoproliferation (e.g., airway obstruction, significant hypersplenism associated with splenomegaly) and/or autoimmune manifestations.

Experience with sirolimus suggests that it is the preferred agent in treating lymphoproliferation in a more sustained manner, including for maintenance of remission after intital treatment followed by a period of discontinued use [Teachey et al 2009, Bride et al 2016]. However, sirolimus is not without side effects.

In severe cases, more potent (lympho-depleting) agents may be required to sufficiently control lymphoproliferative manifestations. Agents include cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin (ATG), and select monoclonal antibodies such as alemtuzumab (Campath®).

Treatment of lymphoma is according to conventional protocols. The presence of defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not appear to hinder the response to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation.

Treatment of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases

Autoimmune cytopenias are typically treated by immune suppression with corticosteroids as well as corticosteroid-sparing agents, if prolonged treatment of autoimmune cytopenias is required and/or in cases of refractory cytopenias.

Recent data from a multi-institutional study suggest that sirolimus should be considered as a first-line – corticosteroid-sparing – agent [Bride et al 2016]. Sirolimus requires monitoring for drug levels and toxic side effects.

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can be used in cases when a less immunosuppressive drug (e.g., compared with sirolimus) seems sufficient, as steroids are tapered. In addition, if drug level and toxic side effects cannot be adequately monitored, MMF could be used as a first-line agent.

Individuals with severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia may benefit from IVIG in combination with corticosteroids.

Rituximab has been used successfully in the treatment of refractory cytopenias in ALPS. However, because of its immune toxicity, its use is generally avoided until other immunosuppression therapies have failed [Rao et al 2009, Rao & Oliveira 2011].

Splenectomy is reserved as an option of last resort in the treatment of life-threatening refractory cytopenias and/or severe hypersplenia because of the high risk of recurrence of cytopenias and sepsis post splenectomy in those with ALPS [Rao & Oliveira 2011, Price et al 2014]. Given the known risks associated with splenectomy, patients requiring this last-resort approach should be considered for curative bone marrow transplantation.

Individuals with isolated chronic neutropenia may improve on low-dose G-CSF [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. In addition, use of a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist should be considered for isolated immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
