The management of individuals with LPI is similar to that described in urea cycle disorders. In LPI, the severity of hyperammonemic crises rarely requires extreme treatments such as dialysis and hemofiltration. It is recommended that individuals with LPI be cared for by a specialized metabolic team.

Treatment of Acute Hyperammonemic Crises

Pharmacologic management. Blocking the production of ammonia is accomplished by the intravenous administration of arginine chloride and of a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. An intravenous loading dose is followed by an oral maintenance dose of nitrogen scavenger drugs when the individual is stable. Depletion of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) may occur as a consequence of the therapy with sodium phenylacetate [Scaglia 2010]. Persistence of BCAA deficiency hampers protein synthesis and induces catabolism. Therefore, careful evaluation of BCAA serum levels is recommended and specific supplementation may be required. Various detailed protocols for the treatment of intercurrent hyperammonemia in individuals with urea cycle disorders and, more generally, with hyperammonemia may be adopted [Singh 2007, Häberle 2011].

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of energy supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, energy should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free formula.

Patients should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. Nasogastric tube feeding may be required to ensure adequate caloric and nutritional intake. Therapy with ondansetron can be started to decrease vomiting.

Complete restriction of protein for more than 24-48 hours is not recommended as the individual will become protein catabolic for essential amino acids.

Long-Term Treatment

Dietary protein restriction and citrulline supplementation. Current treatment consists of dietary protein restriction (0.8-1.5 g/kg/day in children and 0.5-0.8 g/kg/day in adults) and supplementation with citrulline (100 mg/kg/day, in four doses taken with meals). Nitrogen scavenger drugs such as sodium benzoate (100-250 mg/kg/day in four divided doses) should be added to keep the lowest effective dosage of citrulline. As in the management of other inherited metabolic disorders, diet must be tailored on the basis of individual tolerance for the protein charge and carefully monitored to avoid disturbances of both growth and nutritional status.

Measurement of orotic aciduria appears to be a sensitive tool for adjustment of treatment.

Lysine supplementation. As lysine deficiency may contribute to the development of pathologic signs in LPI, oral supplementation with L-lysine-HCl should be attempted. Taking into account the defective intestinal absorption of lysine in LPI, small doses of L-lysine-HCl (0.05-0.5 mmol/kg, three times per day) are given and may normalize plasma lysine concentrations [Lukkarinen et al 2003].

Carnitine supplemetation. In a recent survey of 37 Finnish patients, hypocarnitemia was found to be associated with female sex, renal insufficiency, and the use of ammonia-scavenging drugs. When documented, hypocarnitemia should be corrected (25-50 mg/kg/day) [Korman et al 2002, Tanner et al 2008].

Additional therapies. Modification of the diet and fish oil supplementation should be tried in individuals with dyslipidemia before pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia is started.

Treatment of Late Complications

While hyperammonemia can be efficiently prevented and treated, no effective therapy has been established for late complications.

Treatment of lung disease in LPI remains controversial: high-dose corticosteroid treatment was effective in a few patients when started early, whereas no response was noted in others.

In individuals with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), treatment with granulocyte/monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was shown to be ineffective or even to worsen the clinical course [Santamaria et al 2004]. Recently, increased GM-CSF and decreased bioavailability of surfactant protein D have been proposed as a part of the mechanism underlying PAP in LPI [Douda et al 2009]. Whole lung lavage still remains the best therapeutic approach for PAP in LPI [Ceruti et al 2007]; however, relapses may require serial lavage.

Heart-lung transplantation was attempted with a temporary successful result, but it did not prevent a fatal return of the lung disease [Santamaria et al 2004].

Bone marrow transplantation has been discussed as a possible treatment for PAP in LPI. The rationale of this therapeutic approach would rely on the hypothesis of a defective function of lung macrophages [Barilli et al 2010, Sebastio et al 2011].

Treatment of renal disease in LPI should follow the standard guidelines under direction of the nephrologist.

Treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/macrophagic activation syndrome in LPI should be planned under the direction of the specialist.
