Several drugs variably improve symptoms in affected individuals but, with the lack of clinical trials comparing the efficacy of these drugs, no single medication has been proven to be very effective. Thus, response to the following treatments may be poor.

Acetazolamide

(ACTZ), a carbonic-anhydrase (CA) inhibitor, may reduce the frequency and severity of the attacks in some but not all affected individuals. The mechanism by which ACTZ reduces the frequency and severity of the attacks is unclear. The recommended starting dosage is 125 mg once a day, given orally. However, individuals with good renal function may require higher daily doses, ranging from 8 to 30 mg/kg/day in one to four divided doses (not to exceed 1 g/day). ACTZ should not be prescribed to individuals with liver, renal, or adrenal insufficiency.

Chronic treatment with ACTZ may result in side effects including tiredness, paresthesias, rash, and formation of renal calculi; therefore, for some affected individuals treatment must be discontinued [Graves et al 2014, D’Adamo et al 2015].

Antiepileptic drugs

(AEDs) may significantly reduce the frequency of the attacks in responsive individuals; however, the response is heterogeneous as some individuals are particularly resistant to drugs [Eunson et al 2000].

Diphenylhydantoin treatment at a dose of 150-300 mg daily resulted in reasonable control of seizures in some individuals [VanDyke et al 1975]. In particular, phenytoin treatment at a dose of 3.7 mg/kg/day may improve muscle stiffness and motor performance [Kinali et al 2004]. Nevertheless, phenytoin should be used with caution in young individuals, as it may cause permanent cerebellar dysfunction and atrophy [De Marcos et al 2003].

Sulthiame 50-200 mg daily may reduce the attack rate. During this treatment abortive attacks were still noticed lasting a few seconds and troublesome side effects were paresthesias and intermittent carpal spasm.

Carbamazepine has been prescribed in doses up to 1600 mg daily [Eunson et al 2000]. The dose needs to be adjusted according to different factors including, age, weight, the particular carbamazepine product being used, responsiveness of the individual, and other medications being taken.

Lamotrigine ameliorates attacks in some affected individuals and therefore it has been proposed as an alternative treatment [Graves et al 2014].
