Nosebleeds

It is appropriate to consider intervention for nosebleeds in the case of anemia attributable to the nosebleeds or if an individual feels that the frequency or duration interferes significantly with normal activities.

Humidification and the daily application of nasal lubricants may be helpful.

Hemostatic products (gauze, sponge or powder products) available over the counter help individuals self-manage significant nosebleeds.

Laser ablation typically done under general anesthesia may be the most effective intervention for control of mild to moderate nosebleeds. Office-based sclerotherapy was shown to be a potentially safe and useful alternative in an uncontrolled Spanish study [Morais et al 2012] and a small retrospective US pilot study [Boyer et al 2011].

Young's nasal closure is a consideration for severe epistaxis which has proven unresponsive to the above methods [Richer et al 2012]. Surgical treatment for severe epistaxis in persons with HHT should be performed by surgeons who treat people with HHT regularly.

Oral drug therapy. A meta-analysis of studies of hormonal and anti-hormonal treatment concluded that estrogen-progesterone at doses used for oral contraception may eliminate bleeding in symptomatic HHT and is a reasonable initial option to consider for fertile women [Jameson & Cave 2004]. An anti-estrogen, tamoxifen, was reported to decrease nosebleeds in one series [Yaniv et al 2009]. Antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron®) have been used with some success in selected individuals; the associated risks are not well established [Fernandez-L et al 2007]. Thalidomide, an angiogenesis inhibitor, reduced the severity and frequency of nosebleeds in six of seven affected individuals in a small series [Lebrin et al 2010]. Oral propranolol has also been suggested as a potential treatment [Albiñana et al 2012].

Topical drug therapy. Current evidence and experience suggest that the simple humidification and moisturizing effects of medicated sprays and ointments are more helpful than the particular medication. A multi-HHT center randomized, cross-over, placebo controlled trial (NOSE Trial) to study the efficacy of several medicated nose sprays (bevacizumab, estriol, and tranexamic acid) in the treatment of epistaxis concluded that all groups, including the placebo group using saline spray, had a significant improvement in epistaxis. None of the three topical therapies was any better at decreasing epistaxis frequency than twice-daily saline spray [Whitehead et al 2016]. Another randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled clinical trial of three doses of bevacizumab nasal spray was published simultaneously with the NOSE Trial. Here again, topical bevacizumab had no effect on epistaxis [Dupuis-Girod et al 2016]. Case reports or small series suggest that these and other topically administered agents (e.g., timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution) may help reduce the duration or frequency of nosebleeds in those with HHT [Flanagan et al 2012, Guldmann et al 2012, Olitsky 2012, Reh et al 2013].

Case reports and a small series [Bose et al 2009, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012, Thompson et al 2014] suggest that IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab may be efficacious in those with severe, intractable nosebleeds.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Treatment is unnecessary unless aggressive iron therapy has been ineffective in maintaining hemoglobin concentration in the normal range.

Endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, mesenteric and celiac angiography, and radionuclide studies may be used to localize the source of bleeding and its type [Grève et al 2010].

Endoscopic application of a heater probe, bicap, or laser is the mainstay of local treatment.

Small bowel bleeding sites and larger vascular malformations can be removed surgically after they are identified by nuclear medicine studies.

For severe GI bleeding associated with intractable iron deficiency anemia, various pharmacologic agents have shown promise based on case reports or small uncontrolled series. Treatment with oral estrogen-progesterone or tranexamic acid has decreased transfusion needs [Proctor et al 2008]. A number of single cases of dramatic reduction in GI bleeding after IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab have been reported [Flieger et al 2006, Fodstad et al 2011].

Anemia

Treatment of anemia with iron replacement and red blood cell transfusion, if necessary, is appropriate.

Persons with iron deficiency who are intolerant of or do not respond to oral iron benefit from parenteral administration of iron.

Pulmonary AVMs

Treatment of pulmonary AVMs is indicated for dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and hypoxemia, but is most important for prevention of lung hemorrhage and the neurologic complications of brain abscess and stroke, even in those who are asymptomatic with respect to pulmonary function and oxygen saturation. Any pulmonary AVM with a feeding vessel that exceeds 1.0 mm in diameter requires consideration of occlusion [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010]. Transcatheter embolotherapy (TCE) with coils, occluder devices (Amplatzer®), or both is the treatment of choice. Occasionally, a small lesion cannot be reached because of its location or the size of the feeding vessel. Multiple coils may be needed to occlude AVMs with large or multiple feeding arteries.

Long-term follow up by chest CT and/or contrast echocardiography is indicated after transcatheter occlusion of pulmonary AVMs because of reported recanalization and development or growth of untreated pulmonary AVMs [Cottin et al 2007]. Usually a follow-up CT is done six to 12 months post-occlusion, and if no recanalized or new PAVMs are noted, follow-up CT is done at five-year intervals thereafter [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010, Faughnan et al 2011].

Hepatic AVMs

Treatment of cardiac failure or liver failure secondary to hepatic AVMs is currently problematic. Embolization of hepatic AVMs, which is successful for treatment of pulmonary AVMs, has led to lethal hepatic infarctions. Most individuals with symptomatic hepatic AVMs can be satisfactorily managed with intensive medical therapy [Buscarini et al 2011].

Liver transplantation has been the standard treatment for those (usually older) individuals whose symptoms of hepatic failure do not respond to medical management [Buscarini et al 2006, Lerut et al 2006, Dupuis-Girod et al 2010, Lee et al 2010, Chavan et al 2013].

Bevacizumab administered intravenously has been reported to decrease cardiac output and symptoms of heart failure in affected individuals with severe symptoms secondary to hepatic AVMs in case reports and one series [Mitchell et al 2008, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012].

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Cerebral AVMs

Cerebral AVMs greater than 1.0 cm in diameter are usually treated using neurovascular surgery, embolotherapy, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery.

Note: Before proceeding with treatment for any visceral AVM, individuals and their doctors are encouraged to contact the nearest multidisciplinary HHT clinic, which can be located through the support group, Cure HHT, to assure that appropriate diagnostic and treatment plans are in place.

Intestinal Polyps

Any individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis (JP) should be screened for manifestations of HHT, and the family should be screened for polyps. Any person with HHT who has gastrointestinal polyps, especially at an early age, should be evaluated for JP and managed accordingly (see Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome).
