Adrenal insufficiency. Management of adrenal insufficiency in IMAGe syndrome is similar to management of adrenal insufficiency from other causes and should be under the supervision of an endocrinologist.

Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency require close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Treatment with IV saline, glucose, and cortisol are utilized. If the serum electrolytes do not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of cortisol is increased.

Once the acute episode has been managed, replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and oral supplements of sodium chloride are given. Dosages must be increased with stress, such as intercurrent illness, surgery, or trauma. Steroid doses need to be managed to enable optimal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) therapy. Although information regarding anticipated adult height in IMAGe syndrome is limited, assessment for GH deficiency should be considered, as one child showed poor GH response to glucagon stimulation [Pedreira et al 2004] and other children with normal GH secretion have demonstrated a response in growth with growth hormone therapy [Lienhardt et al 2002, Kato et al 2014].

Genitourinary abnormalities. Routine surgical management of cryptorchidism and hypospadias by a urologist is indicated.

Males with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are likely to need increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty. Long-term adrenal steroid replacement and testosterone replacement should be managed by an experienced endocrinologist.

Orthopedic intervention as necessary for skeletal complications, including scoliosis and hip dysplasia, is appropriate.

Occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed is appropriate, particularly with the hypotonia that often accompanies the syndrome.

Neurologic evaluation is indicated if developmental delay and/or hypotonia are present.
