Management of the varying clinical problems usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatric ophthalmology, nephrology, clinical biochemical genetics, metabolism, nutrition, endocrinology, neurology, child development, behavior, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved.

Eyes. Treatment of the eye problems usually requires an experienced (preferably pediatric) ophthalmologist; cataract surgeons and glaucoma specialists may also be needed.

Early removal of cataracts is recommended to promote proper visual stimulation and development. Postoperatively, eyeglasses or contact lenses help to improve vision. Surgical implantation of artificial lenses is not recommended because of the high prevalence of infantile glaucoma.

Despite management with medical and surgical measures, glaucoma is often difficult to control.

Special services for the visually handicapped should be included in any rehabilitation plan.

Central nervous system. In infancy, feeding and nutrition problems related to hypotonia may be substantial. Occasionally, nasogastric tube feedings or feeding gastrostomy, with or without fundoplication, may be necessary to achieve appropriate nutrition. Occupational or speech therapists who specialize in feeding problems may be of assistance.

Gastroesophageal reflux usually responds to standard anti-reflux measures such as thickened feedings and elevation of the head of the bed. Some individuals need medications to control gastric acidity and to promote gastric emptying; others require surgery.

Most seizure disorders can be controlled with anticonvulsant therapy.

Programs to promote optimal psychomotor development should be started in early infancy. Early childhood and preschool intervention programs, e.g., First Steps or Head Start, and later public or private school programs should evaluate the abilities and specific needs of the child and formulate an individualized educational plan (IEP). Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and language therapy, special education services, and services for the visually impaired are usually included in the plan.

A behavior modification plan along with antidepressant and/or antipsychotic medications may be needed for behavior control.

Kidney. Those individuals with renal Fanconi syndrome and type 2 renal acidosis should be treated with oral supplements of sodium and potassium bicarbonate or citrate to correct acidosis and hypokalemia. Doses need to be titrated to individual needs based on "trough" blood concentrations of serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, and total carbon dioxide). (Trough levels are blood concentrations measured just before a scheduled dose.)

Treatment with oral phosphate, along with oral calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3), is needed to correct hypophosphatemia and renal rickets of the Fanconi syndrome. Doses should also be titrated to individual needs based on trough blood concentration for phosphorus and serum concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, calcium, and intact parathyroid hormone.

An increased requirement for fluids, along with the electrolyte and bicarbonate requirements, places affected individuals at high risk for metabolic imbalance during illness (especially those associated with vomiting or diarrhea) or when fasting, e.g., with surgical procedures. At such times, intravenous replacement of fluids, bicarbonate, and electrolytes is important and may need to be done in anticipation of problems to prevent severe electrolyte disturbances and dehydration.

Progressive glomerulosclerosis likely results from progressive renal tubular injury, which eventually may lead to chronic renal failure and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) between the second and fourth decades of life [McSpadden 2000, Nussbaum & Suchy 2001]. Treatment of ESRD with chronic dialysis and renal transplant may be successful in selected patients [Tricot et al 2003]. Although experience is limited, at least seven adult men with Lowe syndrome and ESRD have been treated successfully over a few years, including three with chronic hemodialysis, one with chronic home peritoneal dialysis, and three with renal transplants [E Brewer, personal observation].

Other. Human growth hormone therapy has been used successfully to improve growth velocity in some boys [McSpadden 2000]. The potential benefits of such therapy must be weighed against its costs/limitations.

Most undescended testes descend with time into the scrotum; some require hormone therapy and/or surgical correction.

In older individuals, bracing or surgery may be needed to arrest or correct severe or progressive scoliosis and joint hypermobility.

Resection of fibromas and cutaneous cysts may be needed if they are painful, have recurrent infections, or limit function.
