Cortisol deficiency

Regular hydrocortisone replacement therapy is indicated if baseline serum cortisol concentrations are low.

Stress-dose steroids should be provided perioperatively and during times of physiologic stress in individuals in whom cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (cosyntropin test) is below normal [Krone et al 2012].

Genital abnormalities

Hypospadias and cryptorchidism may be corrected with surgery.

When clitoromegaly is severe, surgical reduction and plastic reconstruction of the clitoris may be considered.

Vaginal reconstruction may be performed in females with vaginal hypoplasia.

Dihydrotestosterone treatment has been successful in some males with micropenis [Fukami et al 2005].

Testosterone replacement has been initiated in males in whom testosterone levels remained relatively low after onset of puberty [Hershkovitz et al 2008, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Similarly, females with absent pubertal development may require estrogen replacement therapy.

Ovarian cysts. Treatment with estradiol appeared to successfully reduce the size of ovarian cysts in females with PORD [Fukami et al 2009, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Ovarian cysts in females can be a significant problem as they tend to be large and prone to spontaneous rupture; cases of girls treated with GnRH agonists and potent steroids have been reported [Idkowiak et al 2011].

Craniosynostosis. Treatment for craniosynostosis is similar to that for other syndromes associated with premature fusion of cranial sutures. Although surgical correction can be performed at any age, it is generally believed that earlier surgical correction results in better cognitive outcome.

Airway management is often a primary concern in individuals with ABS as a result of choanal stenosis or atresia, small chest, narrow trachea, and/or shortening of the larynx.

Endotracheal intubation is often required in the first minutes after delivery.

Nasal stints or tracheotomy may be required.

Tracheostomy may be necessary until age three to five years when the pharyngeal encroachment can be corrected.

Hydrocephalus. If present, hydrocephalus may be treated by surgical placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.

Joint contractures and elbow synostosis. Physical and occupational therapy can help individuals with contractures and elbow synostosis develop fine and gross motor skills.
