The management of children with SMA starts with the diagnosis and classification into one of the five categories. A consensus document on the diagnosis and treatment of children with SMA has been developed [Wang et al 2007] (full text).

Health Issues Specific to SMA

Nutrition. Bulbar dysfunction is universal in SMA I and gastrostomy should be considered early in the course of the disease. The bulbar dysfunction eventually becomes a serious problem for persons with SMA II and only very late in the course of disease for those with SMA III. Gastrointestinal dysmotility results in constipation, delayed gastric emptying, and potentially life-threatening gastroesophageal reflux.

Pulmonary. Children with SMA I and II, and more rarely type III, have progressive decline in pulmonary function. Formal consultation with a pulmonologist familiar with SMA is indicated. Guidelines for assessment and intervention are published as part of the Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Options for management (depending on family preference) include no respiratory support, noninvasive ventilation, and tracheotomy with mechanical ventilation. These options should be discussed with the parents/care providers before respiratory failure occurs. The type of respiratory support is dependent on the individual’s respiratory status, quality-of-life goals, and reduction in respiratory complications. Palliative care, with or without noninvasive ventilator support, is an option for the most severely affected individuals.

Indications for noninvasive ventilation in SMA include hypoventilation, as demonstrated by decreased oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry or obstructive sleep apnea. Noninvasive ventilation has been shown to improve sleep breathing parameters in SMA I and II [Petrone et al 2007]. Noninvasive ventilation with BiPAP is commonly used in SMA as it may improve chest wall and lung development and is proposed to reduce lung infections and pulmonary comorbidity in SMA. Tracheotomy for chronic ventilation is an option that can be discussed with individuals and their families; however, it is controversial, especially in SMA I.

Airway clearance can be addressed with a mechanical in-exsufflator in conjunction with suctioning and chest physiotherapy, especially in the setting of acute illness. Use of mechanical in-exsufflation in the treatment of children with neuromuscular diseases, including children with SMA, appears to reduce pulmonary complications [Chatwin et al 2003, Miske et al 2004].

Scoliosis occurs frequently in individuals with SMA II. Surgical repair should be considered based on progression of the curvature, pulmonary function, and bone maturity. Use of spinal orthosis prior to surgical intervention is common; however, there is insufficient evidence that spinal orthotics alter scoliosis.

Use of the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib (VEPTR) is a possible treatment for severe scoliosis. Chandran and colleagues described the use of VEPTR in 11 children with SMA types I and II who were followed for an average of 43 months after the initial surgery [Chandran et al 2011]. The average age at time of surgery was six years. No surgical complications were identified. Medical complications were seen in two affected individuals: postoperative pneumonia and anemia.

A newer technology involving magnetically controlled growing rods (MAGEC rods) allows for gradual outpatient distractions controlled by an external remote device. Early case reports for this device are becoming available, although experience is not specific to SMA [La Rosa et al 2017].

Hip dislocation is another orthopedic concern in SMA. A retrospective review of a large series of affected individuals suggests that asymptomatic hip dislocation does not require surgery [Sporer & Smith 2003].
