Acute photosensitivity. Afamelanotide (Scenesse®), a synthetic α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog was approved for treatment of EPP by the European Medicines Agency in 2014. The drug is administered through a subcutaneously inserted bioresorbable implant which results in increased pigmentation due to an increase in eumelanin. Phase III clinical trials in the US and Europe showed an increase in pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in individuals with EPP. In the United States, the drug is pending FDA approval.

The phototoxic pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Current management centers on prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Tanning products. Some tanning creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all. Topical sunscreens are typically not useful.

β-carotene. Oral Lumitene™ (120-180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight in some patients if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600-800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The dose of Lumitene depends on age, ranging from two to ten 30-mg capsules per day and usually started six to eight weeks before summer. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. However, there are currently no data to support its efficacy [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Some affected individuals develop severe liver complications that are difficult to treat, often requiring liver transplantation [Anderson et al 2001]. Hepatic complications may be accompanied by motor neuropathy.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988].

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002].

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, transplant recipients may experience a recurrence of protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006].

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].
