No therapy exists to prevent the progressive organ involvement. However, monitoring for developing problems and early intervention is essential.

Rod-cone dystrophy

Early on when photodysphoria is significant, the use of red-orange tinted prescription lenses may reduce symptoms.

Early educational planning should be based on the certainty of blindness. Instruction in the use of Braille, mobility training, adaptive living skills, and computing skills (including voice recognition and transcription software), and the use of large print reading materials while vision is still present are crucial.

Obesity. A healthful, reduced calorie diet and regular exercise, such as walking, hiking, biking, and swimming with adaptations for the blind, are recommended to control weight gain.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss

Myringotomy has been helpful in individuals with recurrent otitis media (‘glue ear’).

Hearing can be maximized with bilateral digital hearing aids.

Cochlear implantation has benefitted some patients [Florentzson et al 2010].

Cardiomyopathy. Angiotensinogen-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diuretics, digoxin, and possibly beta-blockers should be used in the treatment of cardiac failure. Cardiac transplantation has been successful in isolated cases [Goerler et al 2007].

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes should be treated as in the general population unless heart failure and/or liver dysfunction are present. The diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin resistance, but some individuals respond to a low-sugar, low-fat diet; exercise; and metformin. Glitazones are added to further reduce insulin resistance but must be avoided in the presence of active or treated heart failure. These treatments should be discontinued when the serum creatinine concentration exceeds 200 µmol/L or if cardiomyopathy is evident. Incretin analogues given subcutaneously, as in nonsyndromic type 2 diabetes, are successful in two thirds of cases [Paisey et al 2008, Paisey 2009].

Hypertriglyceridemia

Nicotinic acid derivatives can be helpful in long-term reduction of severe hypertriglyceridemia (>20 mmol/l) especially if pancreatitis has occurred and diabetes is absent or well controlled [Paisey et al 2004, Paisey 2009]. Statins are unlikely to be effective but can be considered for long-term prevention of atherosclerosis in adults with low HDL, high LDL, and diabetes.

Pancreatitis should be treated as in the general population.

Endocrine

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and pituitary hormones should be assessed to determine if hormonal adjustments are necessary.

Male hypogonadism should be treated with testosterone according to local endocrine guidelines to preserve sexuality, muscle strength, and bone health.

Thyroxine therapy should be initiated and monitored if the individual is hypothyroid.

Urologic. Some individuals have required urinary diversion or self-catheterization to manage voiding difficulties [MacDermott 2001].

Renal disease

The use of enzyme ACE inhibitors may be considered if proteinuria is detected.

Successful renal transplantation has occurred in a growing number of individuals, but can be contraindicated in the presence of other complications including morbid obesity, uncontrolled diabetes, and cardiomyopathy.

Hepatic disease. Portal hypertension may be treated with beta-blockade and sclerotherapy of the esophageal veins. Banding should be done in order to prevent upper-GI hemorrhage from varices. Patients who fail to respond to medication and banding are candidates for a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) to decrease risk of variceal bleeding caused by portal hypertension. Patients with significant portal hypertension should be evaluated early for liver transplantation.

Pulmonary disease. General activity, including breathing exercises, can reduce chronic hypoxia and improve wellbeing. Coaching by an exercise expert may be necessary in order to achieve adequate spirometry results to determine the presence of obstructive airways disease.

Other

If skeletal abnormalities are present, referral to an orthopedist is appropriate.

Reflux esophagitis, skin manifestations, orthopedic abnormalities, and neurologic manifestations should be treated as in the general population.

Education intervention, as indicated by evaluation and IEP (individual education plan) with the expectation of total blindness and hearing loss.

Prevention of Primary Complications

The progression to diabetes mellitus and the severity of hyperglycemia can in some cases be mitigated by lifestyle changes and avoidance of severe obesity.
