While there is experience with treating pituitary adenomas in symptomatic persons with FIPA, there is little experience in the management and treatment of persons identified prospectively through clinical screening due to family history of FIPA and/or presence of a heterozygous AIP germline pathogenic variant. The following recommendations are based on those of Biller et al [2008], Jaffe [2006], Katznelson et al [2011], and Melmed et al [2011].

Pituitary adenomas can be treated by surgery, medical therapy, and/or radiotherapy.

Adenomas in persons with FIPA, especially those with AIP-related FIPA, are aggressive. Surgery is usually performed, but often does not fully control the tumor. Transsphenoidal surgery has been performed for large adenomas, while microadenomas with normal clinical and biochemistry findings are monitored closely [Chahal et al 2011]. Large tumors, especially those recurring after surgery, may require radiotherapy when the tumor invades neighboring anatomic structures (such as the cavernous sinus).

Somatotropinomas, particularly in persons with a germline AIP pathogenic variant, often do not respond to medical therapy with somatostatin analogs. Daly et al [2010] showed no tumor shrinkage in AIP-related adenomas and significantly lower reductions in GH secretion (40% vs 75%) and IGF-1 secretion (47% and 56%); in these instances growth hormone receptor antagonist therapy could be initiated [Leontiou et al 2008, Daly et al 2010].

Radiotherapy (conventional or radiosurgery) is an option for treating growing adenomas, for which repeat surgery is unlikely to control hormone levels.

Prolactinomas are usually treated with dopamine agonist therapy (cabergoline being the drug of choice), which can result in tumor regression or in some cases disappearance of detectable lesions. No data suggest that FIPA-associated prolactinomas would respond less favorably to dopamine agonist therapy than do sporadic tumors; however, Daly et al [2010] suggested that prolactinomas in AIP-related FIPA appear to be aggressive and difficult to treat. Persons with AIP-related FIPA and a macroprolactinoma (diameter >10 mm) often undergo surgery.

NFPAs are treated with surgery and, if necessary, radiotherapy. They usually do not respond to traditional somatostatin analogs despite the presence of somatostatin receptors and an often good response in vitro. Dopamine agonist therapy has been tried in some cases. Timely diagnosis, prediction of long-term outcome, and treatment of NFPAs remain a challenge for endocrinologists [Korbonits & Carlsen 2009].

Temozolomide has been successfully used for the treatment of a few aggressive pituitary adenomas; however, there is no experience with its use in persons with AIP-related FIPA.

The increased burden of GH secretion and IGF-1 secretion (defined as the level and duration of increased hormone levels) observed in those with acromegaly is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and metabolic complications [Jayasena et al 2011]. Individuals with long-standing acromegaly often have cardiovascular and rheumatologic/orthopedic complications, which need to be treated accordingly.
