Dental. Early referral to a dental clinic familiar with CCD allows for timely planning of necessary procedures.

The dental problems that need to be addressed include the retention of deciduous dentition, the presence of supernumerary teeth, and the non-eruption of the permanent dentition.

The goal of treatment is to improve appearance and to provide a functioning masticatory mechanism. The goals may be achieved with prosthetic replacements, with or without prior extractions; by removal of the supernumerary teeth followed by surgical repositioning of the permanent teeth; and by a combination of surgical and orthodontic measures for actively erupting and aligning the impacted permanent teeth. For a detailed review, see Becker et al [1997a] and Becker et al [1997b], and Roberts et al [2013].

Generally, an aggressive approach to coordinate multiple oral surgeries for removal of primary dentition and exposure of permanent dentition is recommended, as watchful waiting for spontaneous eruption after initial delay is not effective.

Speech therapy may be required during periods of dental treatment.

Sinus and middle ear infections require aggressive and timely treatment; tympanostomy tubes should be considered when middle ear infections are recurrent [Visosky et al 2003].

Craniofacial. The fontanels close with time in the majority of individuals and cranial remodeling is usually not necessary.

If the cranial vault defect is significant, the head should be protected from blunt trauma; helmets may be advised for high-risk activities. In these cases, evaluation by a craniofacial surgeon and rehabilitation services are indicated.

Affected individuals may consider having correction of the depressed forehead or lengthening of the hypoplastic clavicles for cosmetic reasons. There have been reports of successful surgical interventions in a very small number of affected individuals [Kang et al 2009, Sewell et al 2013].

Skeletal. If bone density is below normal on DEXA, treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplementation should be considered. Preventive treatment for osteoporosis should be initiated at a young age since peak bone mineral density is achieved in the second and third decade.
