Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure.

In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary nonadherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

Addition of a topical antibiotic or antiseptic such as bacitracin, mupirocin, silver, or honey

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix® or Conform®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net® or Tubifast®).

Gastrointestinal

Surgical intervention is required to correct pyloric atresia. Many children need medical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

Consultation with a dietitian or nutritionist can be helpful, especially if there is significant mucosal blistering in the mouth preventing adequate oral intake.

Renal. The following are appropriate:

Referral to an urologist if there are symptoms of difficulty or discomfort with voiding

Referral to a nephrologist if renal function studies and/or urinalysis are abnormal

Other

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert the clinician to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue [Ida et al 2012]. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].
