Aniridia. Simple measures are often the most important:

Regular eye examinations and correction of refractive errors. Refractive errors range from high myopia through emmetropia to high hypermetropia. Spectacle correction of refractive errors is usually recommended as use of contact lenses can be difficult in the presence of keratopathy and reduced tear production.

Tinted or photochromic lenses to reduce light sensitivity associated with the large pupillary aperture. Colored, tinted or artificial pupil contact lenses may reduce light sensitivity or restore a more normal appearance to the eye but, as above, may be difficult to wear because of a poor ocular surface and tear film.

Occlusion therapy for anisometropic amblyopia or strabismic amblyopia in childhood

Optical low-vision aids and other devices such as closed-circuit television systems to help adults and children of school age

Advice and help with schooling

Social support

Note: Corrective surgery for strabismus can be undertaken but is usually only for cosmetic rather than visual purposes.

Lens. Cataract extraction can significantly improve visual acuity in those with severe lens opacities. It should be remembered that in aniridia visual improvement after surgery is limited by foveal hypoplasia; thus, mild to moderate lens opacities may not require surgery:

Children rarely require surgery (lens aspiration or lensectomy).

In adults, phacoemulsification can be successful.

Note: (1) A significant number of individuals with aniridia have poor zonular stability, which increases the risk for intraoperative complications and influences the choice of surgical technique and options for IOL implantation [Schneider et al 2003]. (2) The use of various types of black diaphragm aniridic IOLs may reduce glare or light sensitivity but may be associated with a higher rate of surgical complications [Reinhard et al 2000, Menezo et al 2005, Pozdeyeva et al 2005].

Intraocular pressure

Glaucoma is usually initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication.

Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy:

Trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites (e.g., 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin C) is often used but is associated with a higher risk of treatment failure than that seen in patients with primary glaucoma who undergo the same treatment.

Drainage tube surgery (with or without antimetabolites) or cyclodiode laser treatment may be necessary in refractory cases, although this treatment is increasingly being undertaken as a primary procedure [Khaw 2002, Kirwan et al 2002, Arroyave et al 2003, Lee et al 2010].

Note: (1) Glaucoma presenting in infancy is more difficult to treat. Medical treatment is generally ineffective and surgery is required. Goniotomy and trabeculotomy have a low success rate, but trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites is often successful [Nelson et al 1984, Okada et al 2000, Khaw 2002]. (2) While goniosurgery has been suggested as a preventive measure, glaucoma never develops in a significant proportion of those with aniridia [Swanner et al 2004].

Cornea

Ocular surface disease can be treated medically using lubricants, mucolytics, and punctal occlusion. Note: Drops without preservatives are often required to avoid preservative-related ocular surface toxicity.

When corneal opacification causes significant visual reduction, penetrating keratoplasty (PK) may be considered; however, in the presence of the significant limbal stem cell deficiency observed in aniridia, PK alone has a poor prognosis [Tiller et al 2003].

Limbal stem cell transplantation alone, preceding or concurrent with keratoplasty may be undertaken, but requires an allograft as both eyes are usually affected. This may take the form of a cultured stem cell sheet or a limbal tissue transplant [Lee et al 2008, Pauklin et al 2010]. However, this therapy is associated with a high risk of failure and lifelong systemic immunosuppression may be required to prevent rejection. Whether the use of cultured oral mucous membrane cells may have a beneficial role is as yet uncertain.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Surgical intervention is recommended at the first sign of aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005].

Wilms tumor. See Wilms Tumor Overview.
