The mainstay of management of GSD III is a high-protein diet with cornstarch supplementation to maintain euglycemia.

In infancy, feeds every three to four hours are recommended. Unlike the diet used to treat infants with GSD I, the diet used to treat infants with GSD III can include fructose and galactose, as individuals with GSD III can utilize these sugars; special formulas are not required.

Toward the end of the first year of life, cornstarch is tolerated and can be used to prevent hypoglycemia. Initially one to three doses per day may be required with typical starting dose of 1 g/kg every six hours. The doses can be titrated based on the results of glucose and ketone monitoring.

A protein intake of 3 g/kg is recommended as gluconeogenesis is intact and protein can be used as a source of glucose. For those who cannot make it through the night on cornstarch and protein, Glycosade® extended-release cornstarch can be used [Ross et al 2015].

A high-protein diet prevents breakdown of endogenous muscle protein in times of glucose need and preserves skeletal and cardiac muscles.

Periods of suboptimal metabolic control can be identified by measuring blood glucose and blood ketone several times per month.

Although hypoglycemia upon awakening is uncommon in older children and adults since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations, monitoring blood glucose concentrations between 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Elevated ketones reflect poor metabolic control as ketones are produced when glucose is unavailable and instead fatty acid oxidation is used as a source of energy. Monitoring blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended; the goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations in the normal range (<0.3 mmol/L). Additionally, morning urine ketone measurements can be monitored with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

Existing skeletal and cardiac myopathies can be improved with high-protein diet and avoidance of excessive carbohydrate intake [Slonim et al 1982, Slonim et al 1984, Dagli et al 2009, Valayannopoulos et al 2011, Sentner et al 2012].

Titration of protein and cornstarch in the diet is the primary treatment for elevated cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, which usually result from suboptimal metabolic control.

Emergency protocol. An emergency protocol to avoid dangerous hypoglycemia should be established. An intravenous (IV) infusion of 10% dextrose with 0.5 normal saline administered at 1.5 times the maintenance rate should be given immediately on admission to the emergency room. Serum concentrations of electrolytes, glucose, and ketones should be monitored. Efforts should be made to correct ketosis as it can induce vomiting and worsen the catabolic state.

Liver transplantation. In GSD III hepatic complications are not the main cause of morbidity. Also, modern treatment strategies and good metabolic control can prevent major complications. Liver transplantation should therefore be viewed as a treatment of last resort for individuals with GSD III. Liver transplantation will prevent hypoglycemia in both GSD IIIa and GSD IIIb; the muscular defect, however, will remain present in individuals with GSD IIIa.

Because liver transplantation does not cure the heart and muscle problems and because transplantation has been associated with worsening myopathy and cardiomyopathy, liver transplantation is only indicated in affected individuals with severe hepatic cirrhosis, liver dysfunction, and/or hepatocellular carcinoma [Davis & Weinstein 2008].
