Transfusional Iron Overload

The most common secondary complications are those related to transfusional iron overload, which can be prevented by adequate iron chelation.

Assessment of iron overload

Serum ferritin concentration. In clinical practice, the effectiveness of chelators is monitored by routine determination of serum ferritin concentration. However, serum ferritin concentration is not always reliable for evaluating iron burden because it is influenced by other factors, the most important being the extent of liver damage.

Liver biopsy. Determination of liver iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen shows a high correlation with total body iron accumulation and is the gold standard for evaluation of liver iron overload. However, (1) liver biopsy is an invasive technique involving the possibility (though low) of complications; (2) liver iron content can be affected by hepatic fibrosis, which commonly occurs in individuals with iron overload and HCV infection; and (3) irregular iron distribution in the liver can lead to possible false-negative results [Clark et al 2003].

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a reliable measurement of hepatic iron concentration, is another option [Fischer et al 2003]; however, magnetic susceptometry is presently available only in a limited number of centers worldwide.

MRI techniques for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart are commonly used [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. T2 and T2* parameters have been validated for liver iron concentration. Cardiac T2* is reproducible, is applicable between different scanners, correlates with cardiac function, and relates to tissue iron concentration [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. Clinical utility of T2* in monitoring individuals with siderotic cardiomyopathy has been demonstrated. In one study, twelve human hearts from transfusion-dependent affected individuals after either death or transplantation for end-stage heart failure underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* (the reciprocal of T2*) measurement. Tissue iron concentration was measured in multiple samples of each heart with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, providing calibration in humans for cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* against myocardial iron concentration and detailing the iron distribution throughout the heart in iron overload [Carpenter et al 2011].

Chelation therapy

Desferrioxamine B (DFO). The first chelator introduced clinically was desferrioxamine B (DFO) administered five to seven days a week by 12-hour continuous subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. Recommended dosage depends on the individual's age and the serum ferritin concentration. Young children start with 20-30 mg/kg/day, increasing up to 40 mg/kg/day after age five to six years. The maximum dose is 50 mg/kg/day after growth is completed. The dose may be reduced if serum ferritin concentration is low. By maintaining the total body iron stores below critical values (i.e., hepatic iron concentration <7.0 mg per gram of dry weight liver tissue), desferrioxamine B therapy prevents the secondary effects of iron overload, resulting in a consistent decrease in morbidity and mortality [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2004].

Ascorbate repletion (daily dose not to exceed 100-150 mg) increases the amount of iron removed after DFO administration.

Side effects of DFO chelation therapy are more common in the presence of relatively low iron burden and include ocular and auditory toxicity, growth retardation, and, rarely, renal impairment and interstitial pneumonitis. DFO administration also increases susceptibility to Yersinia infections. The major drawback of DFO chelation therapy is low compliance resulting from complications of administration.

Deferiprone (L-1), a bidentated oral chelator, is administered in a dose of 75-100 mg/kg/day. The main side effects of deferiprone therapy include, arthropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms and, above all, neutropenia and agranulocytosis [Galanello & Campus 2009] that demand close monitoring. The effect of deferiprone on liver iron concentration may vary among the individuals treated. However, results from independent studies suggest that deferiprone is more cardioprotective than desferrioxamine; compared to those being treated with DFO, individuals being treated with deferiprone have better myocardial MRI pattern and less probability of developing (or worsening pre-existing) cardiac disease [Anderson et al 2002, Piga et al 2003]. These retrospective observations have been confirmed in a prospective study [Pennell et al 2006].

Deferasirox was developed as a once-daily oral monotherapy for the treatment of transfusional iron overload. It is effective in adults and children and has a defined safety profile that is clinically manageable with appropriate monitoring. The most common treatment-related adverse events are gastrointestinal disorders, skin rash, and a mild, non-progressive increase in serum creatinine concentration [Cappellini 2008]. Cases of renal failure, hepatic failure, cytopenias and gastrointestinal hemorrhage have been reported in the post-marketing phase. Provided adequate doses are given, there is a good response to deferasirox across the full range of baseline liver iron concentration values. Prospective data demonstrate the efficacy of deferasirox in improving myocardial T2* and in maintaining a normal left ventricle ejection fraction [Pennell et al 2012, Pennell et al 2014]. Deferasirox has not been evaluated in formal trials for affected individuals with symptomatic heart failure or low left-ventricle ejection fraction.

Strategies of chelation using a combination of desferrioxamine and deferiprone have been effective in individuals with severe iron overload. Retrospective, prospective, and randomized clinical studies have shown that combined iron chelation with deferiprone and desferrioxamine rapidly reduces myocardial siderosis, improves cardiac and endocrine function, reduces liver iron and serum ferritin concentration, reduces cardiac mortality, and improves survival; toxicity is manageable [Tanner et al 2007, Galanello et al 2010].

Cardiac Disease

Particular attention has been directed to the early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac disease because of its critical role in determining the prognosis of individuals with β-thalassemia. Assessment of myocardial siderosis and monitoring of cardiac function combined with intensification of iron chelation can result in excellent long-term prognoses [Wood 2008, Kirk et al 2009, Chouliaras et al 2011].

Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is a common complication in adults with thalassemia major or thalassemia intermedia [Voskaridou & Terpos 2008]. Its origin is multifactorial, making it difficult to manage. Treatment involves appropriate hormonal replacement, an effective regimen of transfusion and iron chelation, calcium and vitamin D administration, and regular physical activity. Sufficient evidence exists to support the use of bisphosphonates in the management of thalassemia-associated osteoporosis (to prevent bone loss and improve the bone mineral density). Further research is warranted to establish their anti-fracture efficacy and long-term safety [Giusti 2014]. However, since the origin of bone disease in thalassemia major is multifactorial and some of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are still unclear, further research in this field is needed to allow for the design of optimal therapeutic measures [Skordis & Toumba 2011].
