Anesthesia. Procedures requiring anesthesia require considerable planning and are best performed in a facility in which anesthesiologists are experienced with the airway issues of MPS IVA, such as abnormal anatomy and GAG accumulation, unstable cervical spine, and progressive pulmonary disease (both restrictive and obstructive). Theroux et al [2012], who published the largest cohort of children with Morquio syndrome undergoing anesthesia, made specific recommendations for care during anesthesia.

Preoperative assessment should include history of response to anesthesia and any evidence of airway obstruction; cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and echocardiography; evaluation of respiratory function (spirometry and polysomnography); and airway fluoroscopy [Muhlebach et al 2011, Tomatsu et al 2011].

Endotracheal intubation likely includes use of a video laryngoscope, fiberoptic bronchoscope with or without a laryngeal mask airway, and a smaller endotracheal tube than expected for age or size. Although nasal intubation is an option, GAG deposits can lead to narrowing of the nasal passages and increased propensity to bleeding [Aziz et al 2011, Muhlebach et al 2011, Walker et al 2013].

Postoperative narcotic management should be judicious; multimodal analgesics and non-narcotic medications are preferable to avoid exacerbating preexisting respiratory issues, such as sleep apnea.

Postoperative complications including pulmonary edema have been described [Morgan et al 2002].

Surgery. Because subacute spinal stenosis and/or dynamic spinal stenosis could lead to spinal cord injury, procedures involving cervical spine manipulation, prone positioning (including spinal surgery), and/or prolonged time under anesthesia (e.g., exceeding 45 minutes), should be considered for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM). IONM uses somatosensory and motor evoked potentials (SSEPs or MEPs) to monitor spinal cord function [Solanki et al 2013, Walker et al 2013]. Note: While spinal infarct during surgery was reported in a few individuals with skeletal dysplasia [Tong et al 2012, Pruszczynski et al 2015], data demonstrating consistent improvement of outcome with this monitoring technology are limited [Solanki et al 2013].

Immunizations. Due to increased risk for pulmonary infection, all affected individuals should receive influenza and pneumococcal immunizations as well as routine immunizations.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for those at high risk, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].
