Transfusion iron overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals. The following methods are used both to assess for evidence of transfusion iron overload and to evaluate the effectiveness of iron chelation therapy:

Measurement of iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen, which accurately determines total body iron accumulation

MRI for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a measurement of hepatic iron concentration

Note: (1) Although the latter two methods of total iron measurement are noninvasive, they are available at only a limited number of centers and should be correlated with the “gold standard” liver biopsy [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. (2) Routine measurement of serum ferritin concentration is not reliable in detecting iron overload because the serum ferritin concentration does not always correlate with total body iron accumulation.

Iron chelation therapy is usually started after ten to 12 transfusions (170-200 mL/kg of packed red blood cells), when serum ferritin concentration reaches 1000-1500 µg/L, or when hepatic iron concentration reaches 6-7 mg/g of dry weight liver tissue.

Deferasirox is recommended in individuals age two years or older. It is administered once daily in an oral dose of 20-30 mg/kg/day. Side effects are usually mild and include rash, nausea, creatinine elevation, and rarely proteinuria and transaminase elevation. Patient satisfaction with deferasirox is greater than with desferrioxamine, mostly because of ease of administration [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Porter et al 2008, Vlachos et al 2008].

Desferrioxamine is administered four to seven nights a week in an eight- to 12-hour subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. The recommended initial dose is 40 mg/kg/day; the maximum dose is 50-60 mg/kg/day. The dose and frequency of infusion may be modified using the serum ferritin concentration or the hepatic iron concentration as a guide [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. Side effects include ocular and auditory toxicity and growth retardation. Compliance rate is hampered by the demanding administration route and schedule.

Note: Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in individuals with DBA [Vlachos et al 2008] because its side effects include neutropenia [Henter & Karlen 2007].

Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006].

One of the critical side effects of corticosteroids is growth retardation. If growth is severely impaired, corticosteroids should be stopped and replaced by a short-term red blood cell transfusion regimen [Vlachos et al 2008].
