Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Prompt immune reconstitution is required for survival of children with X-SCID [Myers et al 2002]. BMT was first successful in 1968 and remains the standard means of immune reconstitution. The general experience is that genotypically HLA-identical marrow transplantation restores T-cell immunity in more than 90% of unconditioned individuals with SCID, although B-cell reconstitution occurs in only a limited subset of these individuals [O'Reilly et al 1989, Buckley et al 1999].

Although many centers have expertise in performing bone marrow transplantation in individuals with malignancy, the special issues arising in bone marrow transplantation for X-SCID require involvement of immunodeficiency specialists for an optimal outcome. Individuals with SCID have no immune system capable of rejecting the graft and, therefore, do not typically require fully ablative conditioning; regimens that do not employ agents at doses resulting in long-lasting marrow aplasia are referred to as reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens. Additionally, protocols including alpha/beta T-cell depletion in graft preparations are now being used to improve unrelated donor graft outcomes.

HLA-matched bone marrow transplantation from a relative is preferred; however, most individuals lack a matched, related donor.

For infants who do not have a matched, related donor, haploidentical parental bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T cells can be used [Buckley et al 1999, Pai et al 2014]. In this technique, the bone marrow is depleted of T cells in order to remove mismatched T cells, which would react against the baby's tissues and cause graft versus host disease (GVHD).

Matched, unrelated donor transplantation of peripherally harvested bone marrow (or less frequently cord blood hematopoietic stem cells) in association with partially myeloablative or RIC regimens is now being used at specialized transplantation centers, although GVHD can be a significant problem in some individuals.

Mismatched T cells can react against the baby's tissues and cause GVHD. Cord blood from normal infants is now being banked; frozen cells can be thawed and used in other unrelated donor transplants.

The best timing for BMT is immediately after birth because young infants are less likely than older infants to have had serious infections or failure to thrive. The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) found in 25 centers over the last decade significantly better outcomes (>90% survival) in children receiving transplantation in early infancy (age <3.5 months) without prior infections even after alternative donor grafts were used [Pai et al 2014]. Younger infants also have more rapid engraftment, fewer post-transplantation infections, less GVHD, and shorter hospitalizations than those in whom BMT is delayed [Kane et al 2001, Myers et al 2002]. The optimal age and RIC regimen in young infants, however, remains to be determined. BMT after age 3.5 months and/or a history of infections resulted in a dramatic decrease in survival post transplantation.

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells, chronic warts, and lymphocyte dysregulation.

Administration of immunoglobulin. Long-term periodic administration of immunoglobulin may be required in those who fail to develop allogeneic, functional B lymphocytes after transplantation.

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has been evaluated in individuals not eligible for BMT, after failed BMT, and in individuals with only haploidentical donors. Gene therapy performed using autologous bone marrow stem/progenitor cells transduced with gamma-retroviral vectors expressing a therapeutic gene resulted in significant T-cell reconstitution in the majority of young infants with X-SCID, but only limited success in those with severe infections at the time of transplantation [reviewed in Fischer et al 2011, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014].

B-cell reconstitution was less consistent with roughly half being able to discontinue gamma-globulin replacement therapy.

Unfortunately, between two early trials, five of 20 individuals developed leukemia-like disease requiring ALL-type therapy due to retroviral insertional activation of cellular growth regulatory genes [Howe et al 2008, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2010, Deichmann et al 2011]. Newer, second-generation vectors utilizing self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral vectors have shown similar efficacy in T-cell reconstitution with improved safety design, no adverse events reported in nine individuals over three years post transplantation, and significantly fewer insertions found in genes implicated in lymphoproliferation [Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. Clinical trials using an SIN-lentiviral vector in conjunction with busulfan-based partial myeloablative conditioning are underway for both infants and older individuals who have failed BMT. Initial results in a small number of older individuals have demonstrated sustained myeloid viral marking and restoration of T, B, and NK cell numbers and function [Author, personal communication].

See also Therapies Under Investigation.
