ARO

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Since the defective osteoclasts in osteopetrosis are of hematopoietic origin, allogeneic HSCT can be curative. Most manifestations (bone sclerosis, bone marrow failure, and extramedullary hematopoiesis) can be prevented or reversed by HSCT.

Secondary neurosensory impairments caused by nerve compression may be prevented by early transplantation, but not reversed when they are already present.

Primary neurologic problems and retinal degeneration developing in the neuronopathic form of ARO, however, are independent of the bone disease and therefore cannot be improved or prevented by HSCT. Persons with ARO resulting from CLCN7 pathogenic variants who do not develop neurologic complications have been reported [Pangrazio et al 2010; A Schulz and U Kornak, unpublished results].

It is highly important but difficult to exclude individuals with the neuronopathic form from this invasive treatment. On the other hand, HSCT should be performed as soon as possible in the majority of those without primary neurologic sequelae to prevent irreversible secondary complications, including visual impairment. The evaluation of affected individuals and treatment by HSCT should therefore be performed in experienced pediatric centers after multidisciplinary evaluation to assess the severity of the disease and individual prognostic factors.

The outcome of HSCT in ARO has been analyzed in a retrospective survey of the European Society of Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and the European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) [Sobacchi et al 2013]. The five-year disease-free survival was estimated at 88% for genoidentical transplants, 80% for matched unrelated transplants, and 66% for haploidentical transplants [Sobacchi et al 2013]. In a recently published report of 193 patients transplanted in various centers by a cyclophosphamide-based regimen, the five-year probabilities of survival were 62% after HLA-matched sib transplantation and 42% after alternative donor transplantation [Orchard et al 2015]. A further improved outcome was most recently reported from three large transplant centers using a fludarabine-based conditioning regimen [Natsheh et al 2016; Schulz and Moshous, personal communication].

Note: Because TCIRG1 pathogenic variants are more often the cause of ARO than are CLCN7 pathogenic variants, the majority of HSCTs have been performed in infants with TCIRG1 rather than CLCN7 pathogenic variants. However, there appears to be no significant difference in treatment outcome between individuals with TCIRG1 and CLCN7 pathogenic variants [A Schulz et al, unpublished results].

The incidence of severe complications post-HSCT is high, particularly when alternative stem cell sources are used. Complications include rejection, delayed hematopoietic reconstitution, venous occlusive disease, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercalcemic crisis [Steward et al 2004, Corbacioglu et al 2006, Shroff et al 2012].

Cranial nerve dysfunction (visual impairment caused by optic nerve atrophy) is irreversible in most cases. In the authors' series including about 30 individuals, about two thirds of affected individuals were visually impaired after successful transplantation [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Progressive neurologic sequelae, developmental delay, and repeated seizures occur in a subset of individuals after successful HSCT [Steward 2003]. Severe neurologic manifestations other than visual impairment have been seen in about 10% of individuals in the authors' series [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Other. Conservative treatment strategies include stimulation of host osteoclasts with calcium restriction, calcitriol, steroids, parathyroid hormone, and interferon [Kocher & Kasser 2003]. Since evidence for a favorable outcome in severe osteopetrosis is limited and because side effects are severe (particularly in infants), these drugs may be administered in special situations only.
