Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been undertaken in individuals with severe GD, primarily those with chronic neurologic involvement (type 3 GD). Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver volume. In a few individuals, stabilization of neurologic and bone disease has occurred. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT limit its use in individuals with type 1 and type 3 GD. Therefore, this procedure has been largely superseded by enzyme replacement therapy (see ERT).

Individuals with chronic neurologic GD and progressive disease despite ERT may be candidates for BMT or a multi-modal approach (i.e., combined ERT and BMT).

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is based on the provision of sufficient exogenous enzyme to overcome the block in the catabolic pathway and effect the clearance of the stored substrate, GL1.

Global availability may differ, but there are three recombinant glucocerebrosidase enzyme preparations currently available. All are based on the human gene sequence, but are distinguished according to the cell type involved in their production: imiglucerase (Cerezyme®) generated in Chinese hamster ovary cells; velalglucerase alfa (VPRIV®) from human fibroblast-like cell line; and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso®) from a carrot cell line. Each formulation is modified to expose the alpha-mannosyl (carbohydrate) residues for enhanced uptake by the macrophage.

Regular intravenous infusions of the recombinant enzymes imiglucerase and velaglucerase have been demonstrated to be safe and effective in reversing those features resulting from hematologic and visceral (liver/spleen) involvement [Weinreb et al 2002, Zimran et al 2010]. Experience with taliglucerase alfa appears comparable [Zimran et al 2011, Ben Turkia et al 2013].

It is likely that end-stage histologic changes (e.g., fibrosis, infarction) influence the response to ERT. Thrombocytopenia may persist in individuals with residual splenomegaly and/or the presence of splenic nodules [Stein et al 2010].

ERT is well tolerated. Approximately 10%-15% of individuals develop antibodies to infused imiglucerase; whereas antibody formation has been reported in 1% of persons receiving velaglucerase. In most cases these individuals remain asymptomatic [Rosenberg et al 1999, Starzyk et al 2007]. Adverse effects (e.g., pruritus, hives) are relatively well controlled with premedication using antihistamines.

Individuals with type 1 GD report improved health-related quality of life after 24-48 months of ERT [Damiano et al 1998, Masek et al 1999, Weinreb et al 2007]. After prolonged treatment, ERT reduces the rate of bone loss in a dose-dependent manner [Wenstrup et al 2007], improves bone pain, and reduces bone crises [Charrow et al 2007].The effectiveness of ERT for the treatment of neurologic disease remains to be established, although a few reports have suggested some benefit [Poll et al 2002].

Individuals with type 2 GD and pyramidal tract signs are not likely to respond to ERT, perhaps because the underlying neuropathology is cell death rather than lysosomal storage of GL1 [Takahashi et al 1998]. These individuals and those with hydrops fetalis are not appropriate candidates for BMT, ERT, or substrate reduction therapy (SRT) [Campbell et al 2003, Migita et al 2003].

Individuals with type 3 GD appear to derive some benefit from ERT, although long-term prognosis remains to be defined for this heterogeneous group [Vellodi et al 2001]. Onset of progressive myoclonic seizures while on ERT appears to indicate a poor prognosis [Frei & Schiffmann 2002]. Brain stem auditory evoked responses have deteriorated in individuals with type 3 GD on ERT [Campbell et al 2003]. SRT used in combination with ERT for type 3 GD with progressive neurologic disease does not appear to alter ultimate prognosis.

Consensus recommendations exist for ERT and monitoring of children with type 1 GD [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). The optimal dose and frequency of recombinant enzyme administration is not certain, mostly because of limited information regarding tissue half-life and distribution and the limitations associated with the modalities used for assessing clinical disease course. Intravenously infused enzyme may not reach adequate concentrations in certain body sites (e.g., brain, bones, and lungs). In the majority of individuals, treatment is initiated with a dose of 15-60 units of enzyme per kg of body weight administered intravenously every two weeks. The enzyme dose may be increased or decreased after initiation of treatment and during the maintenance phase, based on response – i.e., hematopoietic reconstitution, reduction of liver and spleen volumes, and stabilization or improvement in skeletal findings [Pastores et al 2004].

Affected individuals may require assistance with insurance-related issues and reimbursement because of the high cost of ERT.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT). SRT aims to restore metabolic homeostasis by limiting the amount of substrate precursor synthesized (and eventually subject to catabolism) to a level that can be effectively cleared by the mutant enzyme with residual hydrolytic activity [Dwek et al 2002]. A potential concern regarding the use of SRT is its nonspecificity; i.e., the substrate whose production is blocked or limited is a precursor in the formation of other glycosphingolipids (ganglio- and lacto- series).

Miglustat, the first oral agent for the treatment of individuals with mild to moderate Gaucher disease for whom ERT is not a therapeutic option (e.g., because of constraints such as allergy, hypersensitivity, or poor venous access). Miglustat has been approved in Canada, countries of the European Union, Israel, Switzerland, and the US. In at least three studies, involving more than 30 individuals with GD type 1, miglustat treatment resulted in a significant decrease in liver and spleen volume after six to 18 months, with clinical improvement noted over 24 months. Bone involvement and platelet and hemoglobin values remained stable or were modestly improved [Cox et al 2000, Elstein et al 2004a, Pastores et al 2005]. An increase in bone density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck was reported to occur as early as six months after the initiation of miglustat monotherapy [Pastores et al 2007]. The most common adverse reactions noted in the clinical trials were weight loss (60% of individuals), and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea (80%), which resolved or diminished with longer use of the product.

Eliglustat, an alternative inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthetase recently approved by the FDA, has been shown in clinical trials to be a safe and effective treatment for individuals with Gaucher disease type 1 who are not on any therapy as well as those previously treated with ERT.

In a placebo-controlled phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients not previously on any therapy, those who were given eliglustat for nine months showed a 28% decrease in spleen volume and a 7% decrease in liver volume as well as a 1.2 gm/dL increase in hemoglobin level and 42% increase in platelet count [Mistry et al 2015].

In a separate phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients previously on ERT, eliglustat demonstrated outcomes similar to imiglucerase for the composite primary endpoint of stability in spleen and liver volume, hemoglobin level, and platelet count from baseline to 12 months [Cox et al 2015].

An effect on GD-related bone disease was suggested by a significant increase in lumbar spine T-scores (mean of -1.6 to -0.9) in 19 patients enrolled in the pivotal phase 2 study who were on eliglustat therapy for up to four years [Kamath et al 2014].

Note: (1) Reported side effects of eliglustat were generally mild. (2) The use of eliglustat requires cytochrome P450 2D6 genotyping and avoidance of drugs that may interact through this metabolic pathway. (3) Drug distribution studies indicate that eliglustat, a P-glycoprotein ligand, is not transported across the blood-brain barrier and, thus, not indicated for neuronopathic forms of GD. Preclinical studies involving analogs that may be efficacious for primary CNS involvement are ongoing [Larsen et al 2012].
