Dietary management. The mainstay nutritional intervention is modification of diet to control the intake of propiogenic substrates (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine), while ensuring normal protein synthesis and preventing protein catabolism, amino acid deficiencies, and growth restriction.

Important note: Dietary management needs to be directed by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician.

Recommended protein intake depends on age of the patient (see Table 11 in Baumgartner et al [2014]).

The ratio of natural source protein to medical foods varies depending on the individual’s clinical status, laboratory parameters, and growth trajectory [Sutton et al 2012].

Laboratory parameters useful in guiding nutritional intervention can include the following:

Pre-prandial plasma essential amino acids

Plasma albumin

Prealbumin

Hemoglobin

Plasma ammonia

Urinary ketones, plasma lactic acid, and methylcitric acid to monitor and adjust nutritional management

Plasma vitamin D

Essential fatty acid profile

Additional calories can be provided using protein-free formulas.

G-tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence in chronic management of PA.

Since the number of acute decompensations negatively correlates with the intellectual quotient in patients with PA [Grünert et al 2012], prevention and proactive management of metabolic crises can be an important point of intervention to maximize favorable clinical outcomes.

Medications

Levocarnitine. The optimal dose of levocarnitine has not been established; doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/kg per day have been reported [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

When calculating the daily dose of levocarnitine, one needs to consider the presence of this pharmaceutic compound in medical foods and the maximum daily dose in older patients.

Levocarnitine can be given enterally and intravenously.

Antimicrobial therapy. Oral metronidazole has been shown to reduce propionic acid production by intestinal gut flora [Thompson et al 1990, Mellon et al 2000]. One regimen uses a one-week-on, three-weeks-off approach [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012].

Biotin supplementation. There is no consensus regarding the use of biotin supplementation nor the optimal dose in the treatment of PA. Given biotin’s favorable profile, a short therapeutic trial may be considered [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Whether a biotin-responsive form of PA exists is not known [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Management during episodes of metabolic decompensation includes:

Avoidance of fasting (e.g., using intravenous dextrose).

Increasing calorie intake to prevent catabolism (e.g., intravenous fat emulsion).

When enteral feeding cannot be provided for a prolonged period of time, judicious use of total parenteral nutrition may include standard amino acid mixes providing age-appropriate recommended daily allowance of protein [Sutton et al 2012]. In rare circumstances, specialized amino acid mixes with reduced content of isoleucine, valine, threonine and methionine are necessary.

Organ transplantation. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) may be indicated in those individuals who, despite adequate medical treatment, still experience frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable hyperammonemia, and poor growth [Barshes et al 2006, Charbit-Henrion et al 2015].

Benefits of OLT include decrease in the frequency of metabolic decompensations, improved quality-adjusted life years, increased life expectancy, life-time cost savings [Vara et al 2011, Li et al 2015], and reversal of dilated cardiomyopathy [Yorifuji et al 2004, Romano et al 2010].

Liver transplantation has been performed from unrelated donors [Barshes et al 2006, Romano et al 2010] and from heterozygous related donors [Morioka et al 2005, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012].

Continuous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Sato et al 2009, Kasahara et al 2012], and left ventricular assist devices have been used while waiting for OLT [Ameloot et al 2011].

OLT in patients with PA is not curative. It does not completely protect against a metabolic stroke, hyperammonemia, or metabolic decompensations.

Life-long post-transplant management is recommended [Yorifuji et al 2004, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continued protein restriction and L-carnitine supplementation after OLT is advocated by several authors [Saudubray et al 1999, Yorifuji et al 2004, Kasahara et al 2012].

Sedation and perioperative management. Anesthetic aspects of perioperative management of patients with PA have been infrequently discussed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Involvement of a metabolic specialist perioperatively to ensure adequate hydration and caloric management can help minimize the risk of decompensations.

Emergency situations. Emergency letters, bracelets, and emergency information in smartphones help facilitate appropriate emergency care by healthcare providers unfamiliar with propionic acidemia.
