Biopsy-proven diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended if a biopsy shows diffuse-type gastric carcinoma [Chun et al 2001, Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Heterozygotes for a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant. The importance of identifying the genetic basis of cancer susceptibility in families with HDGC has been underscored by the observation of early gastric cancers in prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) samples obtained from individuals with a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant [Chun et al 2001, Huntsman et al 2001, Norton et al 2007]. These findings suggest that currently prophylactic total gastrectomy, rather than endoscopic surveillance, is the best preventive measure for individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant.

Prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) involves D-2 dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy and obtaining proximal margins to ensure removal of the gastric mucosa [Norton et al 2007].

In a young, healthy individual, the risk of mortality with PTG in an experienced surgeon’s hands is less than 1% [Lynch et al 2005]. However, the morbidity from prophylactic gastrectomy is high. All individuals have long-term morbidity related to both immediate post-surgical complications as well as long-term complications including rapid intestinal transit, dumping syndrome, diarrhea, eating habit alterations, and weight loss [Caldas et al 1999, Lewis et al 2001]. In addition, the risk for malabsorption increases after total gastrectomy; malabsorption accounts for the increased incidence of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and malnutrition described in persons with gastric cancer [Liedman 1999].

In light of these possible complications, it is recommended that a multidisciplinary team including a surgeon, gastroenterologist, and dietician provide preoperative and postoperative care for an individual undergoing PTG. The multidisciplinary team members can counsel candidates for PTG on the risks and benefits of the surgery. In making the decision to undergo PTG, the affected individual and his/her physicians should consider the following:

The age-specific risks of gastric cancer. Due to nutritional implications, PTG is not generally recommended until the individual’s growth period is complete. In families in which gastric cancer is early onset, PTG should be considered on a case by case basis [Blair et al 2006]. In these individuals, regular endoscopic screening may be begun prior to the consideration of PTG.

The 100% morbidity of gastrectomy and the 1% risk of mortality following the surgery

The risk in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant of developing extragastric cancers (e.g., lobular breast cancer and colorectal cancer) and the screening recommendations for these cancers

Breast cancer. Referral to a high-risk breast clinic is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Prophylactic mastectomy may be considered in women heterozygous for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. The authors are aware of only a handful of women who have to date undergone prophylactic mastectomy for this reason. It is important to note that prophylactic mastectomy can have psychological effects; appropriate counseling should include the possible altered perception of the body and sexual relationships [Lodder et al 2002, Brandberg et al 2008].
