It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment. Note: Because phenotypic variability may be significant, previously undiagnosed and even apparently asymptomatic sibs of an affected individual may also be affected [Vockley et al 2014].

Evaluations can include:

Measurement of blood concentration of phenylalanine and newborn screening in newborn sibs of an individual with PKU if prenatal testing was not done;

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Blood concentration of phenylalanine and tyrosine to clarify the disease status of older at-risk sibs if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with PAH Deficiency

Women with PAH deficiency who have received appropriate treatment throughout childhood and adolescence have normal physical and essentially normal intellectual and behavioral development. However, if the woman has elevated plasma Phe concentrations during pregnancy, the fetus is at high risk for malformations and intellectual disability, since phenylalanine is a potent teratogen (see Clinical Characteristics) [Rouse & Azen 2004, Prick et al 2012].

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology Committee Opinion on the Management of Women with Phenylketonuria, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH deficiency [Vockley et al 2014], and Singh et al [2014] suggest the following management of an affected woman prior to and during pregnancy.

Preconception

Genetic counseling regarding the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal Phe concentration on the developing fetus and recurrence risks for PAH deficiency in the fetus

Achievement and maintenance of the maternal Phe concentration at less than 360 µmol/L for three months prior to conception

Assessment of early osteopenia risk

Discontinuation of LNAA treatment

During pregnancy

Co-monitor in conjunction with practitioners from an experienced metabolic center.

Maternal Phe concentration of 120-360 µmol/L during pregnancy is recommended. In unplanned pregnancies, rapid re-initiation of a Phe-restricted diet should be advised based on current knowledge of the fetal risks.

Despite limited data, sapropterin supplementation may be appropriate in addition to dietary therapy.

Monitor dietary intake of pregnant women with PAH deficiency to ensure nutrient adequacy with proper proportion of protein, fat, and carbohydrates.

Evaluate for fetal anomalies by high resolution ultrasound and fetal echocardiogram.

Post partum

Provide coordinated care in the post-partum period

Breast feeding may be pursued if the infant does not have PAH deficiency.
