If a pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives is warranted to identify those who also have the pathogenic variant and thus will benefit from avoiding anesthetic agents that increase the risk for a malignant hyperthermia episode.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a pregnant woman with MHS requires non-emergent surgery during the pregnancy, a non-triggering anesthetic (local, nerve block, epidural, spinal anesthesia, or a total intravenous general anesthetic) should be administered. Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists mandated monitoring should be used, along with core temperature monitoring. Fetal monitoring should follow standard guidelines. Dantrolene should not be administered in preparation for surgery or labor and delivery.

Continuous epidural analgesia is highly recommended for labor and delivery. If a Cesarean delivery is indicated in a woman who does not have an epidural catheter in place, neuraxial (spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural) anesthesia is recommended, if not otherwise contraindicated. If a general anesthetic is indicated, a total intravenous anesthetic technique should be administered, with an anesthesia machine that has been prepared for an MH-susceptible individual.

In the case of a fetus whose father is known to be MH susceptible but whose mother is not known to be MH susceptible, regional anesthesia or general anesthesia without trigger agents is recommended.

For further information regarding the management of pregnant women with MHS, see 2009 guidelines developed by the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States.

Therapies Under Investigations

Preliminary investigation by Lanner et al [2012] has shown that 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) prevents heat-induced sudden death in a knock-out mouse model of MH. This finding is suggestive of possible effectiveness of AICAR in the prophylactic treatment of humans with enhanced susceptibility to exercise/ heat-induced sudden death associated with mutation of RYR1.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.