It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an individual with complete PAI-1 deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurement of PAI-1 antigen levels and PAI-1 activity if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Recommendations based on published findings during pregnancies in two women with complete PAI-1 deficiency are administration of either tranexamic acid (25 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 1300 milligrams, orally 3-4x/day) or epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) (100 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 3 g, orally 4x/day) for intermittent bleeding in the first and second trimester, from 26 weeks’ gestation through delivery, and for at least two weeks post partum [Heiman et al 2014]. Note that evidence that these recommendations would be effective in all pregnancies of women with complete PAI-1 deficiency is lacking.

A woman with complete PAI-1 deficiency was treated with FFP during three pregnancies at eight to 11 weeks’ gestation two to three times per week; treatment was increased to daily at 20-28 weeks’ gestation. The first pregnancy ended in miscarriage at 19 weeks. The second and third pregnancies were delivered at 32 and 27 weeks’ gestation, respectively, as a result of uncontrollable contractions and placental abruption [Iwaki et al 2012].

Of note, the teratogenicity of EACA and tranexamic acid is unknown and information regarding their safety during pregnancy and lactation is limited. There is a need to establish dosing guidelines for the use of antifibrinolytics during pregnancy and the postpartum period.

To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, see www.mothertobaby.org.
