It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband with ATS in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of surveillance and preventive measures.

If the SLC2A10 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, at-risk sibs should be evaluated for signs of the disorder (clinically and with echocardiography or more elaborative vascular imaging, as clinical symptoms may be very subtle) to clarify their genetic status.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Data on the management of women with arterial tortuosity syndrome during pregnancy and delivery are limited with only three pregnancies reported (in 2 women) to date. All pregnancies had a good outcome; however, one woman experienced pelvic organ prolapse following the vaginal delivery of her first child [Castori et al 2012]. The other woman, who delivered without complications at 34 weeks’ gestation by elective cesarean section, was started on acetylsalicylic acid to prevent thromboembolic events eight days post partum [Allen et al 2009].

Preconception counseling should include possible pregnancy-associated risks to the mother and medication-associated risks to the fetus.

The risks to the mother are mainly those of aortic root dilatation and dissection. As is common practice in management in Marfan syndrome, elective aortic repair using a valve-sparing procedure (if possible) could be performed prior to conception when the aortic root diameter reaches 45 mm.

Currently, no data are available on a possible risk for pregnancy-associated uterine rupture (as is seen in Loeys-Dietz syndrome and EDS, vascular type). Prenatal and postnatal physiotherapy can minimize the risk for pelvic organ prolapse.

Peripartum intensive monitoring is advised. Pregnancies should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician and a cardiologist familiar with this or related conditions.

Increased surveillance of the aortic root and previously detected aneurysms during pregnancy and following delivery is recommended because of the increased risk for progressive dilatation. Echocardiography is suggested every two to three months from conception until six months post partum.

Delivery should be planned in a center with experience with this or related conditions. It is currently unclear whether caesarean section or vaginal delivery is preferable.

Medication-associated risks to the fetus. The effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) on the fetus in the first trimester of pregnancy are incompletely understood; however, use in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can lead to fetal death and damage. Angiotensin II receptor 1 antagonists (ATIIR1) such as losartan are thought to lead to similar fetal effects as ACE-I, including fetal damage, oligohydramnios, and fetal death, if taken during the second and/or third trimesters of pregnancy.

Ideally, women with ATS who are planning a pregnancy should transition to a different antihypertensive medication (e.g., a beta-blocker) prior to conception.

Women with ATS who become pregnant while taking an ACE-I or an ATIIR1 should be transitioned to a different antihypertensive medication as soon as the pregnancy is recognized.

Women undergoing a non-valve sparing aortic root replacement before pregnancy should be advised of the risk associated with anticoagulant therapy during pregnancy.
