The goal is to identify those sibs of a proband who have Wilson disease preferably before symptoms occur so that the therapies described under Treatment of Manifestations can be initiated as soon as possible. Evaluations can include the following:

Molecular genetic testing if both ATP7B pathogenic variants in the proband are known

If the pathogenic variants in an affected family member are not known, biochemical assessment of parameters of copper metabolism (serum copper, urinary copper, ceruloplasmin) and liver function tests as well as ultrasound imaging of the liver and slit lamp examination for the presence of Kayser-Fleischer rings

Note: Because presymptomatic individuals generally have a low serum concentration of ceruloplasmin and mildly increased basal 24-hour urinary copper excretion, biochemical testing can be used; however, sometimes asymptomatic affected individuals cannot be distinguished from heterozygotes.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Treatment must be continued during pregnancy because of the risk of fulminant hepatic failure.

D-penicillamine has been used in many pregnancies with no adverse outcomes; however, congenital connective tissue disorders encompassing inguinal hernias and skin laxity have been reported in some exposed infants. Such adverse outcomes may depend on dose, which should be kept as low as possible. The dose of D-penicillamine should be maintained at the lowest effective dose with the plan to reduce by approximately 30% in the third trimester if the mother has been well chelated prior to pregnancy. A possible over-chelated (copper deficiency) status prior to pregnancy or genetic characteristics of the mother can contribute to fetal abnormalities [Pinter et al 2004].

Trientine has been used successfully during pregnancy, but the total number of reported cases is small. Reduction of the dose to the lowest effective dose is recommended using a comparable approach to that for D-penicillamine.

Zinc has been used effectively during pregnancy.

See www.mothertobaby.org for more information on medication use during pregnancy.
