It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk of inheriting the APOE p.Leu167del variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures and surveillance.

Molecular genetic testing can be used to determine if a family member has inherited the APOE p.Leu167del variant.

If the APOE p.Leu167del variant is found, testing for the presence of an APOE e2 allele (see Diagnosis) is recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

A woman with the APOE p.Leu167del variant should have triglyceride levels measured when pregnancy is identified and at least one to two times later in pregnancy as severe hypertriglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) in pregnancy increases the risk for pancreatitis and fetal and maternal death. Of note, hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy.

Treatment of hypertriglyceridemia in pregnant women is similar to that for nonpregnant individuals. The goal of therapy is to achieve fasting triglyceride levels below 500 mg/dL (see Treatment of Manifestations regarding dietary advice to lower triglycerides).

If acceptable triglyceride levels are not achieved in a pregnant woman with dietary changes alone, medical therapy may be required.

Medical management in pregnancy usually consists of fibrates (pregnancy category C). Prior to taking a medication during pregnancy, a pregnant woman should discuss with her physician the risks and benefits of the specific medication being prescribed.

Due to theoretic concerns regarding the role of cholesterol in embryonic development and the fact that hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy, statin therapy is contraindicated during pregnancy. Women who are taking a statin should discontinue the use of this medication prior to conception, if possible, or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. However, inadvertent exposure early in gestation is unlikely to lead to a significantly increased risk for adverse fetal outcomes [Pollack et al 2005].

Fish oil could be considered, but could alter prostaglandin metabolism in the fetus.

Severe hypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis can require apheresis and use of intravenous insulin and glucose. In these circumstances, consultation with a lipid specialist is recommended.
