It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to relatives at risk for ARVC (even those age <18 years) if the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Predictive testing should be offered in the context of formal genetic counseling.

Note: The initial molecular testing in the proband should encompass ARVC-related genes as a gene panel because of the high rate of digenic heterozygosity (a heterozygous pathogenic variant in two different genes) and to increase the yield of genetic testing [Barahona-Dussault et al 2010, Bauce et al 2010, Christensen et al 2010, Xu et al 2010, Nakajima et al 2012]. Once one (or more) family-specific variant(s) have been identified, targeted variant testing is performed in relatives.

Guidelines exist for screening for cardiac involvement in asymptomatic first-degree relatives at risk for ARVC [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]:

If the family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified in the asymptomatic at-risk relative, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended yearly between ages ten and 50 years.

If genetic testing has not been performed or did not identify a pathogenic variant in an affected family member, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended for asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relatives every three to five years after age ten years.

Screening for cardiac involvement comprises the following [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]:

Medical history with attention to heart failure symptoms, arrhythmia, presyncope, and syncope

ECG, with consideration of signal-averaged electrocardiogram

Echocardiogram

Holter monitoring

Cardiac MRI

At-risk first-degree relatives with any abnormal clinical screening tests for cardiac involvement should be considered for repeat clinical screening in one year [Hershberger et al 2009].

Children younger than age ten are not usually screened, as ARVC features are not usually seen in children before this age. See Hamilton & Fidler [2009] for a review of screening for ARVC in the young. A recent MRI study of ARVC in the young suggested that MRI increases sensitivity but that it was still unusual, even with this more sensitive modality, to see ARVC in children before age ten years [Etoom et al 2015].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Case reports describe successful outcomes in women with ARVC who are pregnant and give birth [Agir et al 2014, Cozzolino et al 2014]. Specific guidelines for managing ARVC in pregnancy have not been developed, but affected individuals need to be monitored by a multidisciplinary team.
