Molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk family members of persons in whom a pathogenic variant(s) has been identified.

Note: Testing of family members needs to be done with caution because presence of the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) is predisposing rather than causative, and thus is only one of several risk factors required for development of aHUS. Predictions based on a single risk factor in unaffected individuals are unreliable (see Penetrance). Therefore, risk cannot be quantified for a given individual.

The following are appropriate for relatives in whom the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) have been identified:

Monitoring of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin) when exposed to potential triggering events such as severe infections, inflammation, and pregnancy (see Surveillance)

Avoidance of known precipitants of aHUS (see Clinical Description)

No monitoring is needed for:

Relatives in whom no family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified;

Relatives of persons in whom no pathogenic variant has been identified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with a history of aHUS are at increased risk for aHUS flare during pregnancy and an even greater risk in the post-partum period. Pregnancy-associated aHUS (P-aHUS) occurred in 21 of 100 adult women with aHUS, with 79% presenting post partum [Fakhouri et al 2010]. Treatment consisted mainly of plasma exchange, and the outcomes were poor with 62% developing end-stage renal disease by one month after presentation and 76% by last follow up. The risk for P-aHUS was highest during a second pregnancy. Complement abnormalities were found in 18 of the 21 adult women with P-aHUS. Pregnancies in affected women with complement abnormalities were complicated by fetal loss (in 4.8%) and preeclampsia (7.7%).

On the basis of these results, women with complement dysregulation should be informed of the 20% risk for P-aHUS, and any pregnancy in these women should be closely monitored.

As for eculizumab, the experience gained from pregnant women with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria who had been treated with eculizumab suggest a risk-benefit balance in favor of eculizumab use [Kelly et al 2010]. Similarly, recent data showed that eculizumab can be successfully used for the treatment of aHUS during pregnancy [Ardissino et al 2013, Cañigral et al 2014, De Sousa Amorim et al 2015].
