When the LMNA pathogenic variant has been identified in a family, molecular genetic testing can be offered to relatives at risk in order to facilitate prompt diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment in those in whom the LMNA pathogenic variant has been detected.

If molecular genetic testing is not possible, the first-degree relatives of a proband with LMNA-related DCM should be evaluated annually by medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG to determine if any have detectable DCM and/or conduction system disease.

Note: Because the age of onset is variable and penetrance is reduced, a normal baseline echocardiogram and ECG in a first-degree relative who has not undergone molecular genetic testing does not rule out LMNA-related DCM in that individual, and the recommendations set forth in Surveillance should be followed.

Any abnormal cardiovascular test results in a relative of a proband with a known LMNA pathogenic variant should be followed up with a full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for any acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease). Results on screening tests that do not meet criteria for DCM but do show some abnormality (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal function; decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle) may reflect variable expression of LMNA-related DCM in that relative. Targeted genetic testing to clarify the diagnosis as well as close surveillance (e.g., cardiovascular testing every 1-2 years) for progression of cardiovascular disease is recommended for such individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is contraindicated in women with DCM because of the significantly increased mortality with pregnancy in DCM. Women with DCM who become pregnant should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician. At-risk women with unknown genetic status should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation and be offered genetic counseling prior to pregnancy.
