Identification of at-risk relatives. A thorough family history may identify other relatives who are at risk but have not been tested (particularly in families with mild hemophilia A).

Early determination of the genetic status of males at risk. Either assay of factor VIII clotting activity from a cord blood sample obtained by venipuncture of the umbilical vein (to avoid contamination by amniotic fluid or placenta tissue) or molecular genetic testing for the family-specific F8 pathogenic variant can establish or exclude the diagnosis of hemophilia A in newborn males at risk. Infants with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, factor VIII concentrate is administered immediately before and after the procedure to prevent delayed oozing and poor wound healing.

Note: Ideally, the cord blood for factor VIII clotting activity assay should be drawn into a syringe containing one-tenth volume of sodium citrate to avoid clotting and to provide an optimal mixing of the sample with the anticoagulant. If not available a standard blue top tube can be used.

Determination of genetic status of females at risk. Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor VIII activity lower than 40% and may have abnormal bleeding. In a survey of Dutch heterozygous females, bleeding symptoms correlated with baseline factor clotting activity; there was suggestion of a very mild increase in bleeding even in those with 40% to 60% factor VIII activity [Plug et al 2006]. Therefore, all daughters and mothers of an affected male and other at-risk females should have a baseline factor VIII clotting activity assay to determine if they are at increased risk for bleeding (unless they are known to be non-carriers based on molecular genetic testing). Very occasionally, a female will have particularly low factor VIII clotting activity that may result from heterozygosity for an F8 pathogenic variant associated with skewed X-chromosome inactivation or, on rare occasion, compound heterozygosity for two F8 pathogenic variants [Pavlova et al 2009].

It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Obstetric issues. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

If the female is symptomatic (i.e., has baseline factor VIII clotting activity <40%), she will be somewhat protected by the natural rise of factor VIII clotting activity during pregnancy, which may even double by the end of the third trimester. The factor VIII level should be measured in the third trimester to confirm that the level is in the normal range, and if it is not, a plan for factor replacement therapy should be developed. Postpartum factor VIII clotting activity can return to baseline within 48 hours, and postpartum hemorrhage may ensue [Lee et al 2006].

Newborn males. Controversy remains as to indications for cesarean section versus vaginal delivery [James & Hoots 2010, Chalmers et al 2011]. In retrospective data analysis of 580 males age 0-2 years with hemophilia, 17 suffered intracranial hemorrhages with delivery, and all but one were delivered vaginally [Kulkarni et al 2009]. This finding supports the recommendation of cesarean section for hemophilic infants, however, 12 of the 17 were born to women not known to be carriers, suggesting that a planned delivery may mitigate risks. In anticipation of delivery, the relative risks of cesarean section versus vaginal delivery should be considered and discussed with the family and obstetrician in anticipation of delivery so that a coordinated plan can be developed.
