Because early diagnosis and treatment is very likely to change the outcome for individuals (especially in the context of SDHB pathogenic variants, which portend aggressive disease), it is recommended that relatives at risk be offered genetic testing as early as possible when the family pathogenic variant is known.

By age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family, presymptomatic testing, including genetic testing, should be offered to all first-degree relatives of an individual in whom a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, and SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX has been detected.

Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited a pathogenic variant. Early detection of tumors can facilitate surgical removal, decrease related morbidity, and potentially result in removal prior to malignant transformation or metastasis [Young et al 2002]:

In families with a previously identified pathogenic variant, relatives who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant are spared the cost and anxiety associated with regular clinical, biochemical, and imaging studies.

Family members who have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be informed of their heightened risks for paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas and encouraged to undergo biochemical and imaging studies as described in Surveillance.

Note: Identification of the pathogenic variant (or the absence thereof) in an affected individual is essential for interpretation of negative molecular genetic test results in an at-risk asymptomatic relative.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no published consensus management guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary PGL/PCC during pregnancy. A high index of suspicion for these tumors in pregnant women is indicated, since there are other more common causes of hypertension during pregnancy (e.g., pre-eclampsia). Secretory PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present at any time during pregnancy (whereas pre-eclampsia is more common in the second or third trimester) and are typically not associated with weight gain, edema, proteinuria or thrombocytopenia. Individuals with PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present with palpitations, sweating pallor, orthostatic hypotension, and glucosuria, and the hypertension may be episodic.

A 24-hour urine collection for fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines should be used as a first-line test, as there is little experience with the use of plasma fractionated metanephrines during pregnancy. MRI without gadolinium administration should be the first-line test used to localize the tumor, since CT will expose the fetus to radiation. Radioisotope imaging studies should be deferred until after pregnancy in non-lactating mothers for similar reasons.

Surgery is the definitive treatment for these tumors, with appropriate alpha-adrenergic, and if needed, subsequent beta-adrenergic blockade to prevent a hypertensive crisis. Phenoxybenzamine is the alpha blocker of choice in both pregnant and non-pregnant individuals with catecholamine-secreting tumors [Reisch et al 2006]. For intra-abdominal PGL/PCC, a laparoscopic surgical approach is ideal if the tumor size allows. After 24 weeks gestation, surgery may need to be delayed until fetal maturity is reached (~34 weeks) because of problems with tumor accessibility. An open surgical approach combined with elective C-section may need to be performed in these situations. A good outcome has only been described with vaginal delivery in select cases [Junglee et al 2007].
