It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (both male and female) of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If prenatal testing has not been performed, it is appropriate to perform biochemical (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level) and molecular genetic testing on at-risk newborns (males and females) as soon after birth as possible to clarify their disease status so that the appropriate treatment or surveillance of those with the family-specific pathogenic variant can be promptly established before the child experiences a metabolic crisis.

Biochemical analysis (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level), an allopurinol challenge test (in older individuals), and/or OTC enzyme activity measurement in liver (males only) if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

In general for children with neonatal-onset disease, such testing cannot be performed rapidly enough to prevent a metabolic crisis. Therefore, preventive measures at birth should be instituted until such a time as the diagnosis can be ruled out (see the description of prospective treatment in Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Heterozygous females are at risk of becoming catabolic during pregnancy and (especially) post partum [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000, Mendez-Figueroa et al 2010, Celik et al 2011, Lipskind et al 2011, Ituk et al 2012].

A symptomatic heterozygous female needs to be treated throughout pregnancy according to her pre-pregnancy protocol with adaptation for her needs during pregnancy. In the peripartum and immediate postpartum periods proactive measures to prevent catabolism include, for example, administration of a 10% dextrose solution with appropriate electrolytes at 1.5 times maintenance and addition of intralipids as needed to meet caloric requirements during these periods.

In an asymptomatic female known to be heterozygous, precautions should be taken in the peripartum and postpartum period to prevent catabolism; in addition, measurement of ammonia levels and administration of dextrose should be considered as heterozygous females have become symptomatic for the first time in the peripartum period.
