Early recognition of manifestations of VHL syndrome may allow for timely intervention and improved outcome; thus, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk individuals (including children) for early manifestations of VHL syndrome is appropriate. The American Society of Clinical Oncology identifies VHL syndrome as a Group 1 disorder – a hereditary disease for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [Robson et al 2010] (full text).

If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used for early identification of at-risk family members to improve diagnostic certainty and reduce the need for screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant [Priesemann et al 2006].

If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is not known and/or at-risk individuals decline genetic testing for religious or financial reasons, continued screening for VHL lesions is warranted (see Surveillance).

The use of molecular genetic testing for determining the genetic status of presumably at-risk relatives when a family member with a clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome is not available for testing is not straightforward. Such test results need to be interpreted with caution. A positive test result signals the presence of a VHL pathogenic variant in the at-risk family member and indicates that the same molecular genetic testing method can be used to assess the genetic status of other at-risk family members. However, a negative test for a VHL pathogenic variant under such circumstances suggests one of the following possibilities:

The at-risk family member has not inherited a VHL pathogenic variant.

The familial VHL pathogenic variant may not be detectable by the assays used.

The clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member is questionable.

In this situation, the presumably at-risk family member has a small, but finite, residual risk of having inherited a pathogenic allele (i.e., VHL syndrome or other hereditary disorder). In counseling such individuals, careful consideration should be given to the strength of the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member, the relationship of the at-risk individual to the affected family member, the perceived risk of an undetected VHL (or other gene) pathogenic variant, and the potential need for some form of continued clinical surveillance.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Recommended medical surveillance for pregnant women with VHL is still debated. Research by the French VHL Study Group showed a significantly higher complication rate of hemangioblastomas in individuals with VHL who had had at least one pregnancy [Abadie et al 2010]. Another study concluded that pregnancy has a significant influence on cerebellar hemangioblastoma growth and causes an overall high complication rate (17%) [Frantzen et al 2012]. Intensified surveillance could therefore be recommended in a specialized medical center during preconception care and pregnancy. Special attention should be paid to pheochromocytoma and cerebellar hemangioblastoma. In another study pregnancy was not related with the development of new hemangioblastomas or hemangioblastoma/cyst growth [Ye et al 2012]. Their data suggest no extra precautions need to be taken during gestation. The VHL Handbook recommends MRI of the cerebellum without contrast at four months’ gestation.
