Empiric treatment of the affected individual’s newborn sib with pyridoxine supplementation should be offered until testing has been completed.

If the ALDH7A1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing is appropriate.

If the pathogenic variants are not known, the following is recommended:

If a younger sib of a proband presents with encephalopathy or a seizure, pyridoxine should be administered acutely (ideally under EEG monitoring) for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.

α-AASA is a sensitive biomarker for pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy while pipecolic acid is an indirect and less sensitive biomarker. If elevated plasma biomarker concentrations have been demonstrated in the proband, a similar elevation in a younger sib would support a diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.

Note: It would be unlikely for the proband's older sibs who have not experienced seizures to be pyridoxine dependent.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

As recurrence risk for couples who have a child with this disorder is 25%, there is justification to treat the mother empirically with supplemental pyridoxine at a dose of 50-100 mg/day throughout the last half of her subsequent pregnancies and to treat the newborn with supplemental pyridoxine to prevent seizures and reduce the risk of neurodevelopmental disability [Baxter & Aicardi 1999, Bok et al 2010a]. It is important to emphasize, however, that at least one severe phenotype has been described in a family in which prenatal treatment of an at-risk sib did not result in an improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Rankin et al 2007].

Molecular genetic testing of ALDH7A1 can be performed prenatally or after birth; if both pathogenic variants are present, pyridoxine treatment should be continued during pregnancy (if prenatal testing is pursued and reveals the fetus to be affected) and after birth; if not, treatment can be withdrawn.
