Evaluation of sibs of a proband as early as possible allows for prompt diagnosis and treatment with much-improved outcome. Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Evaluation by a metabolic physician soon after birth for symptoms pertaining to GSDI if the family-specific pathogenic variants are not known or if molecular genetic testing is not available.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although successful pregnancies have been reported in women with GSDI, certain precautions should be taken:

Pre-pregnancy counseling regarding diet to avoid low blood glucose and to stress the importance of blood glucose monitoring prior to and during pregnancy

Baseline ultrasound of liver and kidneys prior to pregnancy

Consideration of referral to high-risk obstetrician

Review of medications prior to conception to weigh risks and benefits:

Exposure to ACE inhibitors in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can cause fetal damage and death.

No data on the use of allopurinol during pregnancy in humans exist; however, high doses have been shown to interfere with embryo development in animal models.

Lipid-lowering drugs may also lead to adverse fetal effects and should be avoided during pregnancy.

Metabolic control should be followed closely throughout the pregnancy. Because carbohydrate requirements may increase with pregnancy, glucose levels should be monitored closely and treated accordingly [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Abdominal ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 weeks. Sechi et al [2013] reported an increase in the size of pre-existent adenomas and the development of new adenomas during pregnancy and recommended monitoring by imaging before, during, and after pregnancy. Resection of large (≥5 cm) or growing adenomas before pregnancy has been recommended [Terkivatan et al 2000].

Renal function should be followed closely, as this may worsen during pregnancy [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010]. Development of renal calculi has been reported in pregnant women with GSDIb [Dagli et al 2010].

Glucose infusion during labor has been used [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Platelet count, hemoglobin, and clotting studies should be performed because of the potential for increased bleeding at delivery [Lewis et al 2005].
