To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with alpha-mannosidosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history including evidence of hearing loss, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression; change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities or in ability to walk distances; diarrhea or incontinence, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches, reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, auscultation of heart and lungs, neurologic status including gait, and orthopedic evaluation including joint range of motion. In children, attention to growth (plot height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts)

Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections

Audiometry. If intellectual disability or young age makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing

Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus

Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacity

Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Clinical examination and immunologic tests (e.g., antinuclear antibodies, anti-ds-DNA antibodies) to exclude systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are recommended.

Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites

Bone densitometry to detect osteopenia or osteoporosis

CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum, particularly if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Some affected individuals, including those who have had bone marrow transplantation (BMT), may require symptomatic treatment. The overall aim is to prevent complications and to optimize quality of life.

Medical measures

Early use of antibiotics for bacterial infections. A clinical consequence of the immunodeficiency is that bacterial and viral infections must be treated with vigilance.

Hearing aids as early as possible for individuals with sensorineural hearing loss to improve hearing and enhance speech development and social functioning

Insertion

of PE (pressure-equalizing) tubes to reduce the conductive/mechanical component of hearing loss from fluid in the middle ear

Glasses (spectacles) to correct refractive error to improve vision. Although lens replacement for cataract is a standard procedure in alpha-mannosidosis, corneal transplantation can be difficult; postoperative complications include astigmatism (which may be correctable with repeat surgery, laser treatment, or optical devices).

Physiotherapy including hydrotherapy to avoid strain on the joints

Use of a wheelchair if necessary

Treatment of osteoporosis or osteopenia identified on bone densitometry with palmidronate (Aredia®) monthly or zoledronic acid (Aclasta®) once a year

Orthopedic intervention if necessary. Special shoes may help with ankle and foot support.

Ventriculocaval shunt for communicating hydrocephalusNote: Ventriculoperitoneal shunts may cause ascites because of the reduced absorptive capacity of the peritoneal cavity [Malm, personal communication]. Therefore, ventriculocaval shunts are preferred.

Educational opportunities/social considerations

Use of sign language in individuals with significant hearing loss

Early educational intervention for development of social skills

Speech therapy to improve speech

Special education to maximize learning

Planning housing for possible future wheelchair use

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Most affected individuals are clinically normal at birth. Since alpha-mannosidosis can be treated with BMT, and possibly also by ERT in the future, there is a pressing need for newborn screening to identify affected individuals early, before the onset of severe, irreversible, pathology [Meikle et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of immunodeficiency, affected individuals should be included in prophylactic vaccination programs.

The tendency to develop caries as a result of poor tooth quality can be reversed or delayed by good tooth hygiene or dental support [Malm, personal observation].

Regular physiotherapy to increase muscle strength may help compensate for the slowly progressive ataxia [Malm, personal observation].

Surveillance

Suggested serial monitoring to evaluate severity and rate of disease progression

Medical history (every 6-12 months) including number and type of infections, hearing, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression, change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities, ability to walk distances; diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (every 6-12 months) including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, and orthopedic evaluation. In children, attention to growth (height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts)

Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections

Audiometry. If intellectual disability makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing

Ophthalmologic examination to detect corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus

Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacities

Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of ALT for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Immunologic status, focusing on SLE, is recommended.

Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites

Bone densitometry every two to five years to assess osteopenia

CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk sibs should be tested either prenatally or in the newborn period as they will benefit from early intervention (see Treatment of Manifestations). Molecular genetic testing is possible if both pathogenic variants have been identified in the family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT), which transfers enzyme from the engrafted stem cells to the incompetent host cells via cell-to-cell contact or via the blood stream, has been attempted in alpha-mannosidosis.

Early BMT attempts were unsuccessful in one child [Will et al 1987] and successful in another [Wall et al 1998]. In four untreated children with the expected slowing of neurocognitive development and sensorineural hearing loss, Grewal et al [2004] demonstrated improvement in adaptive skills and verbal memory following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in three of four individuals studied. They emphasize the importance of early diagnosis and treatment with HSCT.

In a retrospective multi-institutional analysis, Mynarek et al [2012] summarize the experience of allogeneic HSCT in 17 individuals with alpha-mannosidosis. In summary, after HSCT, affected individuals made developmental progress, although normal development was not achieved. Hearing ability improved in some, but not in all. They conclude that HSCT may promote mental development in alpha-mannosidosis.

Avenarius et al [2011] reported a proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic (MRS) detection method for the accumulation of abnormal metabolites in multiple parts of the brain (basal ganglia, periventricular white matter, and occipital grey matter) of individuals with alpha-mannosidosis. The spectroscopy also showed that the abnormal deposits resolved in an affected individual treated with BMT six years earlier. Thus, MRS could be a useful noninvasive method to monitor the effect of treatments such as BMT or ERT in individuals with alpha-mannosidosis.

However, BMT remains a risky procedure: a retrospective study of 17 patients who had undergone BMT reported high rates of sepsis, graft-vs-host disease (GvHD), and multiple virus infections; two patients died of multi-organ failure [Mynarek et al 2012].

Chronic immune-mediated axonal polyneuropathy that followed BMT improved following plasma exchange in one individual [Mulrooney et al 2003].

Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT). A 24-month-old boy underwent uncomplicated PBSCT with his HLA-identical mother as the donor. T-cell depletion was used to reduce the risk of GvHD. Studies showed 50%-60% donor cells in blood; enzyme activity was slightly below normal. The urinary excretion of mannose-rich oligosaccharides resolved gradually and was almost absent 13 months after PBSCT. Skeletal dysplasia as judged by radiographs of the hands normalized after ten months; delayed myelination as demonstrated by MRI normalized after 12 months [Albert et al 2003].

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT)

Fibroblasts. In many in vitro studies with the purified active enzyme added to the media of mannosidase-deficient fibroblasts, the accumulation of lysosomal substrate was corrected [Abraham et al 1985].

Mouse. ERT studies in alpha-mannosidosis mouse models have found a decrease in mannose-containing oligosaccharides in tissues, including brain [Roces et al 2004]. Therefore, ERT could be an efficient treatment in humans in the future. However, in a guinea pig model, no histologic changes were seen in the brain, whereas lysosomal vacuolation decreased markedly in liver, kidney, spleen, pancreas, and trigeminal ganglion neurons [Crawley et al 2006]. Later studies in mice using higher doses (500 U/kg) of enzyme showed a distinct reduction in pathologic brain storage material [Blanz et al 2008] and even short-term ERT partially reversed the observed cerebellar pathology [Damme et al 2011].

Human. Mannosidase substitution (ERT) in humans is under investigation in the Seventh Framework EU project ALPHA-MAN. According to a press release of 10-17-2011, a Phase 2 study involving nine affected individuals found a significant improvement in the six-minute walk test, the three-minute stair case climb test, and spirometry but not intellectual ability (as measured with the Leiter test).

Gene therapy for alpha-mannosidosis is a theoretic possibility that has not been investigated

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies related to alpha-mannosidosis.

Other

Because of the limited number of affected individuals with psychiatric symptoms, no conclusion about the benefit of various psychotropic drugs can be made at this time. However, to date, olanzapine 5-15 mg at bedtime, has been used in several affected individuals with some success [Malm, unpublished observations].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alpha-thalassemia (α-thalassemia), the following phenotype-based evaluations are recommended:

Hemoglobin Bart hydrops fetalis (Hb Bart) syndrome. See Prenatal Testing and Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis.

Hemoglobin H (HbH) disease

Differentiation of deletion (mild) from non-deletion (moderate-to-severe) forms of HbH disease by appropriate molecular genetic testing of HBA1 and HBA2 is important at presentation because of varying severity.

Consider referral to a hematologist.

Consider consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

Hb Bart syndrome was previously considered a universally fatal condition, however, its prognosis is shifting because of prenatal diagnosis, intrauterine blood transfusions, improved transfusion strategies, and (rarely) curative hematopoietic stem cell transplant [Pecker et al 2017]. Although the Thalassemia International Guidelines recommend a transfusion strategy similar to β-thalassemia for these individuals; however, no reports on optimal transfusion management exist [Amid et al 2016]. Because few children with Hb Bart syndrome survive, clinical trials to assess these treatment approaches are lacking.

The advances in intrauterine and postnatal therapy have resulted in ethical dilemmas for the family and health care provider.

HbH disease. Most individuals with HbH disease are clinically well and survive without any treatment.

Occasional red blood cell transfusions may be needed if the hemoglobin level suddenly drops because of hemolytic or aplastic crises.

Chronic red blood cell transfusions should be considered in selected individuals only. Clear indications for red blood cell transfusions are severe anemia affecting cardiac function and massive erythroid expansion, resulting in severe bone changes and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Note: These events are quite rare in HbH disease.

Iron chelation therapy may be needed in individuals with iron loading caused by regular blood transfusion, inappropriate iron therapy, or abnormal iron absorption.

Splenectomy should be performed only in individuals with massive splenomegaly or hypersplenism; the associated risks for severe, life-threatening sepsis and venous thrombosis should be considered.

Other complications, such as gallstones and leg ulcers, require appropriate medical or surgical treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hb Bart syndrome

Because of the severity of Hb Bart syndrome and the risk for maternal complications during the pregnancy with a fetus with this disorder, prenatal diagnosis and early termination of affected pregnancies is usually considered. Future studies on the functional outcomes of children with Hb Bart syndrome who have received chronic transfusion, intrauterine transfusions, and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, will allow physicians to improve the informed decision-making process for families weighing the risk-benefit profile of present treatment options.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

HbH disease

During febrile episodes, a clinical evaluation is recommended because of the increased risk of hemolytic/aplastic crisis (similar to G6PD deficiency, hemolysis in HbH disease can be triggered by infection or oxidative stresses).

When chronic red blood cell transfusions are instituted for individuals with HbH disease, the management should be the same as for all individuals who have been polytransfused, including use of iron chelation therapy (see Beta-Thalassemia).

In individuals with HbH disease who are not red blood cell transfusion dependent, the only iron chelator specifically approved is deferasirox, which has been shown to be superior to placebo in reducing liver iron concentration in those older than age ten years who have beta-thalassemia intermedia, HbE/beta-thalassemia, and HbH disease [Taher et al 2012].

Regular folic acid supplementation should be recommended, as for other hemolytic anemias.

If splenectomy is required, antimicrobial prophylaxis is usually provided, at least until age five years, to decrease the risk of overwhelming sepsis caused by encapsulated organisms. Use of antimicrobial prophylaxis notwithstanding, a careful clinical evaluation of splenectomized individuals with fever is recommended.

Surveillance

HbH disease

Hematologic evaluation every six to 12 months to determine the steady state levels of hemoglobin

In children, assessment of growth and development every six to 12 months

Monitoring of iron load with annual determination of serum ferritin concentration in individuals who have been transfused, in older individuals, and in those given inappropriate iron supplementation. Since serum ferritin may underestimate the degree of iron overload, a periodic quantitative measurement of liver iron concentration is also recommended [Musallam et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

HbH disease

Inappropriate iron therapy

Oxidant drugs including sulphonamides; some antimalarials because of the risk of hemolytic crisis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The sibs of a proband should be evaluated as soon as possible after birth to determine if they have HbH disease so that appropriate monitoring can be instituted. Evaluations can include:

Evaluation of red blood cell indices, red blood cell supravital stain for HbH inclusions and hemoglobin analysis by HPLC

Targeted molecular analysis if the pathogenic variants in the family are known

Molecular genetic analysis (according to the frequency of α-globin gene pathogenic variants in each geographic area) if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

During pregnancy several complications have been reported in women with HbH disease, including worsening of anemia (with occasional need of red cell transfusions), preeclampsia, congestive heart failure, and threatened miscarriage [Origa et al 2007]. Monitoring for these possible complications is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PORD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluations by appropriate specialists in endocrinology, clinical genetics, neurosurgery, otolaryngology, and cardiology

Assessment for airway problems in individuals with skeletal malformations

Functional adrenal studies (cosyntropin test) to assess glucocorticoid deficiency, regardless of the presence or absence of genital abnormalities

Additional studies that may be indicated:

Cranial CT scan and/or MRI to determine the degree of craniosynostosis, hydrocephaly, choanal stenosis, and orbital depth

Radiographs to identify long-bone fractures and/or bowing, bony synostoses, and/or joint contractures

Echocardiogram if a heart defect is suspected

Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound examination to identify internal sex organs, detect any renal anomalies, and detect and monitor ovarian cysts in adolescent girls.

Treatment of Manifestations

Cortisol deficiency

Regular hydrocortisone replacement therapy is indicated if baseline serum cortisol concentrations are low.

Stress-dose steroids should be provided perioperatively and during times of physiologic stress in individuals in whom cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (cosyntropin test) is below normal [Krone et al 2012].

Genital abnormalities

Hypospadias and cryptorchidism may be corrected with surgery.

When clitoromegaly is severe, surgical reduction and plastic reconstruction of the clitoris may be considered.

Vaginal reconstruction may be performed in females with vaginal hypoplasia.

Dihydrotestosterone treatment has been successful in some males with micropenis [Fukami et al 2005].

Testosterone replacement has been initiated in males in whom testosterone levels remained relatively low after onset of puberty [Hershkovitz et al 2008, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Similarly, females with absent pubertal development may require estrogen replacement therapy.

Ovarian cysts. Treatment with estradiol appeared to successfully reduce the size of ovarian cysts in females with PORD [Fukami et al 2009, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Ovarian cysts in females can be a significant problem as they tend to be large and prone to spontaneous rupture; cases of girls treated with GnRH agonists and potent steroids have been reported [Idkowiak et al 2011].

Craniosynostosis. Treatment for craniosynostosis is similar to that for other syndromes associated with premature fusion of cranial sutures. Although surgical correction can be performed at any age, it is generally believed that earlier surgical correction results in better cognitive outcome.

Airway management is often a primary concern in individuals with ABS as a result of choanal stenosis or atresia, small chest, narrow trachea, and/or shortening of the larynx.

Endotracheal intubation is often required in the first minutes after delivery.

Nasal stints or tracheotomy may be required.

Tracheostomy may be necessary until age three to five years when the pharyngeal encroachment can be corrected.

Hydrocephalus. If present, hydrocephalus may be treated by surgical placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.

Joint contractures and elbow synostosis. Physical and occupational therapy can help individuals with contractures and elbow synostosis develop fine and gross motor skills.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Supplementation with appropriate steroid hormones in individuals who are deficient has helped alleviate:

Adrenal crisis

Lack of or poor pubertal development in males and females

Sleepiness and fatigue

Early intervention services may improve the outcome for individuals at risk for developmental delays and learning difficulties.

Surveillance

Individuals with PORD should be seen by a specialist tertiary pediatric endocrine service throughout childhood to closely monitor their development and adjust steroid supplementation.

Because of the presence of developmental delays in many individuals with ABS, periodic formal developmental assessments may be indicated. However, interpretation of these assessments may be complicated by the physical limitations of the disorder. Screening evaluations are likely to underestimate cognitive abilities. Therefore, evaluations should be done in centers with expertise and experience in developmental testing.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Urinary steroid profiling using gas chromatography / mass spectrometry (GC/MS) can be done if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. The characteristic urinary steroid profile:

Increased coancentration of metabolites of pregnenolone (pregnenediol) and progesterone (pregnanediol)

Significantly elevated metabolites associated with:

Deficiency of 17α-hydroxylase (5 α-tetrahydrocorticosterone, tetrahydrocorticosterone, and 11 dehydrometabolites)

Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase (17 α-hydroxypregnanolone, pregnanetriol, and pregnanetriolone)

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Fertility may be a concern. No reports describe reproduction in individuals with PORD; thus, the prevalence of infertility among individuals with PORD remains uncertain.

Therapies under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Hepatic drug metabolism. NADPH--cytochrome P450 reductase (POR) plays an important role in the metabolism of various drugs and endogenous metabolites/hormones by hepatic microsomal (type 2) P450 cytochromes. Initial studies using bacterially expressed POR pathogenic variants and two hepatic P450 enzymes suggest that pathogenic variants in POR may alter drug metabolism [Miller et al 2009]. In these studies different pathogenic variants resulted in different effects, ranging from no apparent activity to elevated activity of the hepatic P450 enzymes; these activities were not correlated with their activity in CYP17A1 assays.

In vitro activity assays on major drug-metabolizing enzymes and in vivo investigations to assess the impact of various pathogenic and non-pathogenic variants of POR have been performed by various groups [Agrawal et al 2008, Hart & Zhong 2008, Kranendonk et al 2008, Gomes et al 2009, Oneda et al 2009, Agrawal et al 2010, Flück et al 2010, Tomalik-Scharte et al 2010]. For comprehensive reviews on the pharmacogenetics of POR see Pandey & Sproll [2014] and Burkhard et al [2017].

In brief, the different pathogenic variations have different effects on microsomal P450 drug metabolizing enzymes. The common pathogenic variant p.Ala287Pro reduces the activity of the major P450 cytochrome CYP3A4 (which metabolizes ~50% of clinically used drugs) by more than 75% [Nicolo et al 2010]. In vivo cocktail phenotyping in an individual homozygous for the p.Ala287Pro pathogenic variant confirmed altered hepatic detoxification of a variety of drugs due to impaired activity of various hepatic CYP enzymes, including CYP3A4, CYP1A1, CYP2C9, and CYP2D6; the heterozygous mother of this individual also showed impaired activities of CYP1A1 and CYP2C9 [Tomalik-Scharte et al 2010]. In addition, in vitro assays suggest that some variants cause a substrate-specific modulation of CYP3A4 [Agrawal et al 2010].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum (HMSN/ACC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Physical therapy assessment to determine strength and self-help skills

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

During the first few years of life, most children with HMSN/ACC are able to achieve walking independently, but require walking aids such as canes or walkers.

Early developmental/educational intervention is appropriate for cognitive delays.

Depending on its degree of severity, scoliosis usually requires surgical correction.

Low-dose neuroleptics may be useful for psychiatric manifestations. Referral for psychiatric evaluation is appropriate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No specific treatment is available for the sensorimotor neuropathy.

Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team that comprises a pediatrician or pediatric neurologist, an orthopedist, a physiotherapist, and an occupational therapist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As the disease progresses in childhood various orthoses for the upper and lower limbs are needed.

Regular physiotherapy is required to prevent contractures of the hands and feet.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic follow-up, especially during the early teens when significant scoliosis starts to appear

Monitoring in the late teens for psychiatric manifestations including psychosis and paranoid delusions

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with achromatopsia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Standard clinical ophthalmologic evaluation and testing

Electrophysiologic examination

Color vision evaluation

Dark adaptometry

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Dark or special filter glasses or red-tinted contact lenses reduce photophobia and may improve visual acuity.

Low vision aids include high-powered magnifiers for reading.

Children with achromatopsia should have preferential seating in the front of the class to benefit maximally from their magnifying devices.

Extensive information about learning and occupational aids is available from the Achromatopsia Network (www.achromat.org).

Surveillance

Ophthalmologic examination is indicated:

Every six to 12 months in children to monitor changes in refraction and to achieve the best possible corrected visual acuity;

Every two to three years in adults.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

To avoid additional light damage to the retina, it is recommended that individuals wear appropriate protective (dark) glasses in bright light.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In July 2012 a Phase I/II clinical trial (NCT01648452) investigating the therapeutic effects and safety of an intraocular implant releasing ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) in individuals with CNGB3-related achromatopsia was started. No objectively measurable enhancement of cone function was found by assessments of visual acuity, mesopic increment sensitivity threshold, photopic electroretinogram, or color hue discrimination. Subjectively, individuals reported beneficial changes of visual function in the treated eyes, including reduced light sensitivity and aversion to bright light, but slowed adaptation to darkness, consistent with CNTF action on rod photoreceptors [Zein et al 2014].

Most recently, a clinical Phase I/II safety trial for gene replacement therapy using viral AAV vectors for CNGA3-related achromatopsia has been approved by the German legal authorities (NCT02610582). Similar trials for CNGB3-associated achromatopsia are in preparation, and recruiting individuals for clinical assessment to establish the natural history of this disease (NCT01846052).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with achondrogenesis type 1B (ACG1B), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete skeletal survey

Respiratory status

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Provide palliative care for viable newborns.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Clinical manifestations in achondroplasia vary modestly. In order to establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with achondroplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics consultation and, if feasible, consultation with a clinician experienced in caring for children with bone dysplasias

Documentation of length, weight, and head circumference compared with achondroplasia-specific growth standards

Assessment of the craniocervical junction including neurologic history and examination, computerized tomography of the craniocervical junction, and polysomnography

Baseline computerized tomography of the brain

Treatment of Manifestations

Recommendations for management of children with achondroplasia were outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics [Trotter et al 2005]. The recommendations of the committee are meant to supplement guidelines available for treating the child with average stature. A recent review [Pauli 2010] updates the information available in Trotter et al [2005].

The recommendations include (but are not limited to) the following:

Short stature

A number of studies have assessed growth hormone (GH) therapy as a possible treatment for the short stature of achondroplasia [Seino et al 2000, Kanaka-Gantenbein 2001, Kanazawa et al 2003].

In general, these and other series show initial acceleration of growth, but with lessening effect over time.

Only modest effects on adult stature seem to accrue.

Extended limb lengthening using various techniques remains an option for some. Increases in height of up to 12-14 inches may be obtained [Peretti et al 1995, Ganel & Horoszowski 1996, Yasui et al 1997, Aldegheri & Dall’Oca 2001].

Although some have advocated performing these procedures as early as ages six to eight years, many pediatricians, clinical geneticists, and ethicists have advocated postponing such surgery until the young person is able to participate in making an informed decision.

At least in North America, only a tiny proportion of affected individuals elect to undergo extended limb lengthening. The Medical Advisory Board of Little People of America has published a statement regarding use of extended limb lengthening.

Obesity. Measures to avoid obesity should start in early childhood.

Standard weight and weight-by-height grids specific for achondroplasia [Hunter et al 1996, Hoover-Fong et al 2007] should be used to monitor progress.

Note that the body mass index has not been standardized for individuals with achondroplasia and will yield misleading results; thus, body mass index should not be used in this population until normal ranges are established.

Hydrocephalus

If increased intracranial pressure arises, referral to a neurosurgeon is needed.

Because of the presumed mechanism giving rise to hydrocephalus in this population, probably ventriculoperitoneal shunting, rather than third ventriculostomy, is appropriate.

Craniocervical junction constriction

The best predictors of need for suboccipital decompression include:

Lower-limb hyperreflexia or clonus

Central hypopnea demonstrated by polysomnography

Reduced foramen magnum size, determined by CT examination of the craniocervical junction and by comparison with the norms for children with achondroplasia [Pauli et al 1995].

If there is clear indication of symptomatic compression, urgent referral to a pediatric neurosurgeon for decompression surgery should be initiated [Bagley et al 2006].

Obstructive sleep apnea

Treatment may include the following:

Adenotonsillectomy

Weight reduction

Continuous positive airway pressure

Tracheostomy for extreme cases

Improvement in disturbed sleep and some improvement in neurologic function can result from these interventions [Waters et al 1995].

In rare instances in which the obstruction is severe enough to require tracheostomy, surgical intervention to advance the midface has been used to alleviate upper airway obstruction [Elwood et al 2003].

Middle ear dysfunction

Routine management of frequent middle-ear infections, persistent middle-ear fluid, and consequent hearing loss should be undertaken as needed.

Speech evaluation by age two years should be undertaken if any concerns arise on screening.

Varus deformity

Criteria for surgical intervention have been published previously [Kopits 1980, Pauli 2010].

Presence of progressive, symptomatic bowing should prompt referral to an orthopedist. Various interventions may be elected (e.g. valgus-producing and derotational osteotomies, guided growth using 8-plates).

Kyphosis. A protocol to help prevent the development of a fixed, angular kyphosis is available [Pauli et al 1997]:

In children in whom spontaneous remission does not arise after trunk strength increases and the child begins to walk, bracing is usually sufficient to prevent persistence of the thoracolumbar kyphosis.

If a severe kyphosis persists, spinal surgery may be necessary to prevent neurologic complications [Ain & Browne 2004, Ain & Shirley 2004].

Spinal stenosis

If severe signs and/or symptoms of spinal stenosis arise, urgent surgical referral is appropriate.

Extended and wide laminectomies [Pyeritz et al 1987, Lonstein 1988], need to be done as soon as possible [Carlisle et al 2011].

Socialization

Because of the highly visible nature of the short stature associated with achondroplasia, affected persons and their families may encounter difficulties in socialization and school adjustment.

Support groups (see Resources), such as the Little People of America, Inc (LPA), can assist families with these issues through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs.

Information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children with short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting is available through a national newsletter, seminars, and workshops.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For issues related to the secondary complications that may arise in achondroplasia, see Treatment of Manifestations and Surveillance.

Surveillance

Guidelines for surveillance are incorporated into the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical report [Trotter et al 2005].

Growth. Monitor height and weight at each physician contact using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978, Hoover-Fong et al 2007]

Development. Screening of developmental milestones throughout infancy and early childhood should be performed and compared with those specific for achondroplasia [Fowler et al 1997, Ireland et al 2010].

Head growth and risk for hydrocephalus

Complete baseline CT scan (or MRI) of the brain in infancy

Monitoring of head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978] throughout childhood

Craniocervical junction

Every infant should have a CT scan (or MRI) of the craniocervical junction in infancy, with comparison of foramen magnum size to diagnostic-specific standards [Hecht et al 1989].

Overnight polysomnography should also be completed in infancy and interpreted with consideration of features important in assessing the craniocervical junction [Pauli et al 1995].

Neurologic examination including for signs of cervical myelopathy should be incorporated into each physical examination in infancy and childhood.

Sleep apnea

Inquiry should be made regarding signs and symptoms of sleep apnea.

If worrisome nighttime or daytime features arise, then polysomnography should be completed.

Ears and hearing

In addition to newborn screening, each infant should have tympanometric and behavioral audiometric evaluation by age approximately one year.

Evidence for middle ear problems or hearing loss should be sought throughout childhood.

Kyphosis

The spine of the infant and child should be clinically assessed every six months until age three years.

If severe kyphosis appears to be developing, radiologic assessment is needed (lateral in sitting or standing, depending on age, and lateral cross-table prone or cross-table supine over a bolster).

Legs. Clinical assessment for development of bowing and/or internal tibial torsion should be part of each physical assessment.

Spinal stenosis. Because adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk for spinal stenosis, a clinical history and neurologic examination is warranted every three to five years once the person with achondroplasia reaches adulthood.

Adaptation to difference. Inquiry regarding social adjustment should be part of each primary physician contact.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Particularly in childhood, care must be taken to limit risk for injury to the spinal cord at the craniocervical junction. This should include proscription of activities including collision sports (e.g., American football, ice hockey, rugby), use of a trampoline, diving from diving boards, vaulting in gymnastics, and hanging upside down from knees or feet on playground equipment.

Protocols have been published regarding positioning that should be avoided in order to decrease the likelihood of development of a fixed, angular kyphosis [Pauli et al 1997].

There is no increased risk for bone fragility or joint degeneration, and no circumstances to avoid related to these.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cephalo-pelvic disproportion may necessitate delivery by caesarean section when the pregnant woman is of average stature and the fetus has achondroplasia.

Pregnant women with achondroplasia must always be delivered by caesarean section because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with aceruloplasminemia, evaluations for the following are recommended:

Iron deposition. Serum ferritin concentration, brain and abdomen MRI findings, and hepatic iron and copper content by the liver biopsy

Neurologic findings. Brain MRI

Diabetes mellitus. Glucose tolerance test; blood concentrations of insulin and HbA1c

Retinal degeneration. Examination of the optic fundi and fluorescein angiography

Anemia. Complete blood count

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Note: Individual case reports indicate the effectiveness of treatment in patients with aceruloplasminemia; however, no large series of symptomatic patients treated with iron chelators and zinc is available and there is no universally accepted treatment regimen. A systematic review/analysis of studies designed to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of desferrioxamine, deferiprone, deferasirox, and zinc as monotherapy for the initial treatment of various clinical presentations of aceruloplasminemia is needed.

Desferrioxamine. Treatment with iron chelating agents (i.e., desferrioxamine) can be considered for symptomatic individuals whose blood hemoglobin concentration is higher than 9 g/dL. Treatment can decrease serum ferritin concentration as well as brain and liver iron stores, and can prevent progression of the neurologic signs/symptoms [Miyajima et al 1997].

Intravenous infusions of 500 mg of desferrioxamine (desferoxamine mesylate) dissolved in 100 mL of isotonic saline solution are given over one hour. Desferrioxamine is infused twice a week for six to ten months.

In the Miyajima et al [1997] study, head MRI evaluations were performed before and after treatment to evaluate the effect of treatment on iron storage in the brain. Serum concentrations of iron, ferritin, copper, hemoglobin, and hemoglobin A1c, as well as C-peptide immunoreactivity, were measured before and after treatment. Lipid peroxidation in plasma samples also was measured by the thiobarbituric acid method. T2-weighted MRI showed an increase in the signal intensity of the basal ganglia. Serum ferritin concentration was markedly reduced and hepatic iron concentration was decreased, whereas serum iron concentration was elevated and anemia and DM were ameliorated.

In the Mariani et al [2004] report, the brain MRI did not change after more than one year of desferoxamine treatment, whereas excess iron in the liver was removed.

Pan et al [2011] reported an affected individual age 52 years who was treated with desferrioxamine (500 mg) by intravenous infusion in a 5% glucose solution once a week for four years. After four years of treatment, brain MRI evaluation demonstrated improvement in low-intensity areas in the basal ganglia, suggesting that iron chelation can reduce abnormal iron deposition in the central nervous system.

Deferasirox. Iron chelation therapy with deferasirox, an oral iron chelating agent, led to a mild improvement in clinical symptoms, including cognitive performance, gait, and balance, in an individual with aceruloplasminemia who had no response to both deferoxamine and fresh-frozen plasma therapy [Skidmore et al 2008]. Oral administration of deferasirox may prevent tissue damage, particularly to the liver and pancreas [Finkenstedt et al 2010].

Deferiprone. This iron chelator has a lower molecular weight and more lipophilic properties. Deferiprone therapy had no beneficial effects in a patient in a previous report [Mariani et al 2004]; however, it has been shown to protect against retinal degeneration and neurodegeneration and to increase the life span if initiated early in mice exhibiting knockout for ceruloplasmin and hephaestin [Hadziahmetovic et al 2011].

Fresh-frozen human plasma. After the intravenous administration of fresh-frozen human plasma (FFP) containing ceruloplasmin, serum iron content increases for several hours because of ferroxidase activity of ceruloplasmin. Iron content in the liver decreases more with the combined intravenous administration of FFP and desferrioxamine than with FFP administration alone. Neurologic signs/symptoms can improve following repetitive FFP treatment [Yonekawa et al 1999].

Antioxidants such as vitamin E may be used along with a chelator or oral administration of zinc to prevent tissue damage, particularly to the liver and pancreas [Kuhn et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Zinc concentrations in these patients were decreased in the brain and visceral organs, and zinc showed opposing distributions to those for iron. Because zinc has antioxidant activity, treatment with an iron chelator accompanied by zinc may be useful in patients with aceruloplasminemia to diminish iron accumulation in the brain and body and to prevent or ameliorate systemic and neurologic symptoms [Miyajima 2015].

Surveillance

Marked accumulation of iron in parenchymal tissues including the liver, pancreas, heart, and thyroid can result in diabetes mellitus, cardiac failure, and hypothyroidism.

All affected individuals should have an annual glucose tolerance test starting at age 15 years to evaluate for the onset of diabetes mellitus.

ECG evaluation should be performed early in the course of the disease.

Evaluation of thyroid and liver function and complete blood count are indicated annually starting at the time of diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Iron supplements. Individuals with aceruloplasminemia erroneously diagnosed as having iron deficiency anemia and treated with iron supplements had accelerated iron accumulation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband (starting at age 15 years) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and initiation of treatment. However, the proper preventive approach for asymptomatic sibs is unknown:

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Monitoring of serum concentrations of hemoglobin and hemoglobin A1c as anemia and diabetes may precede neurologic symptoms (see also Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Andersen-Tawil syndrome (ATS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline assessments by a neurologist and cardiologist familiar with periodic paralysis and long QT (LQT) respectively

Serum potassium concentrations at baseline and during attacks of weakness

12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitor

Electrophysiologic studies including the long exercise protocol [Kuntzer et al 2000, Fournier et al 2004]

Verification that serum TSH concentration is within normal limits

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with ATS requires the coordinated input of a neurologist familiar with the treatment of periodic paralysis and a cardiologist familiar with the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. To date, no randomized clinical therapeutic trials have been conducted on ATS.

Management of attacks of episodic weakness depends on the associated serum potassium concentration:

If the serum potassium concentration is low (<3.0 mmol/L), administration of oral potassium (20-30 mEq/L) every 15-30 minutes (not to exceed 200 mEq in a 12-hour period) until the serum concentration normalizes often shortens the attack. As dysphagia is almost never a problem during attacks of paralysis, oral potassium replacement is the safest route. If intravenous potassium replacement is needed, a 5% mannitol solution instead of a saline or glucose solution (both of which may exacerbate weakness) is recommended. Close monitoring of serum potassium concentrations and ECG is necessary during potassium replacement therapy in an emergency setting to avoid secondary hyperkalemia.

Whether a relative drop in serum potassium within the normal range causes episodic paralysis is not clear. If such cases are suspected, affected individuals can work with their physician to devise an individual potassium replacement regimen, with a goal of maintaining serum potassium levels in the high range of normal.

Attacks of weakness when serum potassium concentration is high usually resolve within 60 minutes. Episodes may be shortened by ingesting carbohydrates or continuing mild exercise. Intravenous calcium gluconate is rarely necessary for management in an individual seen in an emergency setting.

Vasovagal syncope in individuals with ATS mandates a careful cardiology assessment [Airey et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic treatment aimed at reduction of attack frequency and severity can be achieved, as in other forms of periodic paralysis, with the following:

Lifestyle and dietary modification to avoid known triggers

Use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide 250-500 mg/1-2x/day or dichlorphenamide 50-100 mg/1-2x/day)

Daily use of slow-release potassium supplements, which may also be helpful in controlling attack rates in individuals prone to hypokalemia. Elevating the serum potassium concentration (>4 mEq/L) has the added benefit of narrowing the QT interval, thus reducing the risk of LQT-associated arrhythmias.

An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in individuals with tachycardia-induced syncope [Chun et al 2004]

Empiric treatment with flecainide [Bökenkamp et al 2007, Fox et al 2008, Pellizzón et al 2008] should be considered for significant, frequent ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of reduced left ventricular function [Tristani-Firouzi & Etheridge 2010]. A prospective open label study in ten individuals with ATS and a confirmed KCNJ2 pathogenic variant tested the effect of flecainide, a type 1c antiarrhythmic, for the prevention of cardiac arrhythmias [Miyamoto et al 2015]. Outcomes included a 24-hour Holter monitor before and after treatment, and a treadmill exercise test. Flecainide was found to significantly reduce the number of ventricular arrhythmias seen on Holter monitor, and to suppress exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Individuals were then followed for a mean of 23 months and no syncope or cardiac arrest was documented. The study concluded that flecainide may reduce cardiac arrhythmias in ATS; however, the ultimate benefit of flecainide for prevention of medically significant cardiac arrhythmias is still unknown.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiologists should be aware that some antiarrhythmic drugs, particularly Class I drugs, may paradoxically exacerbate the neuromuscular symptoms and should be used cautiously in individuals with ATS.

Although malignant hyperthermia has not been reported in ATS, appropriate anesthetic precautions should be undertaken as with individuals with other forms of periodic paralysis.

Surveillance

For asymptomatic individuals with a KCNJ2 pathogenic variant, annual screening including a 12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitoring is desirable, followed by referral to a cardiologist if abnormalities are identified.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals should avoid medications known to prolong QT intervals. See CredibleMeds® for a complete and updated list.

Salbutamol inhalers, which may be used in the treatment of primary hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, should be avoided because of the potential for exacerbation of cardiac arrhythmias.

Thiazide and other potassium-wasting diuretics may provoke drug-induced hypokalemia and could aggravate the QT interval.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures:

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, detailed neurologic and cardiologic evaluation, 12-lead ECG, and 24-hour Holter monitoring can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The rarity of ATS and the paucity of reports pertaining to pregnancy in women with ATS make an evidence-based approach to pregnancy management difficult to formulate. One case study reported an uneventful pregnancy, with increased episodes of weakness but reduced ventricular ectopy compared to the pre-pregnancy period [Subbiah et al 2008]. However, as data are limited, a multidisciplinary approach to individual care and anticipation of increased risk (as can be seen in those with long QT syndrome) seems reasonable.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an ACTG2-related disorder (which can range from megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome [MMIHS] to chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction [CIPO]), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics consultation with complete family history

Urologic. Consultation with an expert in in pediatric urology whose evaluation may include studies of upper and lower urinary tract and renal function

Gastrointestinal. Consultation with an expert in pediatric gastroenterology whose evaluation may include radiologic studies of the gastrointestinal tract based on the symptoms and onset. Of note, most individuals with an ACTG2-related disorder will have undergone extensive radiographic imaging prenatally and/or in the neonatal period including evaluation for gastrointestinal distention and/or microcolon. However, if not performed at the time of diagnosis, studies to clarify the extent of disease could include abdominal x-rays, abdominal CT, transit studies (i.e., small bowel contrast studies), and/or endoscopy. Manometry (which typically shows reduced or absent contractions) can be used as an adjunct in the evaluation to quantify the degree of hypoperistalsis and extent of gastrointestinal dysfunction [Ambartsumyan & Rodriguez 2014].

Nutrition. Consultation with a specialist in pediatric nutrition that includes plotting of height and weight on standardized growth charts and assessments of dietary intake, body mass index, and nutritional status (measurement of albumin and prealbumin, and tests of liver function)

Treatment of Manifestations

Children with an ACTG2-related disorder require multidisciplinary management with specialists in pediatric gastroenterology, nutrition, urology, surgery, clinical genetics, and occupational therapy, among others. Adults with an ACTG2-related disorder require similar multidisciplinary care.

Treatment for ACTG2-related disorders remains supportive.

Urologic manifestations. Management of bladder dysfunction by an urologist is recommended.

A clear link has been established between fetal urinary tract dilation such as megacystis and long-term impairment of renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012]. Patients are frequently dependent on bladder management with diversion, catheterization, and/or voiding schedules. In addition, clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.

In a review of 14 patients with visceral myopathy evaluated prior to the discovery of ACTG2, Ghavamian et al [1997] noted that clean intermittent catheterization decreased the frequency of urinary tract infection and observed that surgical approaches (construction of a catheterizable channel or a vesicostomy) were also therapeutic options.

In a review of 39 children with CIPO reported before the discovery of ACTG2,

Lapointe et al [2002] identified megacystis in 26 and hydronephrosis in 14. They noted that urologic intervention to ensure adequate bladder emptying was important to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections and to preserve long-term renal function. Urologic treatment (at some point in their care) included voiding with abdominal pressure (14 children), intermittent catheterization (10), and antibiotic prophylaxis (17).

Gastrointestinal manifestations. Management by a gastroenterologist and nutritionist familiar with intestinal motility disorders is recommended. Patients are frequently dependent on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) (see review by Gabbard & Lacy [2013]).

Complications of long-term TPN can be progressive and include irreversible cholestasis, hepatic dysfunction, central line infections, and thromboembolic events. For this reason, individuals with an intestinal disorder that requires long-term TPN (like those seen in ACTG2-related disorders) have undergone multi-visceral transplantation including liver and intestine. In the series of Gosemann & Puri [2011] in which 12 individuals underwent such multivisceral transplants, TPN could be discontinued in the majority; however, bladder catheterization was still required.

Isolated intestinal transplantation has also been reported in one individual with MMIHS [Huang et al 2013a].

Of note, use of pro-kinetic agents such as 5HT4 agonists has resulted in anecdotal evidence of improvement in bowel function [Lehtonen et al 2012, Wangler et al 2014], as well as failure to improve in bowel function in MMIHS [Hiradfar et al 2013] and some cases of molecularly confirmed ACTG2-related MMIHS [Wangler et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Establishing the correct diagnosis of an ACTG2-related disorder may help avoid unnecessary exploratory laparotomies for unexplained episodes of apparent intestinal obstruction (i.e., CIPO).

Surgical procedures associated with general anesthesia can produce a post-surgical ileus which can persist for an extended period.

Clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters for administration of TPN and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.

Surveillance

Surveillance should be individualized using a multidisciplinary approach.

Surveillance should take into account the link between fetal urinary tract dilation and long-term increased risk for impaired renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012].

Long-term dependence on parenteral nutrition requires routine surveillance of liver function.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

For those with CIPO, high-fat foods (>30% of total calories) and consumption of lactose and fructose may worsen abdominal bloating and discomfort [Gabbard & Lacy 2013].

No drugs are known to exacerbate the smooth muscle functional defect in ACTG2-related disorders.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the ACTG2 pathogenic variant identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk as early diagnosis may help prevent unnecessary surgery for symptoms of intestinal obstruction and may allow early evaluation of bladder and renal function, and the urinary tract for evidence of dilation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

When a fetus at risk for an ACTG2-related disorder has evidence of bladder distention on prenatal ultrasound examination, consultation with a maternal fetal medicine specialist is recommended. Of note, in some fetuses with prenatal detection of megacystis, vesicoamniotic shunts have been performed. The rationale for this has been questioned [Tuzovic et al 2014].

Among the limited number of mothers with an ACTG2-related disorder reported, some instances of poor labor progression and weak uterine contractions have been noted [Klar et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended, some of which may be performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation:

Identification of specific disease-causing viral, fungal, or bacterial organisms (both normal pathogens and opportunistic agents)

Complete blood count (CBC)

Flow cytometry to quantify lymphocyte subsets (T-, B-, NK-cells)

Assessment of humoral immune function by measuring serum immunoglobulins and the titer of specific antibodies related to infections and immunizations

Evaluation of cellular immune function by in vitro response of blood mononuclear cells to mitogens and antigens

Measurement of erythrocyte dAXP concentration to evaluate metabolic severity

Liver function testing to assess for metabolic hepatitis

Auditory testing

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Treatment of infections with specific antibiotic, antifungal, and antiviral agents

Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jiroveci

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Restoring a functional immune system is essential and can be achieved in several ways. The choice of therapy is complex and depends on a number of factors, including the affected person’s age and clinical status, the expectations and desires of the parents, and the specific experience and expertise of physicians in treating ADA-deficient SCID. A workshop held in 2008 developed consensus guidelines for therapy [Gaspar et al 2009] (full text).

Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation (BMT/SCT) from an HLA-identical healthy sib is the method of choice for treating all forms of SCID.

This can be performed without cytoreductive conditioning of the affected individual, and without depletion of donor T-cells.

Results vary among transplant centers, but the procedure is curative in approximately 70% or more of affected individuals.

The main risks are graft-versus-host disease and delayed or incomplete recovery of humoral immune function, requiring continued immunoglobulin replacement.

For the majority of individuals with ADA-deficient SCID who lack an HLA-identical related donor, the following two forms of treatment can be considered [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Candotti et al 2012, Baffelli et al 2015].

BMT/SCT from a “non-ideal” donor

Donor-derived T-cells are depleted to minimize the risk of graft-versus-host disease.

Pre-transplant cytoreductive “conditioning” of the recipient (individual with SCID) is often performed to prevent graft loss, which occurs with relative frequency in those with ADA-deficient SCID who are not conditioned.

Note: Some transplant centers do not perform conditioning of the recipient prior to a haploidentical transplant because of the risk of peri-transplant morbidity [Buckley et al 1999]. However, this latter approach has frequently been associated with a failure to achieve stable engraftment [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012].

Following a T-cell-depleted transplant, return of functional T-cells requires three to four months. B-cell reconstitution is delayed longer, or may not be adequately achieved, requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement therapy.

Note: Universal agreement regarding the best methods for performing partially mismatched BMT/SCT does not exist [Cancrini et al 2010, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012]. When considering therapeutic options, it is therefore important for parents to obtain specific information about prior experience and long-term results of transplants for ADA-deficient SCID at the center where their child will be treated.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has been used as a primary therapy in individuals who lack an HLA-identical marrow/stem cell donor when the risks associated with a partially mismatched transplant are deemed too great or when the risk of graft failure is high, as in older individuals with a delayed- or late-onset phenotype.

Polyethylene glycol-modified bovine adenosine deaminase (PEG-ADA) is composed of purified bovine ADA covalently linked to multiple strands of PEG (average mass: 5 kd) in order to prolong circulating life and reduce immunogenicity. It is administered by intramuscular injection once or twice a week (~15-60 U/kg per week).

By maintaining a high level of ADA activity in plasma, PEG-ADA eliminates extracellular Ado and dAdo, preventing the toxic metabolic effects that interfere with lymphocyte viability and function and that may injure other organs (liver, lung, brain) [Hershfield et al 1987, Hershfield & Mitchell 2001, Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

ERT is not curative; PEG-ADA must be given regularly and at a sufficient dose to maintain a non-toxic metabolic environment.

PEG-ADA has also been used as a secondary therapy in affected individuals who have failed to engraft following an unconditioned BMT/SCT, or in whom an acceptable recovery of immune function has not been achieved following experimental gene therapy.

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA recover partial immune function that is sufficient to prevent opportunistic infections and other clinical manifestations of SCID. A lag of approximately two to four months occurs before T-cell function appears, but B-cells often increase earlier than after BMT/SCT. Lymphocyte counts and in vitro lymphocyte function usually increase during the first year of ERT, but beyond the first year or two most PEG-ADA-treated individuals remain lymphopenic and in vitro lymphocyte function fluctuates widely. Most individuals remain clinically well, but over time both T and B lymphocytes gradually decline in number and display various functional abnormalities [Chan et al 2005, Malacarne et al 2005, Serana et al 2010, Brigida et al 2014]. Approximately half of those maintained on ERT were continuing to receive immunoglobulin replacement.

More than 300 affected individuals have received PEG-ADA. Survival of PEG-ADA-treated individuals beyond five years and through approximately ten years is approximately 75%-80%, comparable or superior to that achieved with BMT/SCT (i.e. in individuals who lack an HLA-identical donor). Most deaths occurred during the first six months of treatment, with the majority in the first month due to life-threatening infections present at diagnosis.

Lymphoproliferative disorders have developed in eight individuals who received PEG-ADA for eight to 22 years [Hershfield 2004; Chan et al 2005; Kaufman et al 2005; Husain et al 2007; Author, unpublished data]. Hepatocellular carcinoma developed in one affected individual after 13 years of ERT, and was present in another at the time ERT was initiated following an unsuccessful stem cell transplant. A third affected individual died of hepatoblastoma after 2.5 years of ERT; the tumor was thought to have been present but undetected prior to ERT. Several other affected individuals have developed persistent hemolytic anemia, which in some cases began in association with a viral infection or with central catheter sepsis [Hershfield 2004, Lainka et al 2005].

The limitations of PEG-ADA therapy include primary failure to recover protective immune function, the development of neutralizing antibodies that reduce or eliminate efficacy, immune dysregulation (particularly in the first few months of therapy), and a risk that immune function will eventually (i.e., beyond 10-15 years) decline to an inadequate level. Approximately 20% of affected individuals have discontinued ERT in order to undergo BMT/SCT. In most of these cases, the transplant had been intended at the time of diagnosis but not performed because a suitable donor was not available or the affected individual had been too ill to undergo the procedure. In a minority of individuals, the transplant was performed because of declining immune function while receiving PEG-ADA. Overall, approximately half of these secondary transplants have been successful [Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA for longer than a year develop antibodies that bind specifically to bovine ADA and are detectable by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); these are of no clinical significance. Neutralizing antibodies that inhibit catalytic activity and enhance clearance of PEG-ADA (and which do compromise efficacy) have developed in fewer than 10% of treated individuals [Chaffee et al 1992, Hershfield 1997]. No allergic or hypersensitivity reactions to PEG-ADA have occurred, and the treatment has generally been well tolerated.

Gene therapy, while still technically experimental, is still another treatment option for those who have failed all other options (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As noted under Treatment of Manifestations, affected individuals receive antibiotic prophylaxis for Pneumocystis, and also IVIG, prior to immune reconstitution. The use of such prophylaxis following transplantation and while receiving ERT varies and depends on the level of immune reconstitution achieved.

Surveillance

Annual or more frequent evaluation of lymphocyte counts, serum immunoglobulin levels, and various in vitro tests of cellular and humoral immune function (i.e., as listed above for the evaluation of individuals suspected of having SCID) should be performed following BMT/SCT and during ERT [Gaspar et al 2009].

Individuals on ERT also require periodic monitoring as follows:

Plasma levels of PEG-ADA activity

Erythrocyte dAXP concentration

Development of neutralizing antibodies, particularly if plasma ADA activity or clinical or immunologic status declines unexpectedly

Monitoring for the appearance or recurrence of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The use of adenine arabinoside (a substrate for ADA) as an antiviral agent or for chemotherapy of malignancies should be avoided.

Pentostatin, a potent ADA inhibitor used to treat some lymphoid malignancies, would be ineffective in persons who lack ADA, and would interfere with PEG-ADA.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate newborn sibs of a proband so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Assay of ADA catalytic activity if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Experimental gene therapy for ADA-deficient SCID employing gamma retroviral vectors has been under clinical investigation for more than 20 years [Engel et al 2003, Cavazzana-Calvo et al 2005]. Clinical trials since about 2000 have employed an approach that was first reported for two affected individuals treated in Milan, Italy and later updated for ten others [Aiuti et al 2002, Aiuti et al 2009]. This strategy involved discontinuing PEG-ADA (in those receiving ERT) and administering non-myeloablative conditioning prior to the infusion of vector carrying human ADA cDNA in order to transduce autologous CD34+ stem cells. Variations on this protocol have also been under investigation in the UK, US, and Japan. More than 40 affected individuals (most of whom had been receiving PEG-ADA) have been treated at these centers [Aiuti et al 2002, Gaspar et al 2006, Engel et al 2007, Aiuti et al 2009, Cappelli & Aiuti 2010, Selleri et al 2011, Candotti et al 2012, Sauer et al 2012, Gaspar et al 2013]. In most treated individuals, stable ADA expression in lymphoid cells has been achieved, along with correction of metabolic abnormalities in erythrocytes, which has been accompanied by reconstitution of both T and B cell immune function, although this reconstitution may take a year or more. Good health has been maintained without the need for ERT.

In contrast to the experience with gene therapy for X-linked SCID, no individuals with ADA deficiency have developed leukemia as a result of vector-associated insertional mutagenesis, and at this time no deaths have been reported [Cicalese et al 2016]. In May of 2016, GlaxoSmithKline announced that the European Commission had approved the gamma retroviral vector developed in Milan for use in treatment of SCID due to ADA deficiency. However, because of remaining concerns about potential insertional mutagenesis, and in order to achieve more effective ADA expression, clinical investigation of gene therapy using lentiviral vectors has now begun [Farinelli et al 2014, Candotti 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS), the following evaluations are recommended.

Cutaneous/cranial

Consultation with a plastic surgeon regarding aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) or any significant cutis aplasia on the body

Consultation with a dermatologist, which may be especially useful in those with extensive cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (CMTC)

Consideration of skull x-ray; on occasion a bony defect may be present even in the absence of ACC, which may require use of a protective helmet. Ultrasonography and CT can also help assess skull involvement.

Consultation with a neurosurgeon in children with a significant calvarial defect

Cardiovascular

Consultation with a pediatric cardiologist. Echocardiography should be performed even when clinical signs of congenital heart disease are absent.

Any evidence for pulmonary hypertension should be sought.

Systemic blood pressure should be checked.

Abdominal ultrasound examination should be performed to check for splenomegaly and patency of the portal vein.

Neurologic

Brain MRI to delineate any brain malformations and identify lesions suggestive of micro-hemorrhage or ischemia. Infants with brain anomalies are at increased risk for seizures, developmental disability, or motor deficits and warrant evaluation and close follow-up by developmental specialists.

MR angiography and venography to show the vascular anatomy. Surgical procedures may result in unexpected complications if anomalous vasculature is unrecognized. MRI and MRV are also important to guide wound care when the ACC lesion is large and to determine whether protection of the superior sagittal sinus is sufficient.

Ocular. Pediatric ophthalmology assessment of the retina should be obtained within a short time-frame so that lesions at high risk can be treated prior to retinal detachment and/or visual loss.

Other

Abdominal ultrasound to look for liver or renal anomalies

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Cutaneous/Cranial

Consultation with a pediatric dermatologist or plastic surgeon provides individualized management. The goals of non-operative therapy are to prevent infection and promote healing.

Wounds without calvarial involvement. The most preferred dressing currently is a silver-coated, low-adherent primary wound dressing (e.g., Acticoat®), plus a barrier of a flexible polyamide net coated with soft silicone (e.g., Mepitel®) if there is any bone defect. Plastic wrap (e.g., Saran®) can be used to prevent desiccation. Once the wound begins to granulate, the frequency of dressing changes can be decreased. Non-infected, partial thickness skin wounds may be adequately dressed with a hydrocolloid (e.g., DuoDerm®).

Other less preferred, less costly dressings are:

Sterile saline soaked gauze / compresses (wet-to-wet), which should be changed every four hours. Although this labor-intensive option is effective, it is not frequently used anymore.

Silver sulfadiazine dressings changed twice daily work well in older children, but these cannot be used in infants younger than age two months (corrected for prematurity) because of the risk of accompanying electrolyte disturbance.

Wounds with calvarial defects: acute care. As soon as possible a plastic surgeon should be consulted for any large and/or deep lesion and imaging performed (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis, Neurologic). Operative management of large lesions involving the calvarium requires involvement of a neurosurgeon.

It is critically important to avoid drying of the wound and eschar separation, which can lead to catastrophic, terminal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus or from a dilated vein.

One option is a dermal regeneration plate (a porous matrix of bovine tendon collagen and glycosaminoglycan) and a semipermeable silicone layer (which provides a framework for cell migration) which is applied in the operating room to a meticulously debrided wound and then monitored for infection [Khashab et al 2009].

In one child with a CSF leak, a biocellulose membrane provided a barrier and supported eventual healing [Frantz et al 2015].

It has been suggested that debridement over the midline be avoided (if possible) to decrease the risk of fatal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus [Udayakumaran et al 2013].

A surgical procedure may be necessary for more severe defects (e.g., large areas of aplasia cutis congenita on the scalp or skull abnormalities) or wounds complicated by hemorrhage, infection, or CSF leakage.

Although some infants have received skin grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Cohen et al 2014], including allogenic grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Udayakumaran et al 2013], difficulties in infants can include limited donor sites and possible interference with growth of the calvarium as well as the usual risks of graft loss and donor-site morbidity. A reason for the high complication rate specific to AOS may be the presence of an anomalous vascular supply.

Use of abdominal muscle fascia to cover exposed dura has been reported [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012].

Wounds with calvarial defects: late calvarial reconstruction. Although many skull defects (especially small ones) show spontaneous closure over a period of months, some remain at least partially open and require reconstruction by a neurosurgeon. As some lesions can also involve the dura, it is important to consider the role of the dura in promoting osteogenesis.

Cranioplasty, if needed, is usually considered around age three to four years [Beekmans & Wiebe 2001]. Because cranioplasty requires good quality skin coverage over the bone graft, scalp reconstruction must be done at the same time or earlier.

Bone grafting in the neonatal period using unaffected skull, with coverage of the sampled site with vascularized peri-osteum, has been reported [Steinbok 2000].

Use of a split rib graft with a latissimus dorsi muscle flap has also been reported.

After healing is complete, scar revision with tissue expansion for cosmesis can be discussed. When the defect is severe the hair-bearing scalp may not be able to completely restore hair to the entire scalp even with tissue expansion.

Limb

Limb malformations may warrant consultation with specialists in orthopedics, plastic surgery, and/or rehabilitation medicine. X-rays of limbs are often performed immediately after birth but are most informative, in terms of delineating the extent of involvement, after age one year.

Many AOS limb anomalies are not severe enough to require surgical or prosthetic intervention.

Occupational therapy and/or physical therapy is used as needed to assist with limb functioning, such as to improve walking and running stability in those with abnormal toes.

Analysis in a gait laboratory may help identify those who would benefit from prosthetic rehabilitation.

Distraction lengthening is problematic at the phalangeal level because of limited covering soft tissue, skeletal stock, and vascularity, but could be an option for metacarpals or the forearm bones in certain circumstances [Sivakumar & Smith 2015].

‘On-top’ plasty is another, quite complex, surgical strategy to achieve prehension when necessary; a digital tip can be transposed onto a proximal phalanx and neurovascular pedicle.

Cardiovascular

Many congenital heart malformations and certain vascular malformations can be ameliorated with a range of standard surgical procedures.

Treatment of pulmonary hypertension with a variety of standard therapies is often found to be ineffective.

Neurologic

If developmental delays or disabilities are suspected, a full assessment with recommendations for supportive therapies should be obtained.

Routine pediatric care should include periodic neurologic examination for signs of spasticity, particularly if neonatal brain imaging showed evidence of periventricular calcifications.

Early physiotherapy can maximize motor function and range of motion.

The risk for epilepsy is increased, particularly when neuroimaging and/or neurologic examination are abnormal. Management of seizures is per routine.

Ocular

Early prophylactic laser photocoagulation may help preserve vision of those with retinal vasculopathy [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012]. Such treatment can decrease the progression from ischemia to neovascularization, gliosis, and retinal detachment.

Retinal detachments should be treated promptly with appropriate interventions, such as bilateral lensectomies, pars plana vitrectomies, or silicone oil tamponade.

Surveillance

Cardiovascular

Echocardiography annually until age three years for signs of pulmonary hypertension

Consideration of abdominal ultrasound examination for signs of portal hypertension in those with failure to thrive, persistent nausea, abdominal swelling, or black stools

Neurologic

Annual pediatric care, including neurologic examination and ongoing assessment of psychomotor development

Ocular

Annual assessment by pediatric ophthalmologist until age three years to identify those with abnormal retinal vascular development

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or surveillance for cardiovascular and/or neurologic manifestations.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known;

Examination by a clinical geneticist if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with an ADAMTSL4-related eye disorder, routine ophthalmologic examination that includes the following is recommended:

Determination of visual acuity and refractive error

Measurement of intraocular pressure

Note: Affected individuals may have increased central corneal thickness that could explain, to some extent, why some individuals have moderately elevated intraocular pressure, but few have glaucomatous damage of the optic nerve head.

Slit lamp examination

Ophthalmoscopy

The following may also provide important information:

Orthoptic examination, particularly in children

Measurement of axial length

Anterior segment examination with optical coherence tomography (OCT) and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM)

Corneal topography including measurement of central corneal thickness

Gonioscopy

Treatment of Manifestations

In children, the main objective is to prevent amblyopia by early correction of refractive errors. Patching is necessary when correction of the refractive error is insufficient in restoring vision.

Lensectomy should be considered in individuals with cataracts, those in whom patching does not result in improvement, those in whom the lens edge is in the middle of the pupil, and those with large degrees of astigmatism [Anteby et al 2003, Wu-Chen et al 2005].

Following lens removal, improvement of visual acuity has been observed even in individuals older than age seven years [Speedwell & Russell-Eggitt 1995].

Treatment with lensectomy must be weighed against the problems of aphakia correction in children (particularly in individuals with unilateral involvement), loss of accommodation, and the risk for secondary glaucoma and retinal detachment. All surgical procedures should therefore be planned individually by an experienced ophthalmic surgeon.

Sphincterotomy (widening of the pupil by incision of the iris at the pupillary margin) can benefit individuals with small and highly displaced pupils.

Increased intraocular pressure can in most cases be controlled by topical anti-glaucomatous medication.

It is not clear if pathogenic variants in ADAMTSL4 increase the risk for retinal detachment. However, after lensectomy or cataract surgery, retinal detachment may occur. If typical signs (e.g., floaters, lightning, a diminished visual field) appear, evaluation by an ophthalmologist should be sought as soon as possible. Treatment of retinal detachment is by standard techniques using vitrectomy and scleral buckling if necessary. It is important to examine the fellow eye for retinal degeneration.

Surveillance

Assessment of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure one to three times per year: adults who are stable may be examined yearly, whereas children require more frequent examinations. Ultrasonography may be necessary to evaluate for retinal detachment if the view of the fundus is limited

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Care must be taken during contact sports to avoid blunt trauma to the eye and head. Affected individuals should not participate in activities like boxing and other martial arts.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs of a proband with an ADAMTSL4-related eye disorder should undergo complete ophthalmologic evaluation (determination of visual acuity, measurement of intraocular pressure, slit lamp examination, and ophthalmoscopy) to allow early diagnosis and treatment of findings, primarily to prevent amblyopia.

If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, molecular genetic testing is likely to be more helpful that clinical examination in clarifying the genetic status of at-risk sibs, given the wide phenotypic variability even within the same family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADCY5-related dyskinesia, the following are recommended:

Neurologic consultation with particular attention to documenting the findings on neurologic examination, and response or lack of response to medications

Consideration of cardiac evaluation, as cardiomyopathy may be a manifestation of ADCY5-related dyskinesia [Chen et al 2011]

Social services consultation (depending on the severity of the paroxysms), as disease severity may qualify some patients for disability or social security benefits

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Medication has been variably effective in suppressing debilitating symptoms. Treatment trials should be determined by the individual’s physician, taking into account potential risk/benefit, other medical conditions, allergies, and potential drug-drug interactions. Response to medication is difficult to evaluate in an individual because some patients have long periods (weeks) of remission of the dyskinesia.

Acetazolamide, which induces a mild alkalosis, has been shown previously to improve the dyskinesia [Chen et al 2015]. In one individual 15 mg/kg/day completely alleviated episodes of dyskinesia for an extended, but non-sustained, period of time [Fernandez et al 2001].

Propanolol, which has suppressed dyskinesia in other disorders (including essential tremor, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, and episodic ataxia type 1), has had variable success in ADCY5-related dyskinesia.

Levetiracetam, an anti-convulsant, helped decrease the severity of adventitious movements in one patient [T Bird, personal observation; J Friedman, personal observation].

Tetrabenazine, which has been used as a symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, resulted in subjective symptom improvement in two patients [Mencacci et al 2015; FM Hisama, personal observation].

Benzodiazepines, which have been used in symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, have been associated with variable improvement in ADCY5-related dyskinesia [J Friedman, personal observation].

Trihexylphenidyl, an antimuscarinic compound used in treating Parkinson disease, was observed to decrease the intensity and frequency of episodes of dyskinesia in one patient, when paired with tetrabenazine [Mencacci et al 2015].

Of note, little to no improvement was observed after administration of primidone, chlordiazepoxide, amitriptyline, trifluoperazine, trihexylphenidyl, vitamin C, coenzyme Q10, carbamazepine, and valproic acid.

Stress management. The only exacerbating factor that is observed consistently across affected individuals is the presence of anxiety and exposure to typical life stressors. Further investigation is needed to determine whether stress management techniques or limitation of stressful activities may reduce the number and frequency of movements.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical and occupational therapy may assist patients in maintaining mobility and function.

Surveillance

There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are reevaluated in neurology clinics and/ or clinical genetics clinics annually (or more frequently if medication trials are undertaken) to document disease progression and determine if other interventions are necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

All patients have reported that anxiety and stress worsen disease manifestations.

Less commonly reported triggers include intercurrent illness, prolonged inactivity, fatigue, and excitement.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Potential teratogenic effects of medications given for treatment of ADCY5-related dyskinesia should be discussed with affected women of childbearing age, ideally prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE):

In addition to the evaluation for epilepsy, cognitive and behavioral assessment to help determine the extent of disease

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In about 70% of individuals with ADNFLE, carbamazepine is associated with remission of seizures, often with relatively low doses. However, individuals with ADNFLE associated with the CHRNA4 pathogenic variant p.Ser284Leu respond only partially to carbamazepine and are more responsive to zonisamide [Provini et al 1999, Ito et al 2000, Combi et al 2004].

Exposure to quinidine significantly reduces gain of function for KCNT1 pathogenic variants implicated in ADNFLE and EIMFS [Milligan et al 2014]. Clinical treatment with quinidine was reported in a child with EIMFS [Bearden et al 2014], and correlated with a marked reduction in seizure frequency. In the future, it may be also possible to treat KCNT1-related ADNFLE with quinidine.

Resistance to AEDs occurs in about 30% of affected individuals. Intrafamilial variation in pharmaco-responsiveness occurs; therefore, all appropriate AEDs should be tried.

Vagal nerve stimulation may be considered for individuals with resistance to AEDs [Carreño et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daytime complaints such as morning tiredness and somnolence may be caused by sleep fragmentation due to seizure-related arousals. To prevent this, it is important to provide diagnosis and treatment for ADNFLE appropriately.

Surveillance

Serial evaluation of EEGs to monitor disease progression is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a medical history to seek evidence of affected status should be elicited from relatives at risk.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADNP-related intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders (ADNP-related ID/ASD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to assess hypotonia, joint laxity, and obesity

Anamnestic interview focusing on sleep problems and feeding difficulties

Neurologic evaluation, including EEG if seizures are suspected, and brain MRI to detect brain abnormalities (if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation)

In infants and children, comprehensive developmental assessment including gross and fine motor skills and speech and language; evaluation for autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability

Psychiatric evaluation if behavioral problems are present

Ophthalmologic examination and vision assessment, including electrophysiologic and visual perception examination to detect cortical visual impairment

Ultrasound of the heart to evaluate for cardiac anomalies

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic; no specific therapy is available. Routine medical care by a pediatrician or primary care physician is recommended:

Speech, occupational, and physical therapy

Specialized learning programs depending on individual needs

Treatment of any neuropsychiatric features including sleep disorders, behavioral problems, and/or seizures

Nutritional support if necessary

Routine treatment of cardiac and ophthalmologic findings

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Administration of NAP, a neuroprotective octapeptide (NAPVSPIQ), has been reported to ameliorate some of the cognitive abnormalities observed in a knockout mouse model [Bassan et al 1999, Vulih-Shultzman et al 2007]. It restores learning and memory and reduces neurodegeneration in Adnp+/− mice. The drug name for NAP is davunetide, a candidate for treatment of multiple selected neurologic disorders. Intranasal and intravenous formulations of the drug have been shown to cross the blood-brain barrier. Phase II and Phase III clinical trials showed good tolerance without significant side effects. Although it is not known whether the disease is the result of a loss of function of ADNP and although the mouse model has not been evaluated for autistic traits, the observations raise hope for treatment in patients with an ADNP-related ID/ASD [Vandeweyer et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TP63 related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics to aid in diagnosis, coordination of health surveillance, and genetic testing and counseling

Dermatology to evaluate and treat related skin issues, especially erosions

Gastroenterology for growth and nutrition issues

Dietary if there are concerns about failure to thrive

Ophthalmology for evaluation and treatment of ocular issues including ankyloblepharon, lacrimal duct atresia/obstruction, dry eyes and blepharitis

Plastic surgery to evaluate and repair cleft lip and palate or breast/nipple assymetry

Otolaryngology for evaluation and treatment of recurrent otitis media and speech issues

Audiology to evaluate for hearing loss

Dental to evaluate and address issues of hypodontia

Prosthodontics to address potential need for dental implants

Psychology/psychiatry to address developmental issues and provide support for the individual and family by assisting in dealing with the impact of the phenotype on a normal life

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach is recommended including regular evaluations with specialists in clinical genetics, dermatology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, audiology, dentistry and prosthodontics, plastic surgery, gastroenterology, and psychiatry.

Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum. These strands of tissue between the upper and lower eyelids are often small and autolyse shortly after birth; larger ones may require surgical separation by an ophthalmologist.

Ectodermal defects

Wigs can be used, if desired, for the sparse hair and alopecia.

There are no known therapies for the nail or skin pigment changes.

Dentures should be considered in early childhood and the possibility of dental implants should be considered in the teens or early adult years.

Sweating is not severely impaired and does not require special care.

Skin erosions. The skin erosions are difficult to treat and prone to excessive ineffective granulation response; they are at increased risk for secondary infection and are not responsive to most standard wound care regimens or antibiotic therapy [Julapalli et al 2009]. Skin erosions should be treated with gentle wound care and periodic, dilute bleach soaks (Dakins solution) to prevent secondary infection.

Occlusive dressings should not be used as they tend to stimulate granulation tissue.

Secondary infections should be treated with topical or oral antibiotics or antifungal agents when appropriate. Empiric treatment (i.e., use of antibiotic without culture-proven infection) is not recommended.

Cleft lip/palate. Clefting should be addressed as soon as developmentally possible. Typical feeding issues associated with clefting are seen and include: poor suck, difficulty coordinating feeding and breathing, and excessive air intake. A nurse, nutritionist, pediatrician, speech therapist, or other specialist familiar with the management of feeding issues in children with cleft lip/palate should be consulted. Early referral to a craniofacial surgeon for planning for surgical cleft repair is indicated.

Other

Weight should be followed closely with assessment for signs of failure to thrive. If optimization of oral caloric intake fails to improve growth, gastrostomy tube placement may be considered.

Myringotomy is indicated as needed for conductive hearing loss resulting from chronic otitis media.

Significant breast asymmetry in women may be corrected through plastic surgery.

Psychological impact of the phenotypic features of the disorder on patient and family should also be considered and referrals made to psychiatry or psychology as appropriate.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infants with severe skin erosions should be monitored and treated aggressively for dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, malnutrition, and secondary infection and sepsis.

Surveillance

Regular evaluation with a multidisciplinary team is recommended for evaluation and prompt treatment of disease manifestations. In particular:

Dental findings over time may warrant use of dental prosthetics.

Periodic hearing evaluations should be performed as conductive hearing loss is common.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged exposure to sunlight should be avoided to prevent sunburn of hypopigmented areas and to prevent increasing the contrast between the patchy areas of hyper- and hypopigmentation seen in AEC syndrome. Reduced sun exposure can minimize freckling of skin in individuals with ADULT syndrome.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the TP63 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

No specific trials for therapies are being conducted at this time. An investigational product developed to activate mutated p53 in cancer therapy has been tested for its ability to activate mutated p63 protein carrying EEC3-associated amino acid substitutions. This compound, denoted APR-246/PRIMA-1MET, showed a beneficial effect on skin differentiation [Shalom-Feuerstein et al 2013, Shen et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasias (NFED) (www.nfed.org) is an excellent resource for affected individuals, their families, and clinicians who care for these individuals.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Assessment of feeding and nutritional status

Ophthalmologic examination

EEG to evaluate for seizures, if suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Chest physiotherapy and vigorous treatment of respiratory complications

Attention to diet and method of feeding to assure adequate caloric intake

Management of seizures using standard protocols

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring for signs of diabetes insipidus in the neonatal period

Assessment for glaucoma at least for the first few years of life

Monitoring of the spine for the development of scoliosis

Monitoring for signs of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and hypothyroidism

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Research into the role of immunosuppressive agents in the treatment of AGS is ongoing [Crow & Rehwinkel 2009, Crow et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Corticosteroids can lower the CSF concentration of interferon [PG Barth 2003, personal communication]; the clinical benefit of such treatment is unproven.

Note: The description of intracranial large-vessel disease in association with biallelic pathogenic variants in SAMHD1 raises important questions about the management of such individuals. The occlusive and aneurysmal arteriopathies described could be amenable to treatment (revascularization for the former and coiling or clipping for the latter). Moreover, the likely inflammatory basis of the arteriopathy suggests that immunosuppression may play a role in management. A key question is whether inflammatory disease is active at the time of clinical presentation, or whether the arterial abnormalities observed represent the end result of a now-quiescent inflammatory process.

Given the lack of evidence, no definitive statement about these issues can be made at present. However, the potential for intervention exists, and it could be argued that some individuals (e.g., those with lesser psychomotor problems) warrant such intervention and should be actively screened for intracranial arteriopathy, if only by close inspection of the vasculature at the base of the brain seen on routine MRI. Chilblains were present in all the affected individuals described by Ramesh et al [2010], and it may be that their presence predicts an increased risk for intracranial vasculopathy.To assess the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Serum and urine concentrations of electrolytes

Assessment of renal function, including measurement of serum BUN and creatinine

Serum concentration of glucose, cortisol and ACTH

Assessment of arterial blood gases in those who are unwell

Measurement of aldosterone and plasma renin activity

Note: Typically, affected individuals who are in shock have hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, acidosis, very elevated serum concentration of ACTH, and increased urinary excretion of sodium. Some samples may need careful handling (e.g., ACTH) and results may only be available some days later. Therefore, it is important to document the child’s clinical condition at the time of sample collection, the source of the sample (e.g., venous, arterial), and the quality of the sample (e.g., hemolyzed) to help with future interpretation of the results.

Treatment of Manifestations

Adrenal Insufficiency

Acute episodes. Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency are usually treated in an intensive care unit with close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Correction of hyperkalemia may be needed. Individuals are treated by the IV administration of saline, glucose, and hydrocortisone (e.g., Solu-Cortef®). If the serum concentration of electrolytes does not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of Solu-Cortef® is increased. Adequate sodium must be provided.

Chronic treatment. Once the initial acute episode has been treated, affected individuals are started on replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, and oral supplements of sodium chloride (NaCl) in younger children.

Steroid doses need to be adjusted to allow normal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

Maintenance hormone treatment is best managed in growing children by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Treatment during stress. Steroid dosage must be increased during periods of stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgery, trauma); glucose and sodium may be needed.

Local hospitals should provide parents with a plan for emergency treatment and instruction regarding when extra oral or injected hydrocortisone is needed. Parents should have access to rapid medical advice; guidelines for hospital admission should be clear.

Children should carry appropriate documentation indicating that they are steroid deficient. Death from acute adrenal insufficiency in individuals known to have X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita may still occur if steroid replacement therapy is not adequate, particularly during times of stress.

Steroid replacement therapy is monitored clinically and hormonally by an endocrinologist. ACTH levels should normalize when replacement therapy is adequate. A sudden rise in ACTH despite steroid treatment has revealed the presence of a pituitary adenoma in one case [De Menis et al 2005].

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

If there is evidence of HH, treatment with increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty may be necessary and should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Surveillance

If puberty has not started by age 14 years, serum concentrations of LH and FSH (basal concentration and GnRH-stimulated concentration), testosterone, and inhibin B are monitored to evaluate for the possibility of HH.

Some children and parents prefer the induction of puberty at the same time as the affected boy’s peer-group; this should not be delayed unnecessarily.

If puberty does start spontaneously it is likely to arrest; thus, careful monitoring of testosterone levels is needed.

Psychological counseling should be available for families and young people if needed to discuss the issues related to hormone replacement therapy and future fertility.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Unnecessary physiologic stress is to be avoided, if possible, and any surgical procedures should be carefully planned. If physiologic stress is unavoidable (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, trauma), the dosage of steroids should be increased two- to threefold following local guidance for sickness/emergencies.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the genetic status of an at-risk male relative has not been established during pregnancy, genetic testing should be performed as soon as possible after birth to clarify genetic status so that glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid hormone replacement therapy can be initiated without delay and adrenal crises can be avoided. Biochemical testing after birth should be undertaken if the genetic status of an at-risk male is unknown and the child should be closely monitored in the first few days of life. A salt-losing crisis usually takes at least seven days to manifest, during which the child is continuing to lose sodium. Initial biochemical tests of electrolytes and basal cortisol may be within normal ranges but may gradually change. The aim is to avoid a clinical salt-losing crisis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.The following are appropriate:

Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis and segmentation abnormalities of the vertebrae and ribs

Dermatologic evaluation to look for vascular malformations and pigmentary lesions at risk for malignant transformation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of infantile spasms and medically refractory epilepsy is essential for long-term management of seizures.

Individuals with Aicardi syndrome usually require multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for adequate seizure control. Improved outcome with vigabatrin [Chau et al 2004] and vagus nerve stimulators has been reported; however, these treatments do not work for all [Van den Veyver & Sutton, unpublished observation].

Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy should begin at diagnosis to ensure the best functionality and developmental outcome possible. An individualized therapy plan should be developed and implemented by the therapists and caregivers.

Resection of large choroid plexus papillomas has been reported for management of hydrocephalus [Taggard & Menezes 2000]. Improvement of seizures was also noted in the individual reported. Whether this improvement was related to resolution of the hydrocephalus or whether the choroid plexus papillomas may have been epileptogenic is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Spasticity can result in contractures or limited range of motion affecting not only mobility but hygiene care as well. Patients benefit from evaluation by physicians specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation as well as physical, occupational, and speech therapists.

Costovertebral defects can lead to scoliosis. Appropriate musculoskeletal support and treatment for prevention of scoliosis-related complications is indicated.

Constipation and gastrointestinal problems are frequent and require ongoing management at regular physician visits.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine dermatologic evaluation to monitor for vascular and other malignancies

Monitoring for and treatment of gastrointestinal complications at regular physician visits

Regular monitoring of the spine to assess the degree of scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to genetic counseling of relatives at risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) the following evaluations are recommended:

Full clinical history and examination, including neurologic evaluation if symptomatic

Review of medications to assess risk versus benefit (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid)

Quantitation of urine porphobilinogen excretion to establish a baseline for comparison with future measurements taken during symptoms suggestive of active porphyria

Referral to a porphyria specialist for more detailed clinical advice on AIP

Referral to clinical genetics for counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute Neurovisceral Attack

Immediate treatment of an acute neurovisceral attack does not require confirmation of the specific type of acute porphyria.

Clinical assessment should include a full neurologic evaluation.

In persons known to have AIP consider other causes of abdominal pain in addition to porphyria.

Investigations should include:

Full blood count (FBC);

Measurement of serum/plasma concentrations of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes;

Serum and urine osmolality;

Urine sodium concentration if hyponatremic;

Other blood tests as indicated by the patient’s condition and possible cause of the attack, e.g., CRP, blood cultures, CK, magnesium.

MRI should be considered if CNS symptoms are present.

General measures

Review all medications and discontinue any that can exacerbate acute porphyria [Elder & Hift 2001]. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Restore energy balance using an enteral route if possible. When required, intravenous fluid should contain a minimum of 5% dextrose; however, hypotonic dextrose-water solutions should be avoided because of the risk of hyponatremia.

Treat intercurrent infections and other diseases promptly.

Supportive treatment

Pain relief. Effective analgesia should be provided as soon as possible, usually in the form of parenteral opiates (morphine, diamorphine, and fentanyl are safe). Very large quantities may be required in a severe acute attack. Consider patient-controlled analgesia and support from a pain team.

Nausea and vomiting. Prochloperazine, promazine or ondansetron are considered safe.

Hypertension. Beta blockers are considered safe.

Convulsions can be terminated with intravenous diazepam, clonazepam, or magnesium sulphate.

Fluid balance and electrolytes. Dextrose saline is preferred. Severe hyponatremia should be treated with intravenous saline rather than fluid restriction [Hift & Meissner 2005].

Specific treatment

For mild acute neurovisceral attacks, a high carbohydrate intake, preferably oral and together with other supportive measures (see Acute Neurovisceral Attack), may be used for up to 48 hours. If improvement is unsatisfactory or if additional and progressive neurologic features present, intravenous administration of hemin preparations is recommended.

Intravenous human hemin is the most effective treatment for acute neurovisceral attacks. Intravenous administration of hemin preparations may be life-saving when employed early when neuronal damage is still reversible, and may help to avoid paresis or prevent its progression.

The recommended dose for hemin is 3-4 mg/kg IV, given once daily for four days. Treatment may be extended, depending on the clinical course.

Panhematin™ (Ovation Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL) is approved for treatment of acute attacks in the US. This product is supplied as a dried powder, which must be reconstituted with sterile water immediately before intravenous injection and administered over 10-15 minutes. Because the administration of Panhematin™ reconstituted with sterile water is associated with transient, mild coagulopathy, concurrent anticoagulant therapy should be avoided.

Heme arginate (Normosang Orphan Europe, Paris) is an arginine-stabilized form of human hemin available in most other countries, including Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South America. It is infused over at least 30 minutes. It has the same advantage as hemin in treating an acute neurovisceral attack, but has fewer reported side-effects [Hift & Meissner 2005, Puy et al 2010].

Note: (1) Phlebitis after intravenous injection can be minimized by reconstituting hematin in 20% human serum albumin solution and/or by using a large vein or a central catheter for infusion. Peripheral cannulas used to administer hematin should be replaced after each use. (2) An infusion set with an in-line filter is recommended to remove any undissolved particulate matter. (3) Rigorous flushing of venous catheters with boluses of saline totaling 100 mL is recommended.

Recurrent Acute Attacks

Recurrent acute attacks are best managed with support and advice from a porphyria specialist. See information and contact details of specialist porphyria centers at porphyria.eu.

Medical therapy aims to reduce the frequency and or severity of acute attacks by the following measures:

Ovulation suppression with gonadorelin analogues for patients with recurrent menstrual cycle-related acute neurovisceral attacks [Innala et al 2010]. Long acting analogues can be used to prevent ovulation and should be administered during the first few days of the menstrual cycle to minimize the early stimulation effect on hormone release which can trigger an attack. Side effects can be minimized by administering estrogen, preferably by patch. Gynecological review and bone density monitoring are recommended.

Prophylactic hemin infusion. The minimum effective infusion frequency should be employed, usually a weekly dose of hemin infused via an in-dwelling venous catheter. Problems include those associated with a venous access device (infection, blockage) and iron overload (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Other Treatments

Liver transplantation is curative and reported from several centers [Soonawalla et al 2004, Wahlin et al 2010, Dowman et al 2012]. Indications include repeated life-threatening acute attacks, failure of medical therapy, and poor quality of life [Seth et al 2007].

Combined liver and kidney transplantation, which has been successful, can be considered in those with AIP with repeated severe attacks and renal failure [Wahlin et al 2010]. Kidney transplantation has been performed for renal failure in persons with overt and latent AIP [Nunez et al 1987, Warholm & Wilczek 2003].

Cimetidine has been suggested as an alternative treatment [Rogers 1997]; however, evidence for clinical efficacy remains elusive. No recent formal study has been performed, but informal feedback from experienced clinicians at international porphyria meetings indicates that few patients have benefited from this treatment.

Other

Patients should be advised to register with an organization that provides warning jewelry in case of an accident (e.g., MedicAlert® or similar).

Patients should be advised about support available from national patient associations where available.

Good-quality information is now widely available from patient or professional organizations either in paper form or from the Internet; see Resources.

Advice on safe treatment of persons with porphyria in some specific clinical situations (e.g., epilepsy, HIV, malaria, tuberculosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) is available on the European Porphyria Network Web site and/or Porphyria South Africa Web site.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

To prevent acute attacks patients are advised on the potential triggers as follows:

Assure that adequate nutrition is provided by a normal balanced diet. Avoid unsupervised calorie restriction diets, particularly those that exclude carbohydrate completely.

Avoid drugs and chemicals known to exacerbate porphyria, particularly prescribed medication and over the counter medication. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Seek timely treatment of systemic illness or infection.

Avoid excessive alcohol consumption and smoking.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

End-stage renal disease, which is thought to result from chronic systemic arterial hypertension, may be delayed through effective blood pressure control [Andersson et al 2000b].

Because 100 mg of hemin contains 8 mg of iron, frequent administration of hemin may increase the risk for iron overload. Periodic monitoring of serum ferritin concentration and/or transferrin saturation is therefore appropriate in individuals treated repeatedly with hemin.

Surveillance

In view of the high risk for HCC in individuals with AIP in Sweden, annual hepatic imaging is offered after age 50 years. It has been shown to improve survival [Innala & Andersson 2011]. A few other countries have also initiated screening. It is not yet clear whether similar testing should be offered more widely, since the risk appears to be low in some countries [Deybach & Puy 2011, Stewart 2012]. Note: Serum α-fetoprotein measurement is not helpful.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking should be avoided.

Knowledge about the safety of many drugs and other over-the-counter preparations in acute porphyrias is incomplete; however, evidence-based guidelines for assessment of drug porphyrogenicity have been published [Thunell et al 2007, Hift et al 2011].

Searchable drug safety databases are available at the following Web sites:

The Drug Database for Acute Porphyria

The American Porphyria Foundation

Porphyria South Africa

Safe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

Welsh Medicines Information Centre - Porphyria Information Service

Unsafe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

British National Formulary (subscription required)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the HMBS pathogenic variant is known in a family, at-risk relatives can benefit from molecular genetic testing to clarify their genetic status, so that those at increased risk of developing acute attacks of AIP can be identified early and counseled about preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The majority of women with AIP have completely normal pregnancies with no clinical problems relating to the porphyria [Marsden & Rees 2010]. However, there is a small chance that pregnancy could initiate or worsen porphyria symptoms.

When a woman with AIP experiences abdominal pain, hypertension, and tachycardia during pregnancy, complications of pregnancy should be excluded before the findings are attributed to an acute attack.

Symptomatic treatment of an acute attack that occurs during pregnancy should take into account drug safety with respect to teratogenicity and precipitating/exacerbating an acute attack of porphyria.

Intravenous human hemin (both available preparations) has been used for the treatment of acute attacks in pregnancy and appears to be safe [Anderson et al 2005, Marsden & Rees 2010]. Several women in the UK and France have received regular heme arginate infusions during pregnancy without any obvious adverse effects on mother or child [Badminton & Deybach 2006].

Prolonged fasting should be avoided during labor and delivery as should the use of unsafe drugs, for example, ergometrine.

Note: In an obstetric emergency, no drug should be restricted if it is likely to be of major clinical benefit or is required in a life-threatening situation.

Stress should be minimized by providing good analgesia. Regional anesthesia, in the form of spinal or epidural anesthesia using bupivacaine, has been safely used.

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical trial of adeno-associated virus (AAV)-based gene therapy for AIP is underway in Europe (see cima.es/aipgene for details).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Alagille syndrome (ALGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a gastroenterologist, including a full set of liver function tests, clotting studies and if necessary, serum bile acids, fat-soluble vitamin levels, a hepatic ultrasound, a technitium-99m-DISIDA scintiscan, and liver biopsy

A full cardiac evaluation, including echocardiogram

AP and lateral chest radiographs to evaluate for the presence of butterfly vertebrae

An ophthalmologic examination to identify anterior chamber involvement

Renal function testing and renal ultrasound examination (especially in the newborn period)

Screening developmental evaluation, with more detailed evaluation if significant delays are identified

Measurement of growth parameters and plotting on age-appropriate growth charts

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with ALGS is often beneficial because of the multisystem involvement. Evaluation by specialists in medical genetics, gastroenterology, nephrology, nutrition, cardiology, ophthalmology, liver transplantation, and child development may be indicated, depending on the age and specific difficulties of the individual [Kamath et al 2010a].

Pruritus is considered the most severe of any pediatric liver disease. Pruritis and xanthomas have been successfully treated with choloretic agents (ursodeoxycholic acid) and other medications (cholestyramine, rifampin, naltrexone). Partial internal biliary diversion (PIBD) and ileal exclusions for individuals with Alagille syndrome have also been reported; however, while these procedures have the potential to relieve the intractable symptoms of liver disease (such as pruritis) and improve quality of life for those with ALGS, they are not thought to prevent the progression of liver disease [Emerick & Whitington 2002, Mattei et al 2006, Dingemann et al 2012, Sheflin-Findling et al 2012].

Liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease has an 80.4% five-year survival rate, and results in improved liver function and some catch-up growth in 90% of affected individuals; however, the catch-up growth seen in post-transplanted individuals with Allagille syndrome is still less than that observed in individuals with other cholestatic liver diseases [Quiros-Tejeira et al 2000, Kasahara et al 2003, Pawlowska et al 2010]. In a recent study on survival following liver transplant in several disorders, Kamath et al showed that the one-year survival rate for individuals with ALGS was 87%, compared to a 96% one-year survival rate for the control group (individuals with biliary atresia). The lower success rate of liver transplantation in ALGS is probably most influenced by the severity of any coexisting cardiac disease, renal disease, or vascular involvement [Kamath et al 2012c]. Additionally, the effects of long-term immosuppressants on the evolution of the other organ systems involved, including vasculature, skeleton, and kidneys, remain largely unknown [Englert et al 2006, Kamath et al 2010b, Shneider 2012]. Note: Since ALGS frequently presents with neonatal jaundice and can mimic biliary atresia, infants with ALGS may undergo an intraoperative cholangiogram and a Kasai procedure. However, a study by Kaye et al [2010] demonstrated that the Kasai procedure does not benefit children with ALGS and may worsen the outcome [Kaye et al 2010].

Cardiac involvement is treated in a standard manner.

Renal anomalies are treated in a standard manner.

Vascular accidents should be treated in a standard manner.

Head injuries and neurologic symptoms should be evaluated aggressively.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities rarely need intervention.

Vertebral anomalies are rarely symptomatic.

Note: Elisofon et al [2010] showed that health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in children with Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is impaired and that cardiac catheterization or surgery, mental health diagnoses, and poor sleep are associated with lower scores in children with ALGS [Elisofon et al 2010]. While surgeries and mental health diagnoses may be out of the control of physicians and care-givers, poor sleep in children with ALGS is often a result of severe pruritus, which can be improved with choloretic agents as discussed above.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Optimization of nutrition to maximize growth and development

Close monitoring of plasma concentration of fat-soluble vitamins, nutritional optimization, and vitamin replacement therapy to maximize growth potential and prevent some of the developmental delay documented in early studies

For those with splenomegaly or with known chronic liver disease, use of a spleen guard during activities

Surveillance

Growth should be monitored using standard growth charts so that nutritional intake can be adjusted to need.

Regular monitoring by cardiology, gastroenterology, and a nutritionist is appropriate.

At this time, the efficacy of presymptomatic screening for vascular anomalies in individuals with ALGS has not been formally evaluated. The possibility of a vascular accident should be considered in any symptomatic individual and MRI, magnetic resonance angiography, and/or angiography to identify aneurysms, dissections, or bleeds should be pursued aggressively as warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contact sports should be avoided by all individuals, especially those with chronic liver disease, splenomegaly, and vascular involvement.

Individuals with liver disease should avoid alcohol consumption.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Given the medical problems of this condition and their variability, it is appropriate to assess first-degree relatives for manifestations of the disorder.

If a JAG1 or NOTCH2 pathogenic variant has been identified in a proband, at-risk relatives can be evaluated using genetic testing.

If no JAG1 or NOTCH2 pathogenic variant has been identified, at-risk relatives can be assessed with measurement of liver enzymes, cardiac examination, eye examination, skeletal x-rays, and evaluation of facial features.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Alexander disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic assessment

Formal, age-appropriate developmental assessment

Assessment of feeding/eating, digestive problems (including constipation and gastroesophageal reflux), and nutrition using history, growth measurements, and, if needed, gastrointestinal investigations

Video/EEG monitoring to obtain definitive information about the occurrence of seizures and the need for antiepileptic drugs

Psychological assessment for older patients to determine their awareness and understanding of the disease and its consequences

Examination for possible scoliosis

Assessment of family and social structure to determine availability of adequate support system

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific therapy is currently available for Alexander disease.

Management is supportive and includes attention to general care, nutritional requirements, antibiotic treatment for intercurrent infection, and antiepileptic drugs (AED) for seizure control.

Learning disabilities and other cognitive impairments are addressed as in individuals who do not have Alexander disease.

Physical and occupational therapy are indicated when assessment reveals the need for adaptive measures to maximize strength and motor capabilities.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Swallow studies and nutritional intervention (i.e., gastrostomy tube placement) for those with severe feeding difficulties

Speech assessments to identify problems amenable to interventions such as assistive communication devices

Early recognition of abnormal tone and spinal problems (i.e., scoliosis) in order to prevent long-term complications

Surveillance

Depending on age, affected individuals should be examined at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, orthopedic and neurologic status, gastrointestinal function, strength and mobility, communication skills, and psychological complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility, the following evaluations are recommended based on the author’s personal experience as no guidelines have been established for initial evaluation of individuals diagnosed with a germline ALK pathogenic variant.

Physical examination to assess for clinical manifestations of neuroblastic tumors such as an abdominal mass, Horner syndrome, and/ or cutaneous lesions

Radiograph of the chest radiograph and ultrasound examination of the abdomen, the most common sites for neuroblastic tumor development

Measurement of urine cathecholamines, as homovanillic acid and vanillylmendelic acid may be elevated in the presence of a neuroblastic tumor

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Children who develop neuroblastic tumors (neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastoma, or ganglioneuroma) should be evaluated and treated by a pediatric oncologist at a pediatric cancer center.

Neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma. The treatment for individuals with a neuroblastic tumor who have a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant is the same standard risk-stratified therapy used to treat all neuroblastic tumors. Clinical trials are ongoing to study the efficacy of ALK-targeted therapy in the setting of relapsed and refractory neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma (see Therapies Under Investigation).

The management guidelines for neuroblastoma or ganglioneuroblastoma are complex [Irwin & Park 2015]

Depending on the age of the affected individual, stage of the tumor, and biologic characteristics of the tumor, treatment may involve observation or surgical resection.

Tumors with risk for metastatic spread or those that have already metastasized require chemotherapy and sometimes radiation therapy, stem cell transplantation, and immunotherapy.

Ganglioneuromas are typically removed by surgical resection and require no further therapy.

Surveillance

Asymptomatic children at risk. Large-scale, population-based studies in Japan, Europe, Canada, and the US that screened healthy infants with urinary catecholamines to identify neuroblastomas found no improvement in survival in children diagnosed before symptoms occurred [Schilling et al 2002, Woods et al 2002].

Because no data are available as yet on the effect of screening in families with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant and because tumor surveillance at the population level does not improve neuroblastoma outcome, there is currently no consensus on the proper frequency or type of tumor surveillance for individuals with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant. In the absence of published guidelines, the noninvasive measures of physical examination, abdominal ultrasound examination, and measurement of urine catecholamine metabolite levels have been performed on the following schedule; less frequent intervals may also be appropriate.

Every 1-2 months in infants age ≤12 months

Every 3-4 months in children age ≤10 years

After successful treatment of a neuroblastic tumor, screening for neuroblastic tumors should continue since children with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility are at risk of developing multiple primary tumors. Although no consensus exists, some recommend screening until age six years [Bourdeaut et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

There is currently no evidence that individuals with ALK-related neuroblastoma tumor susceptibility have increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation therapy; thus, medical and surgical management of tumors should be the same as for the general population.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to test relatives at risk* for the ALK pathogenic variant found in the proband to identify those at high risk for neuroblastoma, for whom early detection of neuroblastoma and initiation of therapy would likely improve quality of life and may affect outcome (if therapy is started prior to end organ damage).

*Sibs who are younger than age ten years at the time of diagnosis of the proband, as well as sibs born subsequently.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Oral preparations of small molecule inhibitors targeting the ALK tyrosine kinase domain (e.g., crizotinib, ceritinib) have shown efficacy and minimal toxicity in children with ALK translocated tumors other than neuroblastoma.

Of affected individuals with refractory/relapsed neuroblastoma, response has only been identified in those with tumors resulting from germline ALK pathogenic variants, including a complete response in at least one individual [Mossé et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alkaptonuria, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete history and physical examination with particular attention to range of motion in the spine and large joints

Physical medicine and rehabilitation evaluation if limited range of motion or joint pain occurs

Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram in individuals older than age 40 years

Renal ultrasound examination or helical abdominal CT to evaluate for the presence of renal calculi

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Joint pain is substantial in individuals with alkaptonuria, and close attention to pain control is necessary. Optimal pain management should be tailored to the individual with close follow up and long-term management.

Physical and occupational therapy are important to promote optimal muscle strength and flexibility.

Knee, hip, and shoulder replacement surgeries are options for managing significant arthritis. In general, the goal of joint replacement is pain relief rather than increased range of motion. Joint replacement in individuals with alkaptonuria is associated with prosthetic survival comparable to that found in individuals with osteoarthritis [Spencer et al 2004].

Aortic stenosis may necessitate valve replacement.

Treatment of prostate stones and renal stones may include surgical intervention.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Although several therapeutic modalities have been investigated, no preventive or curative treatment is available. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Maintaining joint range of motion through moderate non-weight-bearing exercise such as swimming may have beneficial effects.

Younger individuals with alkaptonuria should be directed toward non-contact and lower-impact sports.

Surveillance

Cardiac. Surveillance for cardiac complications every one to two years is advisable after age 40 years and should include:

Echocardiography to detect aortic dilation and aortic or mitral valve calcification and stenosis;

Surveillance CT scans (according to the recommendation of a cardiologist) in affected individuals with coronary artery calcification.

Urology. Urologic complications become more prevalent after age 40 years:

Routine surveillance is not recommended, but awareness of this potential complication is advised.

Ochronotic prostate stones appear on radiography; kidney stones can be identified by ultrasonography and helical abdominal CT.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoidance of physical stress to the spine and large joints, including heavy manual labor or high-impact sports, may reduce the progression of severe arthritis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures. Those found to have alkaptonuria should be counseled to avoid high-impact and contact sports. Career considerations include avoidance of occupations involving heavy physical labor. Instruction on joint strengthening and flexibility exercises, in conjunction with appropriate physical activity, can help preserve overall joint mobility and function.

Evaluations can include:

Biochemical testing for the presence of elevated urinary homogentisic acid (HGA).

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Pharmacologic treatment of alkaptonuria with oral administration of 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-1,3-cyclohexanedione (NTBC) or nitisinone has been proposed [Anikster et al 1998]. Nitisinone is a triketone herbicide that inhibits 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, the enzyme that produces HGA. Nitisinone is approved for the treatment of tyrosinemia type I.

Nitisinone reduced urinary HGA excretion by at least 69% in two individuals, but at the expense of an elevated plasma tyrosine concentration [Phornphutkul et al 2002], resulting in photophobia. The only other known side effect is (rarely) corneal crystals. Theoretically, neurologic complications associated with tyrosinemia type III may develop.

In a pilot study, low-dose nitisinone reduced urinary HGA by up to 95% in nine individuals with alkaptonuria. In the same study, seven individuals were treated for up to 15 weeks with nitisinone while receiving normal protein intake; all had elevated plasma tyrosine concentrations. No ophthalmic, neurologic, or severe dermatologic complications were observed. Two individuals had transient elevations in liver transaminase levels that returned to normal after stopping nitisinone [Suwannarat et al 2005].

In a three-year therapeutic trial, 2 mg of nitisinone daily reduced urine and plasma HGA by 95% throughout the study duration [Introne et al 2011]. Plasma tyrosine averaged 800μM without dietary restriction. Side effects were minimal. One affected individual developed corneal crystals that required discontinuation of nitisinone, and one affected individual had elevated liver transaminases. Statistically significant improvement in hip range of motion and measurements of musculoskeletal function were not observed in the treatment group compared to the control group; however there was a positive trend showing slowing of aortic stenosis. Additional trials are currently underway to establish clinical benefit.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No therapy is proven to prevent or correct the pigmentary changes of ochronosis.

Dietary restriction of phenylalanine and tyrosine has been proposed to reduce the production of HGA, but severe restriction of these amino acids is not practical in the long term and may be dangerous.

High-dose vitamin C decreases urinary benzoquinone acetic acid, a derivative of HGA, but has no effect on HGA excretion [Wolff et al 1989]. It has been hypothesized that high-dose ascorbic acid may prevent the deposition of ochronotic pigment, although it does not alter the basic metabolic defect [Wolff et al 1989]. No credible studies have demonstrated the clinical efficacy of ascorbic acid [La Du 2001].

Oral bisphosphonate therapy has been suggested to halt the progressive bone loss; however, a prospective study of four affected individuals failed to demonstrate benefit [Aliberti et al 2007].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a POLG-related disorder, evaluation should always include measures of functional neurologic status.

In order to determine the baseline function for a given affected individual, it is reasonable to conduct the following evaluations as appropriate for the phenotypic presentation:

Electroencephalogram (EEG) and video EEG monitoring

Formal developmental assessment to provide a baseline of function as well as offer insights into the need for occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy

Brain MRI. On occasion the first neuroimaging study may be normal, but with certain phenotypes, such as AHS, changes may be seen in a relatively short amount of time.

Electrocardiogram. If a mitochondrial illness is suspected and if there is not yet genetic confirmation of a POLG disease it is reasonable to consider both electrocardiogram and echocardiogram.

Formal assessment of vision and hearing

Swallowing study, if bulbar signs are present

Nutritional assessment

Baseline pulmonary function testing

Sleep polysomnogram specifically for the purpose of evaluating for central or obstructive apnea or hypopnea that result in either pCO2 elevation or O2 desaturation

Liver function tests including fasting serum glucose concentration, ALT, and AST; serum concentrations of ammonia, glutamine and tyrosine (found in an amino acid panel), bilirubin, albumin, and cholesterol; and the coagulation factors (prothrombin time or INR). Liver ultrasound examination may assist in determining the presence of fibrosis.

Note: AST elevation, and to a lesser extent ALT elevation, may be due to muscle disease; simultaneously obtaining a serum CK level differentiates between liver and muscle involvement, although both liver and muscle disease can be seen in individuals with POLG-related disorders.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is limited to symptom management and supportive care.

Alpers-Huttenlocher Syndrome

Family education is critical. It is important to address the quality of life/intensity of treatment issues frequently and when major changes occur in disease status. Once the family has started the process of accepting the diagnosis, it is important to involve the family with options for supportive care that can be offered as the illness progresses. These will include (but are not limited to) the use of a gastrostomy feeding tube and the different levels of artificial ventilation that could include less invasive treatments such as CPAP or BiPAP, assisted nasal ventilation, and/or intubation, and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator. Involvement of palliative care services can assist the care team in these discussions, as well as in practical aspects of implementation. Although rehabilitative services are a necessary part of the treatment and care plan for these children, and rehabilitation units are often where parents of children with new gastrostomy tubes and ventilator support learn to care for their children, the global perspective of care should be palliative even if death is not imminent.

Supportive therapies. Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy is indicated to maintain neurologic function for as long as possible and to insure comfort when deterioration begins.

Gastrointestinal. A consult with a gastroenterologist regarding feeding or nutritional issues, or evidence of liver involvement may be appropriate. Surgical placement of a gastric feeding tube when appropriate can maintain nutritional status and/or prevent aspiration of oral feeding.

Hepatic. Standard treatment for liver failure may include small frequent meals or continuous feeding to compensate for defective gluconeogenesis, reduction in dietary protein to a minimum, use of non-absorbable sugars to create an osmotic diarrhea, and use of conjugating agents to treat hyperammonemia.

Because levocarnitine may have some benefit in the setting of liver failure and because of its low toxicity, some recommend its use from the time of diagnosis.

Respiratory. Tracheostomy placement and artificial ventilation may be performed, as appropriate.

Assessment of nocturnal ventilatory function can be performed for evidence of central and/or obstructive apnea using polysomnography with measurement of pCO2 and monitoring by pulse oximetry. Treatment with CPAP or BiPAP as indicated is appropriate.

Seizures. Seizure control is a goal of treatment; however, refractory epilepsy, especially epilepsia partialis continua (EPC), may be impossible to control with any treatment. In individuals with EPC, the use of high-dose anticonvulsants may control the clinical seizures, but the associated obtundation with subsequent risk of aspiration and ventilatory failure may outweigh the benefit.

Although anticonvulsant monotherapy is preferred, treatment with more than one medication often becomes necessary as the child’s seizures worsen and as multiple types of seizures occur. If high-dose anticonvulsant therapy is not effective in improving the quality of life by reducing the seizure burden, reducing the number and/or dose of medications may improve quality of life by reducing medication side-effects.

There is no evidence that newer anticonvulsants such as felbamate, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, or levetiracetam offer a better therapeutic benefit over the older medications (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone); however, the newer medications tend to be less sedating, may require less processing by the liver, and have fewer drug-drug interactions. Intravenous magnesium, used most often to treat seizures in eclampsia, has shown efficacy in one report where affected individuals with status epilepicus were refractory to other typical anticonvulsants [Visser et al 2011].

One unpublished pathway for management of seizures is to begin with lamotrigine monotherapy, and when this is no longer effective for adequate control of seizures, add lacosamide. Adding clobazam may also help when these medications are no longer effective [RP Saneto, personal communication]. With the exception of valproate (see Note), other standard anticonvulsants are reasonable to use, although medications that are heavily metabolized by the liver, such as phenytoins or the barbiturates, should be reserved until other medications fail.

Note: Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Because other anticonvulsants have also been implicated in accelerating liver deterioration, it is reasonable to monitor liver enzymes every two to four weeks after introducing any new anticonvulsant [Bicknese et al1992].

Movement disorder. In addition to electroencephalographic seizures, myoclonus and other non-epileptic movement disorders occur as part of AHS and can be as disabling as seizures. These movements should not be confused with seizures, and video EEG is often the only way to differentiate a seizure from a non-epileptic movement disorder. The use of benzodiazepines often reduces the severity of these abnormal movements and also assists in seizure management and reduction of spasticity.

Chorea and athetosis [Hakonen et al 2005] may cause pain, and treatment with muscle relaxants and pain medications, including narcotics, would be advised. Some movement disorders can be treated with dopaminergic medication such as levodopa-carbidopa or tetrabenazine: a trial of either of these medications can be considered.

In most cases, not all seizures and/or non-epileptic movements can be suppressed with medication, and a balance between the adverse effects of the medication(s) and the disability created by the seizures or movements must be accepted by both the family and physician. Often a modest reduction in seizure control is offset by an improved level of alertness, although the benefit may not be lasting.

Other Phenotypes

Management is supportive and involves conventional approaches such as physiotherapy, speech therapy, and seizure management.

Gastrostomy may be required to provide adequate nutrition.

Surgery for ptosis may provide symptomatic relief for some.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For individuals with any of the POLG-related phenotypes, dose reduction in medications metabolized by hepatic enzymes may be necessary to avoid toxicity.

Reports suggest that CSF folate may be deficient in disorders that lead to mtDNA depletion [Hasselmann et al 2010]. Therefore, testing for CSF folate deficiency and offering treatment to those with deficiency is one option; the other option is empiric therapy with folinic acid (calcium leucovorin).

Surveillance

Individuals with POLG-related disorders require frequent examination and interval evaluation by a team comprising the following:

Primary care provider

Neurologist

Clinical geneticist

Hepatologist or gastroenterologist

Physiatrist

Psychiatrist

Ophthalmologist

Pulmonologist

Laboratory tests. No standard of care guidelines are available to suggest the frequency for which the following tests should be obtained. Testing should be guided by clinical features and the proposed schedule should be modified if the clinical course is stable. For those with the most severe phenotypes, the following could be considered:

Every three months. CBC; electrolytes, liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT); CK, liver function tests including: preprandial serum glucose concentration; serum concentration of ammonia, albumin, bilirubin (free and conjugated), and cholesterol; and prothrombin time or INR as a measure of coagulation factors

Annually. Urine analysis; serum concentration of lactic acid

Biannually. Plasma amino acids; urine organic acids; plasma concentration of free and total carnitine (unless treated with levocarnitine, in which case measure annually)

Imaging and diagnostic procedures

Liver ultrasound examination annually

EEG and video EEG monitoring (e.g., for suspicion of subclinical status epilepticus; presence of epilepsia partialis continua; need to determine if events are seizures or non-epileptic movements)

Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked responses as clinically indicated

Barium swallow study as clinically indicated

Polysomnogram with CPAP titration as part of an evaluation of subacute mental status changes or every two to three years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided because of the risk of precipitating and/or accelerating liver disease [Bicknese et al 1992, Saneto et al 2010].

As with some other mitochondrial diseases, physical stressors such as infection, fever, dehydration, and anorexia can result in a sudden deterioration and should be avoided as much as possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Liver transplantation is not advised in children with AHS because transplanting the liver does not alter the rapid progression of the brain disease [Kelly 2000].

However, liver transplantation in adults who have an acceptable quality of life may be of benefit.

In one report, one of two individuals undergoing liver transplantation survived [Tzoulis et al 2006].

In another report, a woman underwent liver transplantation at age 19 years, eight years after experiencing fulminant hepatic failure following onset of valproate therapy. Molecular genetic testing seven years after her liver transplantation confirmed the diagnosis of a POLG-related disorder; her phenotype fit best with SANDO [Wong et al 2008]. As of late 2012 (15 years after liver transplantation), she was alive and living semi-independently, albeit with progressive central nervous system dysfunction, specifically failing memory with increasing chorea and hemiballismus.

The use of other treatments for refractory epilepsy, such as corticotropin or prednisone, ketogenic diet, and intravenous IgG, are unproven in the treatment of AHS.

Vitamin and cofactor therapy with the intent to fortify mitochondrial function may be offered. There have not been formal studies of the use of these vitamins and cofactors in AHS or other POLG-related disorders [Parikh et al 2009].

The use of folinic acid should be strongly considered (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

The use of levo-arginine has been reported helpful in reducing the frequency and severity of the strokes associated with MELAS, and can be considered for use in persons with POLG-related disorders, especially if deficiency in the plasma or CSF arginine concentration is confirmed.

Levocarnitine, creatine monohydrate, coenzyme Q10, B vitamins, and antioxidants such as alpha lipoic acid, vitamin E, and vitamin C have been used as mitochondrial supplements. Use of all in POLG-related disorders is reasonable based on limited published evidence and their general lack of toxicity [Gold & Cohen 2001, Rodriguez et al 2007, Horvath et al 2008].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), the following evaluations of lung, liver, skin, and vasculature are recommended:

Lungs

Pulmonary function tests, including spirometry (with post-bronchodilator testing), lung volumes, diffusing capacity, and measures of oxygenation

Chest CT, which is more sensitive for detecting emphysema than pulmonary function tests [Stolk et al 2001], as part of the initial evaluation by some clinicians

Liver. Liver biopsy for light microscopy and histochemistry when definition of the precise nature and extent of liver disease is clinically indicated [Nelson et al 2012]

Skin. A detailed history and physical examination to assess for panniculitis

Treatment of Manifestations

Lung Disease

Patients with obstructive lung disease should receive standard therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which may include bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, pulmonary rehabilitation, supplemental oxygen, and vaccinations (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal).

Specific therapy for AATD-related lung disease, called augmentation therapy, is the periodic intravenous infusion of pooled human serum alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT). Concordant observational studies show that AAT augmentation therapy can slow the rate of FEV1 decline among individuals with AATD-related emphysema [Seersholm et al 1997, AADRSG 1998, Wencker et al 1998, Tonelli et al 2009].

Two placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials [Dirksen et al 1999, Dirksen et al 2009] have shown trends toward preservation of lung density as determined by chest CT in treated individuals vs. controls.

Results from a third placebo-controlled randomized, clinical trial are pending; however, preliminary findings are consistent with slowing of progression of emphysema [Chapman et al 2013].

Guidelines available from the American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society [2003] and from the Canadian Thoracic Society [Marciniuk et al 2012]:

Recommend intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with established emphysema. Of note, the greatest benefit evident is observed in individuals with moderate degrees of airflow obstruction (e.g., FEV1 35%-60% predicted).

Do not recommend prophylactic treatment with intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with severe AATD but no demonstrable emphysema.

In addition, the Canadian Thoracic Society guidelines specify that AAT augmentation therapy should be offered to individuals with AATD and evidence of emphysema only when they have stopped smoking and have demonstrated accelerated loss of lung function despite optimal therapy for COPD.

AATD-related lung disease can be modified in asymptomatic individuals by lifestyle changes, including avoidance of smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. It is suspected that regular exercise and good nutrition help maintain lung health.

Approximately 8% of lung transplants in the US are performed in individuals with COPD related to AATD. Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for individuals with end-stage lung disease (i.e., FEV1 <30%) and severe functional impairment despite optimal therapy [Seersholm et al 1994, Trulock 1998]. Some evidence suggests that among comparably affected individuals with AATD, those who receive a lung transplant survive longer (median survival of 11 years in transplant recipients compared to 5 years in those who do not receive a transplant) [Tanash et al 2011].

Note: Though effective in specific subsets of patients with AAT-replete COPD [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003], lung volume reduction surgery confers smaller and shorter-lived improvements in lung function in patients with AATD, and so is not generally recommended [Stoller et al 2007].

Liver Disease

Vitamin E therapy improves liver function in infants with the PI*MZ genotype and in children with cholestasis [Sokol et al 1986, Pittschieler 1991], and could be predicted to help prevent oxidative damage to the lungs. Nonetheless, firm evidence that antioxidant therapy (like Vitamin E) is beneficial in AATD is lacking.

Liver transplantation, the definitive surgical treatment for advanced liver disease, can restore serum AAT levels to normal because a liver from a donor with a PI*MM genotype produces qualitatively and quantitatively normal AAT [Francavilla et al 2000]. Serial lung function measurements following liver transplantation have been studied in a small number of patients to date (N = 17) with a highly variable course following liver transplant [Carey et al 2013]. Overall, 65% of patients experienced a decline in FEV1 post-liver transplant with the mean decline being modest over an average of 49.2 months post-liver transplant and not achieving statistical significance.

The risk for childhood-onset liver disease in infants with the PI*ZZ genotype who are breast-fed during the first month of life was reported to be reduced; however, breast-feeding does not confer absolute protection against the development of severe liver disease [Sveger 1985].

Other

Panniculitis. The often painful nodular lesions of panniculitis may resolve spontaneously or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy [Yesudian et al 2004]; however, when panniculitis is refractory to conventional treatment, it has been shown (anecdotally) to respond to intravenous AAT augmentation therapy in doses higher than the conventional dose of 60 mg/kg [Stoller & Piliang 2008]. Of note, it is presumed that the panniculitis improves because AAT augmentation therapy restores the proteolytic screen in the skin, thereby lessening inflammation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To lessen the progression of lung disease, the following are recommended:

Complete cessation of smoking

Avoidance of dusty occupational exposures

Yearly vaccination against influenza and pneumococcus

To lessen the risk of liver disease, the following are recommended:

Minimal consumption of alcohol [Kershaw & Guidot 2008]

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B

Surveillance

Patients with severe AATD should undergo pulmonary function tests (including spirometry with bronchodilators and diffusing capacity measurements) every six to 12 months [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

All individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype (including those who did not manifest liver disease in childhood) should undergo periodic evaluation of liver function [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

While current guidelines from the American Thoracic Society recommend regular follow up of liver function tests in adults with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003], those tests may not reliably detect liver disease in these individuals [Clark et al 2012]. For instance, various liver function tests were not significantly different in persons with AATD with or without liver disease, and the sensitivity of the alanine transaminase (ALT) for alpha-1 antitrypsin-associated liver disease was only 12% [Clark et al 2012]

A combination of liver function tests, platelet count, and liver ultrasound examination may be an effective screening method to detect the presence of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis [Dawwas et al 2013].

All patients with established liver disease should have periodic (i.e., every 6-12 months) ultrasound examination of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and HCC [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003, Nelson et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Smoking (both active and passive) is a risk factor for lung disease in individuals with AATD.

Occupational exposure (including exposure to environmental pollutants used in agriculture, mineral dust, gas, and fumes) is an independent risk factor for lung function impairment in individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The ATS/ERS guidelines recommend evaluation of older and younger sibs of an individual with severe AATD (Table 2) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

The ATS/ERS guidelines also recommend testing for parents and children of individuals with severe AATD.

Extended pedigree analysis beyond first-degree relatives may be indicated in selected instances. For example, the presence of an AATD-associated condition (e.g., COPD, liver disease, panniculitis) in a more distant family member would justify extensive family testing (i.e., of family members beyond parents, sibs, and offspring).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Management of women with AATD during pregnancy should be guided by usual care principles, both for women without clinical disease and for those with liver disease. As noted, emphysema, especially in non-smokers, would not commonly be expected during the usual childbearing age range.

Therapies Under Investigation

Inhaled administration of purified AAT can restore AAT levels in the bronchoalveolar fluid. Older studies demonstrated the feasibility of inhaling pooled human plasma-derived AAT –currently the subject of ongoing study [Hubbard & Crystal 1990, Sandhaus 2004, Abusriwil & Stockley 2006].

Synthetic inhibitors of human neutrophil elastase, administered intravenously and orally, could theoretically provide protection against proteolytic lung damage. No such drug has yet been approved.

Antioxidant therapy. Vitamins A, C, and E and N-acetylcysteine have been suggested in the treatment of AATD-related emphysema. The efficacy of such treatment has not been evaluated [Sandhaus 2004].

Synthetic chaperones and polymerization could potentially prevent the intracellular polymerization of AAT implicated in causing intra-hepatocyte inclusions and liver disease. Modest improvement in liver retention and increase in plasma concentrations of AAT was suggested after administration of 4-phenyl-butyric acid (PBA) [Burrows et al 2000]. However, a human randomized trial failed to demonstrate efficacy of 4-PBA [Teckman 2004].

Biochemical data on a peptide that specifically binds to variant AAT encoded by the PI*Z allele and that inhibits polymerization are promising, but future cellular and animal studies are needed [Mahadeva et al 2002, Parfrey et al 2004].

Gene therapy is aimed at introducing a functional copy of SERPINA1 into cells to allow production of a normal AAT protein. An alternative approach is to introduce gene(s) to turn off production of the endogenous abnormal variant protein encoded by the pathogenic SERPINA1 allele. Murine studies transfecting muscle with an adeno-associated virus vector carrying a normal functional human SERPINA1 allele have been promising. Human gene therapy studies are currently under way, with evidence that this approach can sustainably increase serum AAT levels, albeit not yet to therapeutic levels (i.e., exceeding 57 mg/dL, the serum protective threshold value) [Flotte et al 2011].

Drugs to enhance autophagy (e.g., rapamycin and carbamazepine) have shown promise in enhancing serum AAT levels and diminishing liver damage. Human trials are under way; results are pending [Hidvegi et al 2010, Kaushal et al 2010, Perlmutter 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) performed for persons with advanced non-AATD emphysema can (in appropriately selected individuals) improve lung function and enhance survival [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003]. However, in AATD-associated emphysema, the physiologic improvement following LVRS is more modest and less sustained than in non-AATD COPD [Gelb et al 1999, Stoller et al 2007]. In a study of 12 individuals with AATD-associated emphysema, postoperative lung function returned to baseline in six to 12 months but showed further deterioration in 24 months [Cassina et al 1998]. Results of the National Emphysema Treatment Trial were similarly unfavorable [Stoller et al 2007]; thus, LVRS is generally not recommended for individuals with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

Transgenic/recombinant production of human AAT protein could solve the potential problems of limited supply of AAT purified from human serum and the theoretic transmission of infectious agents. However, past clinical trials of transgenic/recombinant AAT produced in sheep and goats [Casolaro et al 1987, Wright et al 1991, Ziomek 1998] were discontinued because of serious immunologic reactions in the lungs of recipients. Results from more recent studies are not currently available.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of renal function

Overt proteinuria (urine protein-creatinine ratio >0.2 or, in a child, 24-hour urine protein >4 mg/m2/hr) is an important indicator of renal disease progression in individuals with Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy. Urine protein excretion should be assessed at the time of diagnosis and at least annually thereafter.

In Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy, decreased glomerular filtration and hypertension rarely appear before overt proteinuria. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels) and blood pressure should be monitored.

Hearing evaluation. High-frequency sensorineural deafness typically becomes detectable by audiogram in late childhood (age 6-10 years) in boys with XLAS and in boys and girls with ARAS.

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Assessment of ocular status is often unnecessary if the diagnosis of Alport syndrome is established by other means. The maculopathy is asymptomatic, and anterior lenticonus is also frequently asymptomatic.

Individuals who experience acute corneal erosion should be seen by an ophthalmologist.

Cardiac evaluation. Baseline evaluation including echocardiogram for aortic dilation in males with XLAS is indicated.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013]. These recommendations encourage early detection of microalbuminuria and proteinuria through regular surveillance and early intervention aimed at suppressing proteinuria using angiotensin antagonists (click here for full text).

Renal. Hypertensive individuals should receive appropriate management.

Controlled clinical trials of therapy for Alport nephropathy have not been conducted. However, a retrospective analysis of a registry population suggested that early treatment with angiotensin blockade delays the onset of ESRD in human Alport syndrome [Gross et al 2012]. The angiotensin receptor blocker losartan has been shown to reduce proteinuria in children with Alport syndrome [Webb et al 2013]. Furthermore, angiotensin blockade has been shown to delay progression to ESRD in transgenic mice with ARAS [Gross et al 2003, Gross et al 2004]. Therefore, affected individuals are frequently treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers once proteinuria appears. This form of therapy is rarely associated with significant adverse effects. It is unknown whether the losartan therapy reduces the risk for aortic dilation in XLAS (as is being investigated for Marfan syndrome).

Renal transplantation is typically successful in individuals with Alport syndrome [Kashtan et al 1995, Byrne et al 2002]. Anti-GBM nephritis involving the renal allograft is a dramatic, but rare, complication occurring in an estimated 3% of males with Alport syndrome who have undergone transplantation [Kashtan 1999, Byrne et al 2002].

Prior to renal transplantation, males with XLAS should have a cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation [Kashtan et al 2010].

Special considerations apply to the selection of potential living related kidney donors for individuals with XLAS. The following discussion considers potential donors on the basis of gender and the presence or absence of hematuria:

Male relative without hematuria. The optimal living related donor is a male who has a normal urinalysis and is therefore unaffected.

Male relative with hematuria. A related male with hematuria probably has Alport syndrome, and cannot be a kidney donor.

Female relative without hematuria. Female relatives who have normal urinalyses are probably unaffected, although approximately 5%-10% of females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant are asymptomatic. It is rare for asymptomatic females whose children are also asymptomatic to be heterozygous. Asymptomatic females can probably donate a kidney safely, but should be informed of their risk of having affected male children to whom they will not be able to donate a kidney. Genetic status can be confirmed or excluded by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Female relative with hematuria (i.e., heterozygous female). Females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant should only be considered as potential kidney donors if no asymptomatic living donors are available.

The presence of proteinuria or sensorineural deafness is an absolute contraindication to kidney donation as these are risk factors for progression to ESRD.

Heterozygous females younger than age 40 years should not be used as donors, even in the absence of proteinuria or deafness.

Heterozygous females age 40 years or older who have normal renal function, blood pressure, and hearing and no proteinuria can be considered as donors because the risk of late progression to ESRD appears to be low in such individuals. However, the donor should be informed of the risk (albeit low) of late progression to ESRD.

Cochlear. Hearing aids should be prescribed when appropriate.

Ocular. The ocular manifestations of Alport syndrome rarely require specific ophthalmologic intervention.

Some individuals develop cataracts that interfere with vision; these should be extracted when necessary.

Diffuse leiomyomatosis. Symptomatic leiomyomas may require surgical intervention.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals who suffer recurrent corneal erosions may need to take measures (e.g., wearing goggles when riding a bicycle) to protect their corneas from minor trauma.

Exposure to loud noise should be minimized.

Surveillance

Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment and health surveillance of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013].

Individuals with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy should be followed by a nephrologist in addition to a primary care physician. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels), and blood pressure should be monitored.

Although most females with XLAS exhibit only asymptomatic microhematuria, recent data indicate a significant risk for progression to ESRD [Jais et al 2003]. For this reason, all women with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome need to be monitored regularly for the development of proteinuria and hypertension.

Children with Alport syndrome should have audiologic evaluation every one to two years beginning at age six to seven years (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview).

Periodic cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation for males with XLAS is appropriate.

Transplant recipients should be monitored for development of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate family members at risk for Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Urinalysis

Males. A single urinalysis is sufficient in a male.

Females. Several urinalyses should be performed in females before concluding that hematuria is absent.

Molecular genetic testing. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members. Molecular genetic testing is necessary to exclude heterozygosity in an at-risk female who does not have hematuria.

Relatives found to have proteinuria, hypertension, and/or a pathogenic variant should be referred to a nephrologist for further evaluation. In the absence of proteinuria or hypertension, relatives at risk should, at a minimum, have an annual urinalysis and measurement of blood pressure if molecular genetic testing is not available.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To determine the presence and extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood counts and flow cytometric immunophenotyping of lymphocytes, especially with regard to α/β-DNT cells, in combination with physical examination and imaging studies to assess lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly

If significant lymphadenopathy is present, more extensive diagnostic procedures to detect lymphoma, especially if constitutional symptoms (e.g., fever, night sweats, weight loss) are present

Measurement of autoantibodies to assess for autoimmunity

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

In the absence of curative treatment, current management is focused on the following:

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation, hypersplensim, and lymphomas

Management of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases [Madkaikar et al 2011, Rao & Oliveira 2011, Teachey 2012]

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation and hypersplenism

Manifestations of lymphoproliferation require close clinical observation, as well as serial CT and PET scans every two to three years.

Biopsy is indicated whenever there is a clinical suspicion of lymphoma.

Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs do not decrease lymphadenopathy long term in individuals with ALPS, and are generally reserved for severe complications of lymphoproliferation (e.g., airway obstruction, significant hypersplenism associated with splenomegaly) and/or autoimmune manifestations.

Experience with sirolimus suggests that it is the preferred agent in treating lymphoproliferation in a more sustained manner, including for maintenance of remission after intital treatment followed by a period of discontinued use [Teachey et al 2009, Bride et al 2016]. However, sirolimus is not without side effects.

In severe cases, more potent (lympho-depleting) agents may be required to sufficiently control lymphoproliferative manifestations. Agents include cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin (ATG), and select monoclonal antibodies such as alemtuzumab (Campath®).

Treatment of lymphoma is according to conventional protocols. The presence of defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not appear to hinder the response to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation.

Treatment of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases

Autoimmune cytopenias are typically treated by immune suppression with corticosteroids as well as corticosteroid-sparing agents, if prolonged treatment of autoimmune cytopenias is required and/or in cases of refractory cytopenias.

Recent data from a multi-institutional study suggest that sirolimus should be considered as a first-line – corticosteroid-sparing – agent [Bride et al 2016]. Sirolimus requires monitoring for drug levels and toxic side effects.

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can be used in cases when a less immunosuppressive drug (e.g., compared with sirolimus) seems sufficient, as steroids are tapered. In addition, if drug level and toxic side effects cannot be adequately monitored, MMF could be used as a first-line agent.

Individuals with severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia may benefit from IVIG in combination with corticosteroids.

Rituximab has been used successfully in the treatment of refractory cytopenias in ALPS. However, because of its immune toxicity, its use is generally avoided until other immunosuppression therapies have failed [Rao et al 2009, Rao & Oliveira 2011].

Splenectomy is reserved as an option of last resort in the treatment of life-threatening refractory cytopenias and/or severe hypersplenia because of the high risk of recurrence of cytopenias and sepsis post splenectomy in those with ALPS [Rao & Oliveira 2011, Price et al 2014]. Given the known risks associated with splenectomy, patients requiring this last-resort approach should be considered for curative bone marrow transplantation.

Individuals with isolated chronic neutropenia may improve on low-dose G-CSF [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. In addition, use of a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist should be considered for isolated immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Bone marrow (hematopoietic stem cell) transplantation (BMT/HSCT) is currently the only curative treatment for ALPS. Because of the risks associated with BMT, it has so far been performed mostly in individuals with ALPS with severe clinical phenotypes, such as those with homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in FAS, those with severe and/or refractory autoimmune cytopenias, those with lymphoma, and those who have developed complications from (often long-term) immunosuppressive therapy. It is likely, however, that individuals with undiagnosed forms of ALPS, including ALPS-FAS, have been transplanted.

Successful (reported) BMT in several individuals indicates that defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not pose a barrier to this treatment option [Benkerrou et al 1997, Sleight et al 1998, Dowdell et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vaccinations pre-splenectomy (with consideration of post-splenectomy boost vaccinations) and penicillin prophylaxis are strongly recommended for individuals who undergo splenectomy.

Surveillance

Clinical assessment, imaging, and laboratory studies outlined in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis can be used in surveillance for manifestations of lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity.

Specialized imaging studies such as combined PET and CT scanning in combination with clinical and laboratory surveillance may be helpful in detection of malignant transformation, keeping in mind that PET/CT scanning is often abnormal in ALPS, such that distinguishing between “typical” ALPS findings and a new malignancy (lymphoma) can be difficult [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. Because of this, careful consideration of imaging modalities that expose the patient to radiation is warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Splenectomy to control autoimmune cytopenias and/or massive splenomagaly is discouraged because it typically does not lead to permanent remission of autoimmunity and may be associated with an increased risk for infections. The two recent cohort studies reveal clear-cut consequences of splenectomy. In the French cohort, nine (30%) of 30 affected individuals who underwent splenectomy suffered 17 cases of severe invasive bacterial infection with four deaths after splenectomy; in the NIH cohort, 27 (41%) of 66 affected individuals suffered one or more episodes of sepsis with seven deaths. Of note: Anti-microbial prophylaxis and appropriate vaccinations did not prevent the majority of episodes of sepsis, although poor compliance was found to be a risk factor in the French cohort [Neven et al 2011, Price et al 2014].

The use of over-the-counter medications such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be discussed with a physician as some of these medications can interfere with platelet function.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on relatives at risk for ALPS-FAS, ALPS-FASLG, or ALPS-CASP10 if the pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband.

Relatives who have the family-specific pathogenic variant should:

Be advised of their increased risk for ALPS if the type and location of the ALPS-related pathogenic variant is predicted to have a high penetrance for clinical ALPS;

Undergo ALPS-specific evaluations at initial diagnosis (e.g., enumeration of α/β-DNT cells, detection of autoantibodies, IL-10/soluble FasL measurement) (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis);

Be advised that ALPS-specific evaluations or other assessments may need to be repeated at regular intervals, particularly if the family member is young and/or if new health-related issues consistent with ALPS or ALPS-related complications (e.g., lymphoma) become apparent (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In addition to the risks and benefits to a woman with ALPS associated with treatment with corticosteroids, mycophenylate mofitil, or sirolimus during pregnancy, the potential teratogenic risks of these exposures to the fetus must also be weighed.

See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with C9orf72-related amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD), the following evaluations are recommended:

General medical history with emphasis on psychiatric illness [Devenney et al 2014] and problems potentially related to FTD such as alcohol or drug abuse

Family history with attention to dementia, ALS, or psychiatric illness, which are present in many C9orf72 heterozygotes [Devenney et al 2014]

Physical and clinical neurologic examination with attention to physical disability related to motor neuron disease

Neuropsychological examination to evaluate the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance

Electromyography in case of ALS and/or lower motor signs

Assessment of need for ancillary equipment such as walker, wheelchair, and/or respiratory assistance

Discussion of advanced care planning

Treatment of Manifestations

For ALS-related treatment options refer to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Overview.

Psychosocial support and education are indicated to reduce caregiver stress and reduce the risk of caregiver burden.

Non-pharmacologic treatment options in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) include psychosocial support and education as well as environmental, behavioral, and physical interventions designed to minimize the occurrence and consequences of undesired behaviors. Caregiver and patient support groups are valuable.

Additional helpful interventions include physical, occupational and speech therapy, home safety evaluations, and the implementation of augmentative communication devices [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy are very valuable in cases involving parkinsonism and/or lower/upper motor neuron signs.

Pharmacologic treatment should be considered when non-pharmacologic treatment options have failed or when behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (as in FTLD) are dangerous or too stressful. Options include:

SSRIs. Although the reported efficacy of SSRIs in treating FTLD is based on relatively small, often uncontrolled trials, the use of SSRIs is considered first line therapy in FTLD with behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Venlafaxine. When apathy is prominent, venlafaxine may be tried for its activating properties.

Bupropion is considered when parkinsonism is present because of its dopaminergic tone [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Atypical antipsychotics may be considered in patients with severe behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (agitation, aggressiveness, psychosis) that are refractory to SSRIs. Often, atypical antipsychotics are necessary only as a temporizing measure, and can be tapered as patients become more apathetic (and thus less agitated and disinhibited) with disease progression [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Surveillance

Clinical, neurologic, and neuropsychological follow up is necessary.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorderTo establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Electrophysiologic investigations. EMG/NCV (3 extremities)

Laboratory workup. CSF analysis, muscle biopsy, 24-hour urine collection for heavy metals, blood work (including: CBC, comprehensive chemistry panel, GGT, B12, folate, RPR-syphilis, ANA8/RF, thyroid function, CK, serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), immunofixation panel, quantitative immunoglobulin, qnti-GM1, serum Lyme AB, sed rate)

Radiologic. Head, C-spine, thoracic spine, and lumbar spine MRI

Neurologic. Physical examination, mental status, cranial nerves, motor examination, sensory examination, gait, reflexes

Neuropsychologic testing (if applicable) to assess cognitive impairment

Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is palliative and many individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team including: a neurologist, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and genetic counselor.

Data suggest that individuals under the care of such a team may have a better prognosis [van den Berg et al 2004, Andersen et al 2005]. The factors influencing survival include: age, vital capacity, fatigue, body strength, spasticity, household income, and depression [Paillisse et al 2005], most of which can be managed by the appropriate specialist in the multidisciplinary team.

Riluzole is the only currently FDA-approved drug for the treatment of ALS. Its mechanism of action is thought to be glutamate inhibition. Clinical trials have shown marginal slowing of disease progression in some but not all individuals, [Riviere et al 1998]. Riluzole is associated with elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase levels in 10% to 15% of treated individuals; in rare cases it may cause bone marrow depression [Bensimon & Doble 2004].

Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning.

Pseudobulbar affect can be managed with antidepressants such as Nuedexta® (dextromethophan and quinidine).

Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management, a prognostic factor for survival, has become a focus in the clinical setting.

Medications such as baclofen and benzodiazepines can help relieve spasticity and muscle cramps; however, weakness and lethargy are common side effects. Individualized moderate-intensity endurance-type exercises for the trunk and limbs may help to reduce spasticity [Ashworth et al 2004].

Low-tech (e.g., alphabet board) and high-tech (i.e., computer-assisted) devices can aid speech and communication. The recent development of the eye movement-controlled on-screen keyboard may enable communication for individuals without any remaining limb function.

Assistive devices, such as walkers or wheelchairs, can aid mobility; and others, such as bathroom installments, hospital bed, and Hoyer lift, can aid in activities of daily living at home.

Ventilatory assistance may include use of bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP), which has played an increasing role in preserving and prolonging quality of life in persons with ALS. In 1999, the American Academy of Neurology published norms recommending the initiation of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) in individuals with a theoretic forced vital capacity (FVC) less than 50% of predicted [Miller et al 1999]. Studies show that mean survival significantly increases when NIV is initiated prior to the onset of bulbar symptoms [Farrero et al 2005]. Therefore, evaluation by a pulmonologist should be undertaken before reduction of the forced vital capacity below 50%.

Although tracheostomy and ventilatory support can extend life span, affected individuals often decline these interventions [Albert et al 1999].

The tremendous psychological and social impact of ALS on both affected individuals and caregivers needs to be continually addressed [Goldstein et al 1998]. Hospice care, typically instituted once FVC is less than 30%, contributes to the individual’s comfort in the terminal stages.

Surveillance

Specialized multidisciplinary ALS clinic evaluations are suggested every three months.

Neurologic examination to establish the extent of weakness, atrophy, gait instability, involvement of fine motor and gross motor function and swallowing with attention to choking or coughing episodes and insensible aspiration manifesting as pneumonia

Pulmonary function tests

Nutritional status

PT/OT evaluation

Speech evaluation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Patients and caregivers should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modifications for the home and at work.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Xaliproden slowed the rate of deterioration in FVC by 43% in individuals with ALS during Phase II safety and efficacy trials performed in France but did not improve functional or manual muscle testing scores [Lacomblez et al 2004]. Further investigations are needed.

Fornai et al [2008] reported a delay in disease progression in a small number of individuals with ALS taking a daily dose of lithium supplemental to riluzole. Additional research and clinical trials are needed to establish to neuroprotective effect of lithium.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Individuals with ALS commonly supplement their diets with vitamin E, vitamin C, B vitamins, selenium, zinc, coenzyme Q10, and herbal preparations such as ginseng, gingko biloba, and Maharishi Amrit Kalesh [Cameron & Rosenfeld 2002]. In a Cochrane Review, Orrell et al [2007] summarized and evaluated 21 clinical trials of antioxidant therapies in various combinations including: vitamin E, high-dose coenzyme Q10, vitamin C, selenium, beta-carotene, N-acetylcysteine, L-methionine, and selegiline. In the majority of these studies, the sample size was not adequate for statistical evaluation. Although the antioxidants were well tolerated in many of the trials, significant differences in longevity, muscle strength, or functional rating scales over time were not identified.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Alström syndrome, a complete history of disease should direct detailed physical examination and investigations. A multidisciplinary team should be established to formulate and coordinate monitoring, management, and therapeutic interventions.

Cone-rod dystrophy. Ophthalmologic evaluation, including electroretinogram and visual field testing

Obesity. Measurement of weight and height; calculation of body mass index (BMI)

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry with auditory brain stem response (ABR) and otoacoustic emissions (OAE) to detect sensorineural or conductive hearing loss; assessment of otitis media and conductive hearing loss

Dilated cardiomyopathy. A detailed cardiac history and examination, including auscultation, echocardiography and ECGs. Echocardiography is required to demonstrate ventricular dilation, fibrosis, and decreased myocardial function.

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus

Fasting plasma glucose, even in infancy

A glucose tolerance test (GTT) as early as age six years

Plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from infancy

Hyperlipidemia. A fasting lipid profile, including triglycerides

Endocrine abnormalities

Assessment of thyroid function, including plasma TSH and free T4 concentration. If hyperthyroidism is suspected, free T3 concentration should be done.

Measurement of pituitary hormones

Urologic

History to document urinary difficulties

If the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal, renal ultrasound examination to detect pelvi-calyceal dilatation and bladder ultrasound examination to measure post-voiding residual volumes

Renal disease

Baseline blood pressure; 24-hour blood pressure monitoring

Measurement of plasma BUN, creatinine, urea and electrolytes. If renal function testing is abnormal, ultrasound examination. If abnormalities, refer to a nephrologist.

Hepatic disease

Measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Liver ultrasonography to evaluate for possible hepatomegaly and portal hypertension

If clinically indicated, screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy for varices

Pulmonary disease. Detailed assessment of pulmonary function by chest radiography, combined with pulmonary function tests

Developmental assessment. Educational evaluation for intervention and IEP

Other

Gastrointestinal. If symptoms of reflux esophagitis remain severe, despite acid blockers, perform barium swallow or upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.

Skin. Note acanthosis nigricans (indication of insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus), alopecia, body hair, hirsutism on physical examination.

Orthopedic abnormalities. Note flat feet, scoliosis, barrel chest, kyphoscoliosis on physical examination.

Neurologic manifestations. Neurologic evaluation with EEG to examine for seizures. Note autistic-spectrum behavioral abnormalities, excessive startle, tactile defensiveness, unexplained joint or muscle pain, muscle dystonia, or hyporeflexia.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No therapy exists to prevent the progressive organ involvement. However, monitoring for developing problems and early intervention is essential.

Rod-cone dystrophy

Early on when photodysphoria is significant, the use of red-orange tinted prescription lenses may reduce symptoms.

Early educational planning should be based on the certainty of blindness. Instruction in the use of Braille, mobility training, adaptive living skills, and computing skills (including voice recognition and transcription software), and the use of large print reading materials while vision is still present are crucial.

Obesity. A healthful, reduced calorie diet and regular exercise, such as walking, hiking, biking, and swimming with adaptations for the blind, are recommended to control weight gain.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss

Myringotomy has been helpful in individuals with recurrent otitis media (‘glue ear’).

Hearing can be maximized with bilateral digital hearing aids.

Cochlear implantation has benefitted some patients [Florentzson et al 2010].

Cardiomyopathy. Angiotensinogen-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diuretics, digoxin, and possibly beta-blockers should be used in the treatment of cardiac failure. Cardiac transplantation has been successful in isolated cases [Goerler et al 2007].

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes should be treated as in the general population unless heart failure and/or liver dysfunction are present. The diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin resistance, but some individuals respond to a low-sugar, low-fat diet; exercise; and metformin. Glitazones are added to further reduce insulin resistance but must be avoided in the presence of active or treated heart failure. These treatments should be discontinued when the serum creatinine concentration exceeds 200 µmol/L or if cardiomyopathy is evident. Incretin analogues given subcutaneously, as in nonsyndromic type 2 diabetes, are successful in two thirds of cases [Paisey et al 2008, Paisey 2009].

Hypertriglyceridemia

Nicotinic acid derivatives can be helpful in long-term reduction of severe hypertriglyceridemia (>20 mmol/l) especially if pancreatitis has occurred and diabetes is absent or well controlled [Paisey et al 2004, Paisey 2009]. Statins are unlikely to be effective but can be considered for long-term prevention of atherosclerosis in adults with low HDL, high LDL, and diabetes.

Pancreatitis should be treated as in the general population.

Endocrine

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and pituitary hormones should be assessed to determine if hormonal adjustments are necessary.

Male hypogonadism should be treated with testosterone according to local endocrine guidelines to preserve sexuality, muscle strength, and bone health.

Thyroxine therapy should be initiated and monitored if the individual is hypothyroid.

Urologic. Some individuals have required urinary diversion or self-catheterization to manage voiding difficulties [MacDermott 2001].

Renal disease

The use of enzyme ACE inhibitors may be considered if proteinuria is detected.

Successful renal transplantation has occurred in a growing number of individuals, but can be contraindicated in the presence of other complications including morbid obesity, uncontrolled diabetes, and cardiomyopathy.

Hepatic disease. Portal hypertension may be treated with beta-blockade and sclerotherapy of the esophageal veins. Banding should be done in order to prevent upper-GI hemorrhage from varices. Patients who fail to respond to medication and banding are candidates for a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) to decrease risk of variceal bleeding caused by portal hypertension. Patients with significant portal hypertension should be evaluated early for liver transplantation.

Pulmonary disease. General activity, including breathing exercises, can reduce chronic hypoxia and improve wellbeing. Coaching by an exercise expert may be necessary in order to achieve adequate spirometry results to determine the presence of obstructive airways disease.

Other

If skeletal abnormalities are present, referral to an orthopedist is appropriate.

Reflux esophagitis, skin manifestations, orthopedic abnormalities, and neurologic manifestations should be treated as in the general population.

Education intervention, as indicated by evaluation and IEP (individual education plan) with the expectation of total blindness and hearing loss.

Prevention of Primary Complications

The progression to diabetes mellitus and the severity of hyperglycemia can in some cases be mitigated by lifestyle changes and avoidance of severe obesity.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Routine pediatric immunizations should be given and administration of pneumococcal vaccination should be considered.

Care must be taken during sedation or operative procedures. The combination of dilated cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary fibrosis can cause sudden severe hypoxia in an affected individual following surgery or even during a minor infection. Close monitoring of cardiac status and oxygenation are necessary until the individual is fully recovered.

Surveillance

Rod-cone dystrophy. Annual ophthalmologic follow-up is indicated as long as the affected individual has vision.

Obesity. Weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded annually and plotted on growth curves.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry should be performed yearly.

Cardiomyopathy

A detailed cardiac history and examination including echocardiography annually even in the absence of symptoms related to left ventricular dysfunction (signs of cardiac failure, such as sweating, fatigue, lethargy, asthma, decreased physical activity)

ECGs in parallel with echocardiography and 24-hour ECG monitoring if indicated

In individuals who have had infantile cardiomyopathy, annual monitoring by a pediatric cardiologist, even if the individual has recovered from cardiomyopathy and is asymptomatic

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes

Annual measurement of plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from early infancy

Measurement of fasting plasma glucose concentration every two to three months

If fasting blood glucose is greater than 7 mmol/L, or postprandial blood glucose is greater than 11 mmol/L, measurement of HbA1c concentration and serum glucose concentration regularly (every 6 months, although glucose estimations may be performed more frequently as determined by the 'diabetic control' of the affected individual)

Hyperlipidemia. Annual total lipid profile determination is appropriate unless hyperlipidemia is present, in which case more frequent monitoring may be indicated. When the affected individual is ill and/or dehydrated, pancreatitis precipitated by hyperlipidemia can be life threatening.

Renal disease

Urinalysis and measurement of plasma concentrations of electrolytes, uric acid, BUN, and creatinine twice yearly

Renal and bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal

Hepatic disease

Annual measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Ultrasonography to evaluate for possible steatosis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and portal hypertension

Pulmonary disease. Pulmonary function tests should be performed yearly to evaluate general lung function, even if symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis are not yet present.

Hypothyroidism. Patients should be monitored annually for thyroid abnormalities.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any substance contraindicated in persons with renal or cardiac failure should be avoided.

Therapy directed at one system may have adverse effects on other systems; for example, the use of glitazone therapy in diabetes mellitus is contraindicated in the presence of cardiac failure.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early evaluation and/or molecular genetic testing (if the two pathogenic allelic variants in a family are known) of at-risk sibs allows for early diagnosis and early treatment of manifestations.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no data to guide the management of a pregnancy should it occur in a female with Alström syndrome. Potential maternal complications during pregnancy could include development or worsening of cardiac, renal, or hepatic failure; severe dyslipidemia; and hyperglycemia. The fetus could be affected by placental dysfunction resulting from maternal diabetes and cardiorenal disease. Intensive multidisciplinary surveillance of any pregnancy would be mandatory.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (EOFAD), the following evaluations are recommended:

History (especially first symptoms, duration, progression). In particular, onset before age 45 years may indicate more rapid progression.

Examination (especially mental status)

MRI, PET. Severe cortical atrophy on MRI or marked metabolic deficits on PET imaging suggest more advanced disease.

Treatment of Manifestations

The mainstay of treatment is supportive and each symptom is managed on an individual basis [Clare 2002]. In general, affected individuals eventually require assisted living arrangements or nursing home care.

Although the exact biochemical basis of Alzheimer disease is not well understood, it is known that deficiencies of the brain cholinergic system and of other neurotransmitters are present. Agents that increase cholinergic activity, such as tacrine cholinesterase inhibitors, are approved for treatment and show modest but variable benefit. Aricept® (donepezil), Exelon® (rivastigmine), and Reminyl® (galatamine) are such drugs [Rogers et al 1998, Farlow et al 2000, Raskind et al 2000, Feldman et al 2001, Mohs et al 2001, Seltzer et al 2004].

Memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, has also been approved for use in AD [Reisberg et al 2003].

Medical and behavioral management of depression, aggression, sleep disturbance, seizures, and hallucinations is required. Depression and seizures should be treated with appropriate medications.

Physical and occupational therapy can be helpful to manage problems with gait and activities of daily living.

Surveillance

Monthly surveillance to identify and manage secondary complications is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Sudden changes in environment and over-sedation should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), lipid-lowering agents, vitamin E, beta secretase inhibitors and β amyloid "vaccination" are being investigated as possible therapeutic agents for AD [Lahiri et al 2003]. None of these pharmacologic treatments has been systematically evaluated in individuals with EOFAD.

An amyloid vaccination immunization trial of Aβ42 in late-onset AD was stopped because encephalitis developed in 6% of the subjects [Holmes et al 2008].

A treatment trial of an anti-Aβ monoclonal antibody showed no significant differences when primary efficacy was analyzed [Salloway et al 2009].

A treatment trial with a gamma secretase inhibitor (tarenflurbil) showed no efficacy [Green et al 2009].

Retrospective studies of NSAIDs have been mixed, showing possible protective effects [Vlad et al 2008] and no protective effects [Breitner et al 2009].

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with action myoclonus – renal failure (AMRF) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical evaluation including cognitive function and school performance, emotional features, eye movements, coordination, handwriting, walking

Examination of myoclonus including evaluation at rest, with action, and in response to stimuli

EEG evaluation including photosensitivity before therapy is initiated, as it is most characteristic before the use of anticonvulsant medication

Renal function

Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) to assess the possibility of clinical or subclinical sensorineural hearing loss [Rubboli et al 2011, Perandones et al 2012, Perandones et al 2014]

Nerve conduction velocities (NCV) and needle electromyography (EMG)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Neurologic manifestations. Symptomatic pharmacologic and psychosocial support is the mainstay of care for the neurologic manifestations. Response to treatment is variable and may deteriorate over time, necessitating rehabilitative management.

Valproic acid, the first drug of choice, diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures.

Clonazepam may be used as add-on therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures.

Levetiracetam appearss to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures, and is recommended in women of child bearing age.

Note: Lamotrigine is not effective in controlling the myoclonus, and may aggravate myoclonus in some patients [Guerrini et al 1998].

Renal manifestations. Renal insufficiency requires dialysis but response to treatment is poor, and renal transplantation is often necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Standard measures for prevention of aspiration pneumonia and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) should be followed; offering psychosocial support may be helpful.

Surveillance

Lifelong clinical follow up should include the following:

Neurologic

Monitoring of antiepileptic drug treatment (drug levels and clinical assessment of biological effects);

Periodic assessment of hearing by audiograms and BAEPs and of the peripheral nerves by NCV and needle EMG.

Renal function monitoring by measurement of: blood pressure; body weight; serum concentrations of creatinine, albumin, and cholesterol; 24-hour urinary protein; and creatinine clearance

Agents/Circumstances to avoid

Diphenylhydantoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and possibly lamotrigine increase myoclonus and should be avoided in any individual with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME), including AMRF.

Evaluation of relatives at risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Some antiepileptic drugs can lead to an increased risk of malformations, growth retardation, or neurodevelopmental disabilities in exposed fetuses. However, when pregnant women experience prolonged seizures during pregnancy, the risk of adverse fetal outcomes is increased. Therefore, it is recommended that women with a known seizure disorder continue to take antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy. Standard measures for prevention of fetopathy should be followed. These include:

Possible changes of medication prior to pregnancy;

Spacing of the antiepileptic drugs into four doses a day or taking extended release medications, so that the drug levels do not have significant peaks or troughs;

Monitoring the dosages and drug levels of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and after the delivery.

In addition, folic acid should be prescribed at 1 mg/day for all women of childbearing age and increased to 5 mg/day when planning a pregnancy (ideally 3 months prior to conception) and during the pregnancy, in order to prevent possible neural tube defects and other congenital malformations that can be associated with fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs.

Therapies Under Investigation

A trial of enzyme replacement therapy (ERP) with imiglucerase (60 U/kg every two weeks) in two sibs with AMRF for a period of one year did not improve the clinical status. Substrate reduction therapy (SRT) with miglustat (600 mg daily) administered to one of the two sibs resulted in a significant reduction of myoclonus [Chaves et al 2011].

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with androgen insensitivity syndrome, a complete evaluation by specialists in disorders of sex development (DSDs), which can include specialists in endocrinology, urology, gynecology, clinical genetics, psychology, and psychiatry [Hughes et al 2006, Parisi et al 2007, Douglas et al 2010], is ideal.

Treatment of Manifestations

A number of clinicians have sought to establish a consensus statement on management of DSD including AIS [Hughes & Deeb 2006]. A number of publications have subsequently discussed best management of these disorders. See Diamond & Beh [2008] (full text), Douglas et al [2010] (full text), Pasterski et al [2010] (full text), Wiesemann et al [2010] (full text), and Hughes et al [2012] (full text).

Assignment of sex of rearing. The issue of sex assignment in infancy when the child is being evaluated for ambiguous genitalia is paramount. It requires informed decision making by parents and healthcare personnel and should be resolved as early as possible, after a multidisciplinary evaluation has been completed.

Even in CAIS this may not always be easy. Cheikhelard et al [2008] evaluated 29 individuals with CAIS; it was recommended that gonads be retained at least until the completion of spontaneous puberty and the possibility of virilization be evaluated before management decisions are made.

Psychological counseling and use of support groups can be of benefit [Cull & Simmonds 2010, Hughes et al 2012].

Gender identity has become a topic of increasing importance due to the possibility of changes in sex assignment over time [Kolesinska et al 2014].

Issues of sexual orientation regardless of gender phenotype have also become increasingly important to explore and discuss [Brunner et al 2016].

CAIS

A critical consideration of any surgical intervention is the nature and timing of such intervention; thus, surgeons need to be involved with the affected individuals and pediatrician in any such decisions [Purves et al 2008, Munoz & Swan 2010]. Vidal et al [2010] reviewed the evolution of surgical techniques for ‘feminization’ and ‘masculinization’ and their possible outcomes.

A common practice is to remove the testes after puberty when feminization of the affected individual is complete, since feminization occurs partly by testicular estrogen and partly by peripheral conversion of androgen to estrogen.

The rationale for postpubertal gonadectomy is that testicular malignancy, which develops at the usual rate for cryptorchid testes, seldom occurs before puberty [Hannema et al 2006]. Prepubertal gonadectomy is now only considered if inguinal testes are physically or esthetically uncomfortable, and if inguinal herniorrhaphy is necessary. In this event, estrogen replacement therapy is necessary to initiate puberty, maintain feminization, and avoid osteoporosis.

However, the issue of gonadectomy is controversial. Some have argued that the true risk for malignant transformation of the gonads is small and have suggested postpubertal gonad biopsy as opposed to removal [Hughes et al 2006, Parisi et al 2007, Patel et al 2016], which would allow affected individuals to retain a natural source of androgen production and avoid exogenous hormone replacement.

In one study of 48 individuals diagnosed with either CAIS or PAIS, gonadoblastomas were observed in 9/30 (30%) of individuals with CAIS and 3/18 (16%) of individuals with PAIS, suggesting that the risk of gonadal malignancy may be greater than previously reported; the authors suggest earlier rather than later prophylactic gonadectomy [Liu et al 2014]. Another study found the frequency of gonadal tumor in individuals with CAIS was 13/48 (27%) and in those with PAIS was 2/21 (9%), with similar conclusions regarding the time of gonadectomy [Jiang et al 2016].

Vaginal dilatation to augment vaginal length and to avoid dyspareunia is typically the treatment of choice for those with short vaginal length. If this method fails, new treatments of blind vagina have been proposed, including autologous buccal mucosal graft vaginoplasty and enhanced balloon vaginoplasty [Zhao et al 2009, El Saman et al 2011]. Recent studies that examined the long-term outcomes of vaginoplasty with autologous buccal micromucosa indicated a high degree of satisfaction [Li et al 2014]. In addition, a study reported that peritoneal vaginoplasty appeared to be superior to ileal vaginoplasty [Huang et al 2014]. However, surgical reconstruction frequently requires maintenance vaginal dilatation to decrease the likelihood of future stricture.

The question of how much and when to disclose the diagnosis of CAIS to an affected individual has not been resolved uniformly; however, it has become obvious that explanation of the diagnosis in an empathic setting is much preferable to systematic concealment or self-discovery of the diagnosis in an environment devoid of support from family, professionals, and other affected individuals [Conn et al 2005].

PAIS with Predominantly Female Genitalia (Incomplete AIS)

The issues are similar to those discussed under CAIS, except prepubertal gonadectomy helps avoid the emotional discomfort of increasing clitoromegaly at the time of puberty.

In instances in which the diagnosis of PAIS is difficult to establish because of the presence of somatic mosaicism, a change of sex assignment can result in concomitant problems [Köhler et al 2005].

PAIS with Ambiguous Genitalia or Predominantly Male Genitalia

The assignment of sex in an infant with ambiguous genitalia is a complex process that requires timely assessment by a multidisciplinary team in consultation with the family and should be resolved as early as possible. Aside from purely anatomic and surgical considerations, the choice of a male sex-of-rearing demands a therapeutic trial with pharmacologic doses of androgen to try to predict potential androgen responsiveness at puberty. Furthermore, appreciable phallic growth in response to administered androgen facilitates reconstructive surgery.

In instances in which maximum information is being gathered on an infant with no family history of AIS before sex is assigned, sequence analysis of AR may be considered; however, the lower probability of detecting an AR variant in individuals with the PAIS phenotype and the poor positive predictive value of any given variant regarding AIS phenotype need to be considered when making decisions about sex assignment.

It has also been reported that the length of the AR exon 1 CAG repeat can influence the efficacy of testosterone treatments: individuals with shorter repeat lengths are more likely to respond to hormonal treatments [Zitzmann 2009]. However, the efficacy of CAG repeat length as a possible marker to assess hormonal treatment must await further studies.

Based on experience with a small number of individuals, the role of long-term androgen pharmacotherapy in individuals with PAIS who are raised as males remains unclear. Response to androgen treatment may be substantial in individuals with certain missense variants in the DNA-binding domain of the androgen receptor [Weidemann et al 1998], and a recent study confirmed the difficulty of accurately predicting the efficacy of androgen treatment [Becker et al 2016]. Thus, considerable caution should be exercised with regard to androgen treatment [Werner et al 2010], in particular because special hormonal profiles to androgen insensitivity have often not been acknowledged in replacement strategies. It has been proposed that an external masculinization score in neonates could be a reasonable predictor of virilization at puberty in individuals with PAIS who have been assigned a male sex of rearing [Hughes et al 2012].

Gynecomastia that develops in puberty eventually requires reduction mammoplasty. It has been reported that tamoxifen has been used for treating pubertal gynecomastia in two sibs with PAIS [Saito et al 2014].

Those individuals with PAIS who are raised as females and who have gonadectomy after puberty may need combined estrogen and androgen replacement therapy, the latter to maintain libido.

MAIS

Men with MAIS often require reduction mammoplasty for treatment of gynecomastia.

A trial of androgen pharmacotherapy is recommended to attempt to improve virilization [Loy & Yong 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The efficacy of androgen therapy in preventing manifestations such as gynecomastia is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Women with CAIS have decreased bone mineral density, regardless of timing of gonadectomy [Oakes et al 2008]. However, women with PAIS who choose not to undergo gonadectomy do not appear to be at high risk for decreased bone mineral density [Bertelloni et al 2010].

In addition to estrogen replacement therapy, supplemental calcium and vitamin D are recommended.

Regular weight-bearing exercises are encouraged to maintain bone health.

Bisphosphonate therapy may be indicated for those individuals with evidence of decreased bone mineral density and/or multiple fractures.

Surveillance

Appropriate measures include the following:

Monitoring of postnatal development of genitalia that were ambiguous at birth for changes that could lead to reconsideration of the assigned sex

For individuals assigned a male sex, evaluation during puberty for signs of gynecomastia

In adults, monitoring of bone mineral density through DEXA (dual-emission x-ray absorptiometry) scanning [Oakes et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include karyotype in sibs who have normal external female genitalia but have not yet undergone menarche.

Molecular genetic testing can be pursued next if a phenotypic female is found to have a 46,XY karyotype and if the AR variant in the family is known.

Androgen binding assays may be considered if an AR variant has not been identified in the family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Chen et al [2010] noted that Fkbp52 regulates AR transactivation activity and male urethra morphogenesis, suggesting that AR variants may require other genetic factors to produce hypospadias.

Apolipoprotein D (APOD) is a possible biomarker of AR function in AIS [Appari et al 2009].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Angelman syndrome (AS), the following evaluations focused on neurologic assessment and good preventive practice are recommended:

Baseline brain MRI and EEG

Note: Typically, management of seizures (or assessment of risk for seizures) is not significantly helped by repetitive EEG or MRI testing.

Musculoskeletal examination for scoliosis and gait impairment (e.g., extent of foot pronation or ankle subluxation; tight Achilles tendons) and the extent of muscular hypotonia; orthopedic referral as needed

Ophthalmology examination for strabismus, evidence of ocular albinism (in deletion-positive AS), and visual acuity

Developmental evaluation focused on: (1) nonverbal language ability and related educational and teaching strategies; and (2) physical therapy to enable optimal ambulation

Evaluation for gastroesophageal reflux in infants and young children; dietary evaluation to assure optimal nutritional status

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Feeding problems in newborns may require special nipples and other strategies to manage weak or uncoordinated sucking.

Gastroesophageal reflux can be associated with poor weight gain and emesis; the customary medical treatment (i.e., upright positioning, motility drugs) is usually effective; sometimes fundoplication as required.

Many antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have been used to treat seizures in individuals with AS; no one drug has proven superior. Medications used for minor motor seizures (e.g., valproic acid, clonazepam, topiramate, lamotrigine, ethosuximide) are more commonly prescribed than medications for major motor seizures (e.g., diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital) [Thibert et al 2009]. Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants. Single medication use is preferred, but seizure breakthrough is common. A few individuals with AS have infrequent seizures and are not on AEDs. Some with uncontrollable seizures have benefited from a ketogenic or low glycemic diet [Thibert et al 2012].

Hypermotoric behaviors are typically resistant to behavioral therapies; accommodation by the family and provision of a safe environment are important.

Most children with AS do not receive drug therapy for hyperactivity, although some may benefit from the use of stimulant medications such as methylphenidate (Ritalin®).

Behavioral modification is effective in treating undesirable behaviors that are socially disruptive or self-injurious.

A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.

Unstable or nonambulatory children may benefit from physical therapy. Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor and oral-motor control. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required, especially for extremely ataxic children.

Speech therapy is essential and should focus on nonverbal methods of communication. Augmentative communication aids such as picture cards or communication boards should be used at the earliest appropriate time. Attempts to teach signing should begin as soon as the child is sufficiently attentive.

Individualization and flexibility in the school are important educational strategies.

Special physical provisions in the classroom, along with teacher aides or assistants, may be needed for effective class integration. Children with AS with excessive hypermotoric behaviors need an accommodating classroom space.

Many families construct safe but confining bedrooms to accommodate disruptive nighttime wakefulness. Administration of 0.3 mg melatonin one hour before sleep may be helpful in some, but should not be given in the middle of the night if the child awakens.

Strabismus may require surgical correction.

Constipation often requires regular use of laxatives such as high fiber or lubricating agents.

Orthopedic problems, particularly subluxed or pronated ankles or tight Achilles tendons, can be corrected by orthotic bracing or surgery.

Thoraco-lumbar jackets may be needed for scoliosis, and individuals with severe curvature may benefit from surgical rod stabilization.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children with AS are at risk for medication overtreatment because their movement abnormalities can be mistaken for seizures and because EEG abnormalities can persist even when seizures are controlled.

The behavioral phenotype of Angelman syndrome includes hyperexcitability, hypermotoric behaviors, and deficits in social communication. These limitations place them at risk for social disruptions. On occasion, the use of risperidone (Risperdal®) or other atypical antipsychotic drugs provides some but often limited benefit. When such drugs are needed, care must be taken to avoid over-sedation and other side effects.

Older adults tend to become less mobile and less active; attention to activity schedules may be helpful in reducing the extent of scoliosis and obesity.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual clinical examination for scoliosis

For older children, evaluation for the development of obesity associated with excessive appetite and decreased physical activity

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants.

Vigabatrin and tigabine (anticonvulsants that increase brain GABA levels) are contraindicated in individuals with Angelman syndrome. For unknown reasons, carbamazapine, vigabatrine, and tigabine can cause development of other seizure types or non-convulsive status epilepticus. This paradoxic seizure development is not limited to individuals with Angelman syndrome [Pelc et al 2008a]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Clinical trials involving oral administration of folate, vitamin B12, creatine, and betaine have been undertaken in an attempt to augment DNA methylation pathways and possibly increase expression of the paternal UBE3A allele in the central nervous system; however, the initial trial did not demonstrate significant clinical benefit [Peters et al 2010] (see full text for more information). More recent therapeutic efforts have focused on activating the otherwise silenced paternal UBE3A allele by use of telomerase inhibitors [Huang et al 2011] and antisense oligonucleotides [Meng et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Excessive tongue protrusion causes drooling; available surgical or medication treatments (e.g., surgical reimplantation of the salivary ducts or use of local scopolamine patches) are generally not effective.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with ANO5-related muscle diseases, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation and manual muscle force measurement to establish a baseline for future assessment of disease progression and the possible need for assistive devices.

Muscle imaging (CT or MRI) to identify the pattern of affected muscles in detail

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The need for orthoses or other assistive devices varies individually. Most patients remain ambulatory without assistance for decades.

No definitive treatments for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies exist. Management is tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. Management to prolong survival and improve quality of life includes weight control to avoid obesity, physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures, and use of mechanical aids to help ambulation and mobility.

Hyperextension of the knee can be treated by splinting [Hicks et al 2011].

Surveillance

For persons with muscle weakness, evaluate muscle strength and functional status every six to 12 months.

For asymptomatic persons, evaluate less frequently.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided as very high levels of CK have been measured after strenuous exercise [Milone et al 2012, Penttilä et al 2012].

The use of statins, which can induce muscle pain and worsen muscle weakness, requires extra monitoring of clinical status especially at the beginning of treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with atelosteogenesis type 2 (AO2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete skeletal survey

Respiratory status

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Provide palliative care for the viable newborn.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination of cognitive function

Examination of cranial nerve function

Extended neurologic examination of the limbs: initial inspection, tone, strength testing, reflexes, coordination, sensory testing

Ophthalmologic examination

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Physical therapy may be helpful, particularly for disabilities resulting from peripheral neuropathy.

A wheelchair is usually necessary for mobility by age 15-20 years.

Educational support should be provided to compensate for difficulties in speaking (dysarthria), in reading (oculomotor apraxia), and in writing (upper-limb ataxia and weakness).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

High-protein diet to restore serum albumin concentration is indicated to prevent edema secondary to hypoalbuminemia.

Low-cholesterol diet is advised.

Surveillance

Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with oculomotor apraxia type 2 (AOA2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of cognitive function

Examination of cranial nerve function

Neurologic examination including assessment of gait and limb ataxia, coordination, tone, strength, reflexes, and sensory perception

Ophthalmologic examination

Clinical genetics consultation

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment of strength and balance

Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration, if not evaluated previously

Treatment of Manifestations

Physical therapy may be helpful, particularly for disabilities resulting from peripheral neuropathy.

A wheelchair is usually necessary for mobility by age 30 years.

Educational support (e.g., use of a computer with speech recognition and special keyboard for typing) should be provided to compensate for difficulties in reading (caused by oculomotor apraxia) and in writing (caused by upper-limb ataxia).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

A low-cholesterol diet is advised.

Surveillance

Routine visits to the attending neurologist are indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD), the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI of the brain and spinal column to exclude other treatable causes of gait spasticity and neurogenic bladder

Assessment of post-void residual and consultation with a urologist to identify and manage complications of a neurogenic bladder

Bedside or formal neuropsychometric analysis to assess for early signs of cognitive impairment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Optimally, care is provided by a team that includes specialists in physical medicine rehabilitation, urology, and behavioral neurology or psychology (i.e., behavioralists) who can provide the following:

Gait safety devices including canes and wheel chairs

Consideration of antispasmodic bladder medications and in-and-out bladder catheterization vs indwelling bladder catheter depending on urologic findings

Behavioral modification and cognitive aids as needed

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Gait aids and urologic management of neurogenic bladder may prevent falls and urosepsis, respectively.

Surveillance

Periodic assessment of the following:

Bladder function

Gait

Sensation in the distal lower extremities

Cognition (e.g., executive function)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A randomized controlled trial of trihepatnoin for APBD is ongoing. See Author Notes.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline lipoprotein profile, including total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time)

Platelet count

Physical examination to screen for splenomegaly. If splenomegaly is suspected, an abdominal ultrasound examination could be performed to further characterize the extent of splenomegaly.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

There are no formal management guidelines for APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorders.

Given the limited number of reports of individuals with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder and the clinical variability among affected individuals, it is unknown which individuals with the APOE p.Leu167del variant will develop hyperlipidemia, splenomegaly, and/or severe thrombocytopenia. However, the authors postulate that untreated hyperlipidemia may worsen the phenotype.

Hyperlipidemia. Discussion of the management of hyperlipidemia is beyond the scope of this article. For more in-depth discussion on management, see the 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults [Stone et al 2014] (full text). It should be noted that using risk prediction models in genetic dyslipidemia may markedly underestimate an individual’s risk of developing ASCVD.

Treatment for individuals with documented ASCVD or at high risk of developing ASCVD begins with lifestyle changes (adherence to a heart-healthy diet, exercise, tobacco avoidance, maintenance of a healthy weight). Medical therapy may include a statin (generally the mainstay of therapy to reduce ASCVD risk), a fibrate, high-dose fish oil, and/or niacin. If present, diabetes mellitus should be well controlled, as uncontrolled diabetes can worsen hypertriglyceridemia.

In patients with fasting triglyceride levels:

>500 mg/dL, the first goal of treatment should be to lower triglyceride levels to prevent pancreatitis.

>1000 mg/dL, elimination of fat from the diet is essential.

<500-1000 mg/dL, the focus may shift to the avoidance of high glycemic carbohydrates. Additionally, if identified, excessive intake of sucrose- or fructose-containing food and beverages should be limited.

Although caloric restriction with the goal of weight loss can also be helpful in lowering triglyceride levels, it should not be the primary focus in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Splenomegaly. Although no interventions are known to prevent disease progression, it has been suggested that treatment of dyslipidemia may prevent development of splenomegaly [Okorodudu et al 2013].

Splenectomy should be avoided as it may worsen hyperlipidemia. Patients who underwent splenectomy were reported to have markedly worsened hypertriglyceridemia after splenectomy [Nguyen et al 2000, Faivre et al 2005, Rahalkar et al 2008, Okorodudu et al 2013].

Liver function abnormalities and thrombocytopenia should be managed by specialists in gastroenterology and hematology, respectively.

Liver function abnormalities. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Persistent nausea

Vomiting

Abdominal pain

Yellow discoloration of the skin

Thrombocytopenia. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Bruising

Bleeding

Any new petechial rash

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients with splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.

Surveillance

There are no formal guidelines regarding surveillance. The authors suggest obtaining the following:

Lipoprotein profile one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). If abnormal, follow at regular intervals for treatment of hyperlipidemia.

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time) one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients regarding the signs of liver dysfunction.

Platelet count one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients to notify their provider immediately in the event of bleeding or petechial rash.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Splenectomy as it worsens the hypertriglyceridemia

For those with splenomegaly: contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk of inheriting the APOE p.Leu167del variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures and surveillance.

Molecular genetic testing can be used to determine if a family member has inherited the APOE p.Leu167del variant.

If the APOE p.Leu167del variant is found, testing for the presence of an APOE e2 allele (see Diagnosis) is recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

A woman with the APOE p.Leu167del variant should have triglyceride levels measured when pregnancy is identified and at least one to two times later in pregnancy as severe hypertriglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) in pregnancy increases the risk for pancreatitis and fetal and maternal death. Of note, hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy.

Treatment of hypertriglyceridemia in pregnant women is similar to that for nonpregnant individuals. The goal of therapy is to achieve fasting triglyceride levels below 500 mg/dL (see Treatment of Manifestations regarding dietary advice to lower triglycerides).

If acceptable triglyceride levels are not achieved in a pregnant woman with dietary changes alone, medical therapy may be required.

Medical management in pregnancy usually consists of fibrates (pregnancy category C). Prior to taking a medication during pregnancy, a pregnant woman should discuss with her physician the risks and benefits of the specific medication being prescribed.

Due to theoretic concerns regarding the role of cholesterol in embryonic development and the fact that hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy, statin therapy is contraindicated during pregnancy. Women who are taking a statin should discontinue the use of this medication prior to conception, if possible, or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. However, inadvertent exposure early in gestation is unlikely to lead to a significantly increased risk for adverse fetal outcomes [Pollack et al 2005].

Fish oil could be considered, but could alter prostaglandin metabolism in the fetus.

Severe hypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis can require apheresis and use of intravenous insulin and glucose. In these circumstances, consultation with a lipid specialist is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with APRT deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of kidney involvement:

Measure serum creatinine concentration.

Screen for albuminuria or proteinuria.

Assess kidney stone burden with ultrasound or CT examination.

Perform kidney biopsy in individuals with reduced renal function and/or proteinuria.

Ophthalmology consultation if eye symptoms are present

Consideration of consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Allopurinol. Treatment with the XDH inhibitor allopurinol is effective and generally well-tolerated in individuals with APRT deficiency. Allopurinol 5-10 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 800 mg), either once daily or in two divided doses, minimizes DHA crystalluria, stone formation, crystal deposition in the kidney, and the development of kidney failure [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Treatment with allopurinol can even dissolve DHA kidney stones and improve kidney function in individuals with advanced CKD [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Allopurinol treatment is monitored by clinical evaluation and urine microscopy; the absence of urinary DHA crystals is indicative of adequate therapy.

Febuxostat. The recently introduced XDH inhibitor febuxostat provides an alternative treatment option for affected individuals allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol [Becker et al 2005]. The complete disappearance of urinary DHA crystals was recently described in an indvidual with APRT deficiency treated with febuxostat in the daily dose of 80 mg [Arnadóttir 2014]. Furthermore, the authors of this review have noted a significant reduction or even disappearance of DHA crystalluria in several adult individuals with APRT deficiency treated with a daily febuxostat dose of 80 mg [unpublished observations].

Low purine diet and ample fluid intake provide adjunctive benefits to pharmacologic therapy.

Surgical management of DHA kidney stones is the same as for the management of other types of stones, including extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy.

Treatment of ESRD

Dialysis. Of note, it is not known if individuals with APRT deficiency on dialysis benefit from allopurinol therapy. The allopurinol dose should not routinely be reduced in affected individuals who have impaired kidney function.

Kidney transplantation. All individuals with APRT deficiency undergoing kidney transplantation require treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat) for at least six weeks prior to transplant surgery, whenever possible. Affected individuals who have undergone kidney transplantation require lifelong therapy with allopurinol (or febuxostat) to prevent recurrent DHA crystal nephropathy in the transplanted organ.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Adequate treatment of APRT deficiency with allopurinol (or febuxostat in those who are allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol) prevents kidney stone formation and the development of CKD in most, if not all, individuals with the disorder [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010, Harambat et al 2012]. Therefore, all affected individuals should receive lifelong treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat).

Surveillance

No surveillance guidelines have been developed. However, all individuals with APRT deficiency should see their physician every six to 12 months to:

Monitor kidney function;

Assess the urinary excretion of DHA crystals (disappearance of the crystals is considered an adequate treatment response);

Facilitate medication compliance.

Periodic renal ultrasound examinations may be considered to evaluate for new kidney stones.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Azathioprine should be avoided by individuals taking XDH inhibitors.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once the pathogenic variants in a family have been identified, it is recommended that sibs of an affected individual undergo molecular genetic testing or APRT enzyme activity measurements to allow early diagnosis and treatment in order to improve long-term outcome. Further investigations, including assessment of renal function and urinalysis, are warranted in individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants.

Note: Approximately 15% of individuals with APRT deficiency may be asymptomatic [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]; they are usually identified during family screening.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The safety of allopurinol in human pregnancy has not been systematically studied.

Animal studies using high doses of allopurinol have revealed evidence of adverse fetal effects in mice but not in rats or rabbits; it is not clear if these effects are a result of direct fetal toxicity or maternal toxicity. Thus, allopurinol should only be prescribed during pregnancy when the benefit of treatment is believed to outweigh the risk. Treatment with allopurinol during pregnancy should be considered in women with APRT deficiency who have CKD with reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) or who have undergone kidney transplantation.

Some post-transplantation immunosuppressive therapies can also have adverse effects on the developing fetus.

A thorough discussion of the risks and benefits of maternal medication use during pregnancy should ideally take place with an appropriate health care provider prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arginase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Plasma ammonia concentration

Plasma arginine concentration

Developmental assessment

Complete neurologic evaluation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of individuals with arginase deficiency should closely mirror that described in the Urea Cycle Disorders Overview, with one caveat: individuals with arginase deficiency are less prone to episodes of hyperammonemia and when present, hyperammonemia is more likely to respond to conservative management such as intravenous fluid administration. However, the individual who is comatose and encephalopathic is at high risk for severe brain damage and should be treated accordingly. Arginine supplementation is obviously contraindicated.

Infants should be managed by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a specialized center. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following:

Rapidly reducing plasma ammonia concentration. The best way to reduce plasma ammonia concentration quickly is by dialysis; the faster the flow rate of dialysate, the faster the clearance of ammonia from the plasma. The method employed depends on the affected individual's circumstances and available resources. Fastest is use of pump-driven dialysis, in which an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) pump is used to drive a hemodialysis (HD) machine. Other methods are “routine” hemodialysis, hemofiltration (both arteriovenous and venovenous), peritoneal dialysis, and continuous-drainage peritoneal dialysis. Dialysis can usually be discontinued when plasma ammonia concentration falls below 200 µmol/L. Affected individuals often experience a "rebound" hyperammonemia that may require further dialysis, although rarely is this level of intervention required in arginase deficiency.

Pharmacologic management to allow alternative pathway excretion of excess nitrogen. Blocking of ammonia production and the need for ureagenesis is accomplished by diminishing catabolism with adequate non-protein calories and with a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. A loading dose of the drugs is followed by maintenance administration, initially intravenously and later orally when the individual is stable. Intravenous forms of these medications are now approved by the FDA and are generally available.

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of calories supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, calories should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free oral formula, such as Mead Johnson 80056® or Ross Formula ProPhree®; however, complete restriction of protein should not exceed 24-48 hours, as depletion of essential amino acids may result in endogenous protein catabolism and nitrogen release. High parenteral glucose plus insulin can be used acutely to diminish endogenous protein catabolism. Individuals should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. In early treatment, feeding 1.0 to 1.5 g of protein/kg body weight with 50% as essential amino acids is advised, particularly for infants. Older children require and tolerate lower protein intake.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage. Cautionary measures are physiologic stabilization with intravenous fluids (10% dextrose with one-quarter normal saline) and cardiac pressors as necessary while avoiding overhydration and resulting cerebral edema, the duration of which correlates with poor neurologic outcome.

Older individuals are at risk for episodes of hyperammonemia and should continue to be managed by a specialist in metabolic disorders.

Seizures are easily treated by phenobarbital or carbamazepine.

Acute intercurrent illnesses should be treated promptly with special dietary intervention or hospitalization to minimize the effect of catabolism.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The goal should be maintenance of plasma arginine concentration as near normal as possible, consistent with the individual's tolerance for the following interventions:

Restriction of dietary protein through use of specialized formulas. In the best of circumstances, the affected individual should be on the minimal protein intake needed to maintain protein biosynthetic function, growth, and normal or near-normal plasma amino acid concentrations. Half or more of dietary protein should be an arginine-free essential amino acid mixture.

Administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate/glycerolphenylbutyrate at a dose of 350-600 mg/kg/day in patients weighing less than 20 kg, or 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day in larger patients. The medicines are to be taken in equally divided amounts with each meal or feeding (i.e., 3-6x/day) [De Deyn et al 1997, Iyer et al 1998, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium].

Liver transplantation eliminates the hyperargininemia and presumably the risk for hyperammonemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Most individuals with arginase deficiency have persistent hepatic synthetic function abnormalities; particularly, elevated prothrombin time.

In some circumstances hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis have developed and have either been fatal or required a liver transplant.

Arginine is the substrate for nitric oxide synthase; however, abnormalities in this pathway have not been described.

The spasticity may be reactive and instances of marked improvement with Botox® have been described.

Surveillance

Patients are seen at regular intervals determined by their age and degree of metabolic stability.

Infants should be seen monthly or more frequently, with monitoring of plasma concentration of ammonia and amino acids, growth, and neurologic function. If treatment fails to arrest the neurologic deterioration or if spasticity is symptomatic, appropriate orthopedic and physical therapy interventions are indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproic acid is to be avoided as it exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle defects and other inborn errors of metabolism [Scaglia & Lee 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the age of onset of arginase deficiency is delayed beyond the newborn period and the manifestations can vary, the genetic status of all sibs of a proband (especially the younger ones) should be clarified so that morbidity can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment in those who are affected. Testing methods can include any one of the following:

Plasma quantitative amino acid analysis

Molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific ARG1 pathogenic variants are known)

Analysis of enzymatic activity in red blood cells

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The authors are not aware of any instance in which pregnancy has been reported in a woman with arginase deficiency; therefore, no inference can be drawn about the safety of pregnancy for the mother or the fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Immunizations can be provided on the usual schedule.

Multivitamin and fluoride supplementation are indicated for all affected individuals.

Appropriate use of antipyretics is indicated. Ibuprofen is preferred over acetaminophen.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurocognitive evaluation

Evaluation for evidence of hepatic involvement including hepatomegaly, hepatitis, and signs of liver failure

Plotting of the systolic and diastolic blood pressure on the centile charts based on age and stature

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment involves rapid control of hyperammonemia during metabolic decompensations and long-term management to help prevent episodes of hyperammonemia and long-term complications.

During acute hyperammonemic episodes severe enough to cause neurologic symptoms, treatment includes the following [Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001] (full text):

Discontinuing oral protein intake

Supplementing oral intake with intravenous lipids, glucose and intravenous insulin if needed (with close monitoring of blood glucose) to promote anabolism.

Intravenous nitrogen scavenging therapy. A loading dose of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate in 25 to 35 mL/kg of 10% dextrose solution given intravenously over a 90-minute period is recommended. This is followed by a sustained intravenous infusion of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate over a 24-hour period. When available, plasma concentrations of ammonia scavenging drugs should be monitored to avoid toxicity. In the absence of drug levels, a serum anion gap of greater than 15 mEq/L and an anion gap that has risen more than 6 mEq/L could indicate drug accumulation and increased risk for toxicity.

Ammonia levels usually normalize with therapy; however failure to decrease ammonia levels with medical therapy mandates prompt institution of hemodialysis.

Hemodialysis is the preferred method for rapid reduction of ammonia in patients who do not respond to nitrogen scavenging therapy. Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis (CAVHD) or continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) with flow rates greater than 40 to 60 mL/min is optimal. Some centers use extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with hemodialysis. Although this combination of techniques provides very high flow rates (170-200 mL/min) and rapidly reduces ammonia levels, morbidity is greater because of the need for surgical vascular access. Nitrogen scavenging therapy needs to be continued during hemodialysis. It is the authors’ policy to continue nitrogen scavenging therapy for 12-24 hours after the patient has been stabilized and is able to accept enteral feeds and medications [Author, personal observation].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary restriction of protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays of long-term management.

Diet. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for dietary protein is higher than the minimum needed for normal growth and, hence, most children with a urea cycle disorder (UCD) can receive less than the RDA of protein and still maintain adequate growth. To achieve this end [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]:

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, branched chain amino acids, and arginine should be maintained within normal ranges.

Serum plasma total protein and prealbumin levels should be maintained within the low normal ranges.

Plasma glutamine concentration should be maintained at less than 1000 µmol/L if possible [normal range for individuals ages two to 18 years is 266-746 µmol/L].

Some of the correlations between compliance with the prescribed diet and outcome are contradictory. Although in some patients dietary therapy along with arginine supplementation have been shown to reverse the abnormalities of hair, to improve cognitive outcome, and to reverse abnormalities on EEG [Coryell et al 1964, Kvedar et al 1991, Ficicioglu et al 2009], in many dietary therapy has not been shown to influence the outcome of liver disease or cognitive impairment [Mori et al 2002, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010].

Arginine base supplementation. The doses of arginine base routinely recommended are 400-700 mg/kg/day in persons weighing less than 20 kg and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day in those weighing more than 20 kg. Supplementation with arginine base helps replenish this amino acid (which is deficient in persons with ASL deficiency) and promote excretion of nitrogen through the urea cycle as argininosuccinate. Arginine base is preferred for long-term chronic treatment as the chronic use of arginine hydrochloride may lead to hyperchloremic acidosis.

Arginine base supplementation has been shown to reverse the hair changes; however, its efficacy in preventing the chronic complications is not known. While evidence suggests that arginine base supplementation may prevent metabolic decompensations in those with severe early-onset disease, long-term follow up of persons identified through newborn screening programs did not detect a difference in outcomes between those who were supplemented with arginine base and those who were not [Batshaw et al 2001, Ficicioglu et al 2009, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. As the renal clearance of argininosuccinic acid is high, increasing its production through arginine supplementation effectively increases waste nitrogen disposal, thereby decreasing the risk of hyperammonemia. However, because of the theoretic risk of argininosuccinic acid toxicity on hepatocytes, reducing the amount of supplemental arginine by initiating nitrogen scavenging therapy may have merits.

Oral nitrogen scavenging therapy. Patients who have had frequent metabolic decompensations or episodes of elevated ammonia despite being on a protein-restricted diet and arginine base supplementation are candidates for oral nitrogen scavenging therapy, an alternative pathway therapy in which sodium benzoate and sodium phenyl butyrate stimulate the excretion of nitrogen in the form of hippuric acid and phenylacetylglutamine, respectively [Batshaw et al 2001]. The dose of sodium phenyl butyrate is 400-600 mg/kg/day for persons weighing up to 20 kg and 9-13 g/m2/day for those weighing more than 20 kg; the dose of sodium benzoate is 250-500 mg/kg/day.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Long-term correction of ASL deficiency in the liver can be accomplished by OLT [Lee & Goss 2001] which has resulted in “biochemical cure” [Robberecht et al 2006, Marble et al 2008, Newnham et al 2008]. However, OLT does not correct the arginine deficiency or elevation of argininosuccinic acid at the tissue level, two abnormalities thought to account for the long-term complications of ASL deficiency. Thus, the authors have recommended OLT only in patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations that are resistant to conventional medical therapy, or in patients who develop cirrhosis with associated metabolic decompensations [Author, personal observations].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Salt restriction and use of antihypertensives are indicated in those with elevated blood pressure. Antihypertensives may be tried although their efficacy has not been established.

Electrolyte (potassium) supplementation is appropriate when indicated.

Surveillance

Regular monitoring of the concentration of plasma amino acids to identify deficiency of essential amino acids as well as impending hyperammonemia is indicated. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical scenario, but need to be more frequent in neonates and in those with frequent metabolic decompensations. The authors prefer to evaluate neonates every one to two weeks, infants between age two months and one year every one to three months, and children older than age two years every three to four months.

Early signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes in older individuals include mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, ankle clonus, and elevated plasma concentrations of glutamine, alanine, and glycine. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration in such individuals.

Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic dietician and clinical biochemical geneticist is preferred when possible.

Annual measurement of blood pressure using the appropriate-sized cuff and plotting the centile values for age and stature is indicated.

Periodic evaluation of liver function tests may be necessary; the appropriate frequency is unknown.

Periodic evaluation of serum electrolytes is appropriate; the frequency unknown.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Large boluses of protein or amino acids

Less than recommended intake of protein

Prolonged fasting or starvation

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases

Valproic acid

Intravenous steroids

Hepatotoxic drugs in those with hepatic involvement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of at-risk sibs (either by molecular genetic testing if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known or by biochemical testing) shortly after birth can reduce morbidity by permitting early diagnosis and treatment of those who are affected.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ARSACS (autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI

Retinal examination

EMG

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Curative therapy is not available.

Physical therapy and use of oral medications such as baclofen to control spasticity in the early phase of the disease may prevent tendon shortening and joint contractures. These measures may help to postpone major functional disabilities until severe muscle weakness or cerebellar ataxia occur.

Urinary urgency and incontinence may be controlled with low doses of amitryptiline or oxybutynin.

During school years, speech therapy and psychological support may help enhance academic performance.

Surveillance

Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy may possibly be considered in the long term once transgenic models provide more specific clues on the molecular cascades of partially deleted or truncated sacsin and their effects on neuronal survival and functions that lead to the ARSACS phenotype.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiography. Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size [Roman et al 1989].

MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to evaluate arterial tortuosity and identify arterial aneurysms and/or stenoses throughout the arterial tree

Lung function test and imaging (radiographs, CT-scan) when emphysema is suspected

Skeletal radiographs depending on the clinical findings (e.g., scoliosis).

Consideration of bone densitometry based on patient history (fractures), sex, habits (smoking, alcohol consumption, sedentary life style) and age

Evaluation of the palate to identify patients with a highly arched palate, bifid uvula, or cleft palate who may be at risk for orthodontic complications including dental crowding (see Surveillance). Patients with bifid uvula and cleft palate may be at risk for feeding difficulties.

Eye examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders that includes: refraction and correction of refractive errors, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia; specific assessment for keratoconus, keratoglobus, and corneal thinning

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with ATS benefit from a coordinated approach of multidisciplinary specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. If feasible, individuals with ATS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Cardiovascular. In managing the cardiovascular features of ATS the following should be kept in mind:

Clinical history studies are limited.

Vascular disease is widespread and requires repeated imaging of the complete arterial tree from head to pelvis by MRA or CTA.

It is currently not known whether arterial dissections or thrombosis is the main cause of ischemic events.

As is common practice in the treatment of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, hemodynamic stress on the arterial wall can be reduced through use of beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and angiotensin II receptor 1 (ATIIR1) antagonists such as losartan, when titrated to effect. While ATIIR1 antagonists may have an additional beneficial effect by attenuating TGFβ signaling in the arterial wall, the role of TGFβ signaling in ATS is unclear (see Molecular Genetic Pathogenesis). Importantly, the efficacy of these treatments has not been established in ATS and caution is warranted when using blood pressure-lowering medications in the presence of arterial stenosis (anatomic or functional due to severe tortuosity) – especially renal artery stenosis, as these medications may confer a risk for renal failure.

Aneurysms and focal stenoses are amenable to surgical intervention.

For aortic root aneurysms, a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation can be used. No data are available on the aortic diameter at which intervention is appropriate; thus, decision making should also include assessment of the family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit.

For focal stenoses of the aorta and aortic branches, surgery, catheterization, or a hybrid of the two (transcatheter-surgical procedure) may be used [Santoro et al 2008, Vicchio et al 2008].

Pulmonary artery stenosis resulting in pulmonary hypertension may be treated by catheterization and/or surgery.

Skeletal. Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist. Surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

At the patient’s discretion, orthotics may be used for severe pes planus.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of ATS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is essential, and evaluation of keratoconus is necessary.

Other

Hernias may recur after surgical repair. A supporting mesh can be used in the surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Careful postoperative evaluation of (surgical) wounds is necessary as wound healing may be delayed. Note that stitches should avoid traction and should remain in place for approximately ten days.

Emphysema is treated symptomatically. Of note, positive pressure ventilation may cause emphysematous changes to progress.

Individuals with ATS can and should remain active with aerobic activities (e.g., swimming) performed in moderation.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular follow up with echocardiography, and MRI- angiography or CT scan with 3D reconstructions from head to pelvis starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis, and repeated at regular intervals depending on the initial findings and the disease course. Under stable conditions (in the absence of aneurysms, stenosis, or dilatation of the aortic root), echocardiography could be performed on a yearly basis and MRI angiography or CT scan at least every three years in older children and adults.

Pulmonary hypertension may develop secondary to pulmonary artery stenosis, requiring regular echocardiographic follow-up.

Pulmonary follow up. Increased vigilance for emphysema is appropriate

Routine follow-up for refractive errors and keratoconus, when possible with an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders

Evaluation for orthopedic complications especially during periods of rapid growth (first two years of life and during puberty), e.g., serial radiographs to evaluate for progression of scoliosis

Orthodontic follow-up, especially during eruption of permanent dentition because of the increased risk of dental crowding secondary to palatal abnormalities

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Scuba diving because of pressure differences and the need for positive pressure ventilation

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Use of tobacco, which increases cardiovascular risk and the likelihood of premature skin aging

Sun tanning, which increases the likelihood of premature skin aging

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband with ATS in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of surveillance and preventive measures.

If the SLC2A10 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, at-risk sibs should be evaluated for signs of the disorder (clinically and with echocardiography or more elaborative vascular imaging, as clinical symptoms may be very subtle) to clarify their genetic status.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Data on the management of women with arterial tortuosity syndrome during pregnancy and delivery are limited with only three pregnancies reported (in 2 women) to date. All pregnancies had a good outcome; however, one woman experienced pelvic organ prolapse following the vaginal delivery of her first child [Castori et al 2012]. The other woman, who delivered without complications at 34 weeks’ gestation by elective cesarean section, was started on acetylsalicylic acid to prevent thromboembolic events eight days post partum [Allen et al 2009].

Preconception counseling should include possible pregnancy-associated risks to the mother and medication-associated risks to the fetus.

The risks to the mother are mainly those of aortic root dilatation and dissection. As is common practice in management in Marfan syndrome, elective aortic repair using a valve-sparing procedure (if possible) could be performed prior to conception when the aortic root diameter reaches 45 mm.

Currently, no data are available on a possible risk for pregnancy-associated uterine rupture (as is seen in Loeys-Dietz syndrome and EDS, vascular type). Prenatal and postnatal physiotherapy can minimize the risk for pelvic organ prolapse.

Peripartum intensive monitoring is advised. Pregnancies should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician and a cardiologist familiar with this or related conditions.

Increased surveillance of the aortic root and previously detected aneurysms during pregnancy and following delivery is recommended because of the increased risk for progressive dilatation. Echocardiography is suggested every two to three months from conception until six months post partum.

Delivery should be planned in a center with experience with this or related conditions. It is currently unclear whether caesarean section or vaginal delivery is preferable.

Medication-associated risks to the fetus. The effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) on the fetus in the first trimester of pregnancy are incompletely understood; however, use in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can lead to fetal death and damage. Angiotensin II receptor 1 antagonists (ATIIR1) such as losartan are thought to lead to similar fetal effects as ACE-I, including fetal damage, oligohydramnios, and fetal death, if taken during the second and/or third trimesters of pregnancy.

Ideally, women with ATS who are planning a pregnancy should transition to a different antihypertensive medication (e.g., a beta-blocker) prior to conception.

Women with ATS who become pregnant while taking an ACE-I or an ATIIR1 should be transitioned to a different antihypertensive medication as soon as the pregnancy is recognized.

Women undergoing a non-valve sparing aortic root replacement before pregnancy should be advised of the risk associated with anticoagulant therapy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Arts syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation for manifestations of hypotonia, ataxia, presence/absence of tendon reflexes

Audiometry for evidence of hearing loss

Eye examination for evidence of optic atrophy

Assessment of intellectual abilities

Analysis of the family pedigree for other possible affected individuals and carrier females

Treatment of Manifestations

Intellectual disability. An individualized educational support program tailored to the patient’s needs and based on assessment of cognitive abilities should be provided.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management. Cochlear implantation in the two affected Australian males was associated with improved communication skills.

Optic atrophy. No treatment is available.

Ataxia. See Hereditary Ataxias, Management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of immune system compromise in males with Arts syndrome, the following are recommended:

An annual influenza immunization

Routine immunizations against other common childhood infections (e.g. measles, mumps)

Surveillance

Cognitive impairment appears to be non-progressive, but repeat neuropsychologic assessments are recommended to help guide educational support programs.

Although the sensorineural deafness appears to be static (albeit very severe), regular audiologic assessment is recommended so that educational support can be optimized.

Visual impairment appears to be progressive; thus, regular evaluation by an ophthalmologist is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Females at risk of being carriers should be evaluated for the family-specific PRPS1 pathogenic variant because clinical manifestations observed in carriers may only become apparent at a later age.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation could theoretically alleviate some of the symptoms of Arts syndrome by providing an oral source purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. An adult with HPRT deficiency has been reported to benefit neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006].

An open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome is continuing [J Christodoulou et al, unpublished data; approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia]. Oral SAM supplementation is presently set at 30 mg/kg/day. The brothers appear to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however, slight deterioration in their vision has been noted.

Mildly affected carrier females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the following evaluations are recommended if not performed at the time of diagnosis:

ECG

Echocardiogram and/or MRI, depending on the expertise of the imaging center

Noninvasive monitoring. Cardiac rhythm can be monitored noninvasively through Holter or event monitoring, and this is an effective means of detecting ventricular ectopy including nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Implantable loop recorders can also be used in individuals with ARVC for whom arrhythmia risks are not clear. Signal-averaged ECGs may also be useful [Philips & Cheng 2016].

Electrophysiology study to assess the risk for ventricular arrhythmias and the appropriateness of device insertion (e.g., an implantable cardioverter defibrillator). A cardiac catheter ablation of tissue causing abnormal rhythms can be performed during the electrophysiology study; however, ablation may not be effective long term in individuals with ARVC because of the multiple sites of primary ventricular tachycardias.

Treatment of Manifestations

Affected individuals should be monitored by a cardiologist who is knowledgeable about ARVC. Management of individuals with ARVC is complicated by its variable course and the limited specificity of clinical findings to predict arrhythmia risk. Management should be individualized and based on the specific results of detailed clinical and genetic investigation.

Management is focused on prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Beta blockers are considered first line therapy. Although their efficacy has not been shown in a randomized, prospective clinical trial, beta blockers are recommended [Yancy et al 2013, Corrado et al 2015].

Amiodarone may also be effective [Corrado et al 2015].

The mainstay of arrhythmia prevention relies on device insertion and management. Risk-benefit analysis for device insertion and management should be balanced against clinical risk stratification for arrhythmias.

Education regarding sudden death risk to affected adults and parents of affected children is an important aspect of management.

Physical exercise ‒ specifically regular, intense exercise ‒ is thought to promote ARVC and its associated arrhythmias. Therefore, those with fully diagnosed ARVC are usually recommended to reduce or eliminate prolonged exercise and participation in competitive sports [James et al 2013]. Supporting this idea that intense exercise hastens the onset of ARVC, Ruwald et al [2015] reported that a history of participation in competitive sports was associated with an earlier age of onset. These findings support the notion that intense exercise can induce ARVC even in the absence of an identifiable genetic predisposition.

Heart transplantation is considered when ARVC has progressed to right or left ventricular heart failure. Severe diffuse biventricular involvement simulating dilated cardiomyopathy and requiring heart transplantation appears to be rare.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prospective randomized trials have not been conducted in ARVC for the prevention of arrhythmias. Management relies on personalized recommendations based on clinical assessment.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). Observational studies support that ICD placement is effective in reducing the risk for sudden cardiac death in ARVC. ICD placement should be considered in anyone with a clinical diagnosis of ARVC. Corrado et al [2010] reported results of ICD implantation in 106 individuals with ARVC who met task force criteria. Device placement was based on the presence of arrhythmia risk factor defined as syncope, family history of sudden death, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and whether ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation was inducible in an electrophysiology done at the time of device implant. Over the follow-up interval of 58 months, 24% of subjects had an appropriate ICD discharge. Syncope was found to predict appropriate ICD discharge. The advisability of placing an ICD for primary prevention remains a question of debate [Zorzi et al 2016].

The ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, which are based on experience and previously published reports recommend as a Class I indication (i.e., procedure/treatment should be performed) ICD implantation for prevention of sudden cardiac death in individuals with documented sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation who have a reasonable expectation of survival with good functional status for more than one year. Class II indications (i.e., it is reasonable to perform procedure/treatment) for ICD implantation include extensive disease (e.g., left ventricular involvement), family members with sudden death, or undiagnosed syncope when ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia cannot be excluded as the cause of syncope while the individual was on optimal medical therapy [Tracy et al 2013, Priori et al 2015].

Surveillance

Screening for degree of cardiac involvement in persons diagnosed with ARVC is essential to ascertain severity and disease progression over time. Screening recommendations:

ECG, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Echocardiogram, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Holter monitoring, event monitoring, implantable loop recorder

Exercise stress testing

Cardiac MRI, with frequency depending on symptoms and findings

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with ARVC are discouraged from participating in vigorous athletic activity including competitive athletics because of the strain caused on the right heart [Corrado et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to relatives at risk for ARVC (even those age <18 years) if the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Predictive testing should be offered in the context of formal genetic counseling.

Note: The initial molecular testing in the proband should encompass ARVC-related genes as a gene panel because of the high rate of digenic heterozygosity (a heterozygous pathogenic variant in two different genes) and to increase the yield of genetic testing [Barahona-Dussault et al 2010, Bauce et al 2010, Christensen et al 2010, Xu et al 2010, Nakajima et al 2012]. Once one (or more) family-specific variant(s) have been identified, targeted variant testing is performed in relatives.

Guidelines exist for screening for cardiac involvement in asymptomatic first-degree relatives at risk for ARVC [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]:

If the family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified in the asymptomatic at-risk relative, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended yearly between ages ten and 50 years.

If genetic testing has not been performed or did not identify a pathogenic variant in an affected family member, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended for asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relatives every three to five years after age ten years.

Screening for cardiac involvement comprises the following [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]:

Medical history with attention to heart failure symptoms, arrhythmia, presyncope, and syncope

ECG, with consideration of signal-averaged electrocardiogram

Echocardiogram

Holter monitoring

Cardiac MRI

At-risk first-degree relatives with any abnormal clinical screening tests for cardiac involvement should be considered for repeat clinical screening in one year [Hershberger et al 2009].

Children younger than age ten are not usually screened, as ARVC features are not usually seen in children before this age. See Hamilton & Fidler [2009] for a review of screening for ARVC in the young. A recent MRI study of ARVC in the young suggested that MRI increases sensitivity but that it was still unusual, even with this more sensitive modality, to see ARVC in children before age ten years [Etoom et al 2015].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Case reports describe successful outcomes in women with ARVC who are pregnant and give birth [Agir et al 2014, Cozzolino et al 2014]. Specific guidelines for managing ARVC in pregnancy have not been developed, but affected individuals need to be monitored by a multidisciplinary team.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic consultation with attention to ataxia, including assessment of extraocular movement

Assessment of speech re communication and swallowing re risk of aspiration

Nutrition and feeding assessment

Immune status of specific parameters that were previously aberrant (e.g., immunoglobulin levels, B/T cell levels, T cell function)

Chest x-ray and pulmonary function for baseline

CBC with differential

Diabetes screen (urinalysis, fasting blood glucose concentration, Hgb A1C)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Neurologic. Supportive therapy can minimize drooling, choreoathetosis, myoclonus/tremor, and ataxia. However, individual responses to specific medications (e.g., amantadine and 4-aminopyridine) and to treatments used for myoclonus vary [Perlman et al 2012, Nissenkorn et al 2013, Shaikh et al 2013, van Egmond et al 2015]. Thus, it is recommended that treatment options be discussed with an experienced neurologist.

Early and continued physical therapy can minimize the risk for contractures (which appear in almost all individuals with time and often lead to other problems such as pressure sores and pain) and scoliosis (which can, for example, be the consequence of prolonged sitting in a wheelchair – particularly the tendency to lean on the same elbow).

Although steroids are reported to temporarily improve the neurologic symptoms of A-T in children, the symptoms reappear within days of their discontinuation [Gatti 1985, Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. (See also Therapies Under Investigation.)

Immunodeficiency. IVIG replacement therapy should be considered for individuals with frequent and severe infections and very low IgG levels [Nowak-Wegrzyn et al 2004].

Pulmonary. The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which can contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in persons with A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Cancer. Because cells from individuals with A-T are 30% more sensitive to ionizing radiation than cells from controls, conventional doses of ionizing radiation are potentially lethal in individuals with A-T. Thus, the use of radiotherapy and some radiomimetic chemotherapeutic agents should be administered carefully and monitored closely [Schütte et al 2016].

Doses of some chemotherapeutic agents are often reduced by 25%-50% and longer recovery periods between treatments are considered to allow for the slower DNA repair that occurs in A-T [Schütte et al 2016].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Pulmonary and nutritional complications of dysphagia are common. Often, gastrostomy tube feedings are recommended to manage these comorbidities. Children with disorders with predictable progression (like A-T) and impaired swallowing may benefit from early rather than late placement of a feeding tube [Lefton-Greif et al 2000].

Anesthesia carries unique potential risks in persons with A-T because of impaired coordination of swallowing, increased risk of aspiration, reduced respiratory capacity, and propensity to infections [McGrath-Morrow et al 2008]. In a recent review, 24% of patients required supplemental oxygen (maximum duration 24 hours) post anesthesia; mild postoperative hypothermia was also relatively common [Lockman et al 2012].

Surveillance

The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which could contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Parents should be counseled to monitor for – and report to a physician – the early warning signs of malignancy (which can occur at any age) including weight loss, bruising, and localized pain or swelling. Periodic CBCs are warranted.

Immune status needs to be monitored if severe recurrent infections occur or immunomodulatory therapy is in progress.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Research suggests the following:

Antioxidants (e.g., vitamin E or alpha-lipoic acid) are recommended, although no formal testing for efficacy has been conducted in individuals with A-T. Alpha-lipoic acid has the theoretic advantage of crossing the blood-brain barrier and improving mitochondrial function in A-T cells [Ambrose et al 2007].

In culture, certain aminoglycoside antibiotics can induce small amounts of full-length ATM protein and return ATM functions to A-T cells with primary nonsense pathogenic variants [Lai et al 2004, Gatti 2012]. Non-aminoglycoside read-through chemicals, identified by a high-throughput screen of 70,000 compounds, induce ATM protein in A-T cells [Du & Gatti 2009]; and chemical derivatives of those compounds – such as RTC13, RTC14, RTC216, RTC202, RTC204, and RTC219 – have produced encouraging results in other diseases besides A-T (e.g., a mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy [Kayali et al 2012], epidermolysis bullosa keratinocytes, xeroderma pigmentosum [Kuschal et al 2013], and retinal cells from amaurotic congenital blindness [Pillers et al 2015].

Thus, it is anticipated that in future patients will be candidates for mutation-targeted therapeutic trials, which will be based on the class of pathogenic variants present and not on the specific gene itself. These drugs will be grouped according to the class of pathogenic variants for which they can address/correct the underlying molecular pathogenicity. – rendering them potentially useful for treating a molecular spectrum of genetic diseases based on the class of pathogenic variant rather than the disease itself [Du et al 2007, Hu & Gatti 2008, Du & Gatti 2009, Jung et al 2011, Gatti 2012, Du et al 2013, Lavin 2013].

Antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (AMOs) induce substantial corrections of ATM protein in cell lines with certain types of ATM splicing variants [Du et al 2007, Du et al 2009]. AMOs remain active in A-T cells for more than 14 days. In animal studies, they are well tolerated when a cell-penetrating protein moiety is added to the AMO. Groundbreaking clinical trials using AMO to treat spinal muscular atrophy – and a particular splicing variant that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy – are in progress.

Amlexanox (Aphthasol®) is another non-aminoglycoside (similar to ataluren [PTC124]) read-through compound for nonsense pathogenic variants that is being tested. To date, it is approved as an ointment for mouth ulcers and is prescribed primarily by dentists [Loudon 2013].

Dexamethasone and betamethasone, but not methylprednisolone, have been reported to decrease neurologic manifestations in A-T [Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. However, the neurologic improvement, which is also accompanied by signs of steroid toxicity, disappears within days of discontinuation of the steroids. Additional studies are in progress. Delivery of the steroids by loading them into erythrocytes affords much better dose control and delivery at 0.001% of previous steroid doses [Leuzzi et al 2015].

In a formal clinical trial in progress, betamethasone is being delivered within autologous red cells that have been infused with doses 100-1000 times lower than what was previously manageable, thereby mitigating most side effects of chronic steroid therapy.

Use of insulin-like growth factor 1(IGF-1) treatment for A-T has been suggested [Fernandez et al 2005]. More recently, Voss et al [2014] showed that the GH/IGF-1 axis was perturbed in 58.3% of individuals with A-T (age range 2 to 9 years). A clinical trial is presently underway.

Manganese-containing superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimics have a radioprotective effect on A-T cells [Pollard et al 2009]. A recent report provides compelling evidence that treatment of a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with a copper-chaperone for SOD extends by 500 days the life expectancy of mice that normally die within three months [Williams et al 2016]. This potential advance in treating motor degeneration may be applicable to A-T as well.

Mutation-targeted therapy for other rare genetic diseases has been encouraging [Wilschanski et al 2003, Welch et al 2007, Du et al 2009]. The number of potential disease targets for read-through therapy exceeds 8000 [Keeling & Bedwell 2011]. It is also estimated that 10%-15% of human pathogenic variants are nonsense variants [Mort et al 2008], predicting investigation of many millions of potential drug candidates.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Any child younger than age five years with malignancy should be evaluated for A-T before starting chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy since conventional doses of either can be fatal in A-T.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical neurologic examination – particularly reflex status, vibratory and position sense, gait, Babinski sign, tremor, dysarthria

Ophthalmologic examination for evidence of macular degeneration or retinitis pigmentosa and decreased visual acuity; electroretinogram (ERG)

Cardiac examination; echocardiography and ECG to assess for cardiomyopathy

Neurophysiologic examination; nerve conduction velocity (NCV) and somatosensory potentials (especially the central conduction time [Schuelke et al 1999]), which are good objective measures of neurologic improvement after vitamin E supplementation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment of choice for AVED is lifelong high-dose oral vitamin E supplementation. Some symptoms (e.g., ataxia and intellectual deterioration) can be reversed if treatment is initiated early in the disease process [Schuelke et al 1999]. In older individuals, disease progression can be stopped, but deficits in proprioception and gait unsteadiness generally remain [Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014]. With treatment, plasma vitamin E concentrations can become normal.

In presymptomatic individuals, the manifestations of AVED can be prevented if vitamin E supplementation is initiated early [El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].

No large-scale therapeutic studies have been performed to determine optimal vitamin E dosage and to evaluate outcomes.

The reported vitamin E dose ranges from 800 mg to 1500 mg (or 40 mg/kg body weight in children) [Burck et al 1981, Harding et al 1985, Amiel et al 1995, Cavalier et al 1998, Schuelke et al 1999, Schuelke et al 2000b, Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004].

One of the following vitamin E preparations is used:

The chemically manufactured racemic form, all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate

The naturally occurring form, RRR-α-tocopherol

It is currently unknown whether affected individuals should be treated with all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate or with RRR-α-tocopherol. It is known that alpha-TTP (αTPP) stereoselectively binds and transports 2R-α-tocopherols [Weiser et al 1996, Hosomi et al 1997, Leonard et al 2002]. For some TTPA pathogenic variants, this stereoselective binding capacity is lost and affected individuals cannot discriminate between RRR- and SRR-α-tocopherol [Traber et al 1993, Cavalier et al 1998]. In this instance, affected individuals would also be able to incorporate non-2R-α-tocopherol stereoisomers into their bodies if they were supplemented with all-rac-α-tocopherol. Since potential adverse effects of the synthetic stereoisomers have not been studied in detail, it seems appropriate to treat with RRR-α-tocopherol, despite the higher cost.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

If vitamin E treatment is initiated in presymptomatic individuals (e.g., younger sibs of an index case), the symptoms of AVED do not develop [Amiel et al 1995, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].

Surveillance

During vitamin E therapy, the plasma vitamin E concentration should be measured at regular intervals (e.g., every 6 months), especially in children. Ideally the plasma vitamin E concentration should be maintained in the high normal range.

Some protocols call for measuring the total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter of plasma (TRAP). Although α-tocopherol only contributes 5%-10% to TRAP, this parameter appears to be the best surrogate marker for clinical improvement [Schuelke et al 1999]. Discontinuation of vitamin E supplementation, even temporarily, leads to a drop in plasma vitamin E concentration within two to three days and to a prolonged drop in TRAP, even after reinitiating vitamin E supplementation [Kohlschütter et al 1997, Schuelke et al 2000b].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with AVED should avoid:

Smoking because it considerably lowers TRAP and reduces plasma vitamin E concentrations [Sharpe et al 1996];

Occupations requiring quick responses or good balance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Predictive testing should be offered to all sibs of a proband, as timely treatment with vitamin E supplementation may completely avert the clinical manifestations of the disease.

All relatives at risk, especially younger sibs of a proband, should be evaluated for vitamin E deficiency.

If plasma vitamin E concentration is low, the person should be tested for presence of the TTPA pathogenic variants found in the proband so that individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants can be treated promptly with vitamin E supplementation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Reduced vitamin E levels are associated with low fertility and embryo resorption in mice [Traber & Manor 2012] and α-tocopherol transfer protein is highly expressed in the human placenta [Müller-Schmehl et al 2004]; therefore, it is advisable to keep vitamin E levels in the high normal range during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Because of abnormal position sense in the extremities, individuals with AVED may have difficulty riding a bicycle or driving a car. Before attempting to drive a car, affected individuals need to be tested by a physician to determine whether they can drive safely.The initial step following diagnosis of β-thalassemia in an individual is to distinguish between those who have thalassemia intermedia (requiring intermittent transfusions on an as-needed basis) from those with thalassemia major (who need a regular transfusion program). See Establishing the Diagnosis.

The following should be included in the investigations when deciding whom to transfuse:

Confirmed diagnosis of thalassemia

Hemoglobin level <7 g/dl on 2 occasions, > 2 weeks apart (excluding all other contributory causes such as infections)

OR, presence of the following features, regardless of hemoglobin level:

Facial changes

Poor growth

Bony fractures

Clinically significant extramedullary hematopoiesis.

Treatment of Manifestations

Comprehensive reviews of the management of thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia have been published by Thalassemia International Federation [Taher et al 2013, Cappellini et al 2014] and are available at the TIF web site.

Thalassemia major. Regular transfusions correct the anemia, suppress erythropoiesis, and inhibit increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron. Before starting the transfusions, it is absolutely necessary to carry out hepatitis B vaccination and perform extensive red blood cell antigen typing, including Rh, Kell, Kidd, and Duffy and serum immunoglobulin determination — the latter of which detects individuals with IgA deficiency who need special (repeatedly washed) blood unit preparation before each transfusion. The transfusion regimen is designed to obtain a pre-transfusion Hb concentration of 95-100 g/L. Transfusions are usually given every two to three weeks.

Thalassemia intermedia. Treatment of individuals with thalassemia intermedia is symptomatic and based on splenectomy and folic acid supplementation. Treatment of extramedullary erythropoietic masses is based on radiotherapy, transfusions, or, in selected cases, hydroxyurea (with a protocol similar to that used for sickle cell disease). Hydroxyurea also increases globin gamma chains and may have other undefined affects. Individuals with thalassemia intermedia may develop iron overload from increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron or from occasional transfusions; chelation therapy with deferasirox has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in persons age ten years or older with a liver iron concentration ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight or serum ferritin ≥800 ng/mL (thresholds after which the risk of serious iron-related morbidity is increased) [Taher et al 2012].

Bone marrow transplantation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) from an HLA-identical sib represents an alternative to traditional transfusion and chelation therapy. If BMT is successful, iron overload may be reduced by repeated phlebotomy, thus eliminating the need for iron chelation.

The outcome of BMT is related to the pretransplantation clinical conditions, specifically the presence of hepatomegaly, extent of liver fibrosis, and magnitude of iron accumulation. In children who lack the above risk factors, disease-free survival is over 90%. Adults with beta-thalassemia are at a higher risk for transplant-related toxicity due to an advanced phase of the disease and have a cure rate of 65% with current treatment protocol [Isgrò et al 2010].

Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) of variable severity may occur in 5%-8% of individuals.

BMT from unrelated donors has been carried out on a limited number of individuals with β-thalassemia. Provided that selection of the donor is based on stringent criteria of HLA compatibility and that individuals have limited iron overload, results are comparable to those obtained when the donor is a compatible sib [La Nasa et al 2005, Gaziev et al 2013].

Affected individuals without matched donors could also benefit from haploidentical mother-to-child transplantation, the results of which appear encouraging [Sodani et al 2011].

Cord blood transplantation. Cord blood transplantation from a related donor offers a good probability of a successful cure and is associated with a low risk for graft versus host disease (GVHD) [Pinto & Roberts 2008]. For couples who have already had a child with thalassemia and who undertake prenatal diagnosis in a subsequent pregnancy, prenatal identification of HLA compatibility between the affected child and an unaffected fetus allows collection of placental blood at delivery and the option of cord blood transplantation to cure the affected child [Orofino et al 2003]. Alternatively, in case of an affected fetus and a previous unaffected child, the couple may decide to continue the pregnancy and pursue BMT later, using the unaffected child as the donor.

Unrelated cord blood transplantation has been explored as an alternative option for affected individuals without a suitable HLA matched unrelated adult donor. However, this strategy may be limited by less than adequate cell dose and higher rates of primary graft failure. One potential strategy may be the use of two cord blood units in order to achieve the desired cell dose, as has been done in individuals with malignancy. However, this approach may be associated with a higher rate of acute GVHD, which may add to the burden of morbidity and mortality for this population.

For these reasons, unrelated cord blood transplantation appears to be a suboptimal strategy for individuals with thalassemia [Ruggeri et al 2011]. However, others have found the outcome of this approach to be more favorable. Jaing et al [2012] reported an overall survival of 88% and a thalassemia-free survival of 74% in 35 individuals with β-thalassemia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of the disease, allows early appropriate treatment and monitoring.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Transfusional Iron Overload

The most common secondary complications are those related to transfusional iron overload, which can be prevented by adequate iron chelation.

Assessment of iron overload

Serum ferritin concentration. In clinical practice, the effectiveness of chelators is monitored by routine determination of serum ferritin concentration. However, serum ferritin concentration is not always reliable for evaluating iron burden because it is influenced by other factors, the most important being the extent of liver damage.

Liver biopsy. Determination of liver iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen shows a high correlation with total body iron accumulation and is the gold standard for evaluation of liver iron overload. However, (1) liver biopsy is an invasive technique involving the possibility (though low) of complications; (2) liver iron content can be affected by hepatic fibrosis, which commonly occurs in individuals with iron overload and HCV infection; and (3) irregular iron distribution in the liver can lead to possible false-negative results [Clark et al 2003].

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a reliable measurement of hepatic iron concentration, is another option [Fischer et al 2003]; however, magnetic susceptometry is presently available only in a limited number of centers worldwide.

MRI techniques for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart are commonly used [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. T2 and T2* parameters have been validated for liver iron concentration. Cardiac T2* is reproducible, is applicable between different scanners, correlates with cardiac function, and relates to tissue iron concentration [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. Clinical utility of T2* in monitoring individuals with siderotic cardiomyopathy has been demonstrated. In one study, twelve human hearts from transfusion-dependent affected individuals after either death or transplantation for end-stage heart failure underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* (the reciprocal of T2*) measurement. Tissue iron concentration was measured in multiple samples of each heart with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, providing calibration in humans for cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* against myocardial iron concentration and detailing the iron distribution throughout the heart in iron overload [Carpenter et al 2011].

Chelation therapy

Desferrioxamine B (DFO). The first chelator introduced clinically was desferrioxamine B (DFO) administered five to seven days a week by 12-hour continuous subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. Recommended dosage depends on the individual's age and the serum ferritin concentration. Young children start with 20-30 mg/kg/day, increasing up to 40 mg/kg/day after age five to six years. The maximum dose is 50 mg/kg/day after growth is completed. The dose may be reduced if serum ferritin concentration is low. By maintaining the total body iron stores below critical values (i.e., hepatic iron concentration <7.0 mg per gram of dry weight liver tissue), desferrioxamine B therapy prevents the secondary effects of iron overload, resulting in a consistent decrease in morbidity and mortality [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2004].

Ascorbate repletion (daily dose not to exceed 100-150 mg) increases the amount of iron removed after DFO administration.

Side effects of DFO chelation therapy are more common in the presence of relatively low iron burden and include ocular and auditory toxicity, growth retardation, and, rarely, renal impairment and interstitial pneumonitis. DFO administration also increases susceptibility to Yersinia infections. The major drawback of DFO chelation therapy is low compliance resulting from complications of administration.

Deferiprone (L-1), a bidentated oral chelator, is administered in a dose of 75-100 mg/kg/day. The main side effects of deferiprone therapy include, arthropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms and, above all, neutropenia and agranulocytosis [Galanello & Campus 2009] that demand close monitoring. The effect of deferiprone on liver iron concentration may vary among the individuals treated. However, results from independent studies suggest that deferiprone is more cardioprotective than desferrioxamine; compared to those being treated with DFO, individuals being treated with deferiprone have better myocardial MRI pattern and less probability of developing (or worsening pre-existing) cardiac disease [Anderson et al 2002, Piga et al 2003]. These retrospective observations have been confirmed in a prospective study [Pennell et al 2006].

Deferasirox was developed as a once-daily oral monotherapy for the treatment of transfusional iron overload. It is effective in adults and children and has a defined safety profile that is clinically manageable with appropriate monitoring. The most common treatment-related adverse events are gastrointestinal disorders, skin rash, and a mild, non-progressive increase in serum creatinine concentration [Cappellini 2008]. Cases of renal failure, hepatic failure, cytopenias and gastrointestinal hemorrhage have been reported in the post-marketing phase. Provided adequate doses are given, there is a good response to deferasirox across the full range of baseline liver iron concentration values. Prospective data demonstrate the efficacy of deferasirox in improving myocardial T2* and in maintaining a normal left ventricle ejection fraction [Pennell et al 2012, Pennell et al 2014]. Deferasirox has not been evaluated in formal trials for affected individuals with symptomatic heart failure or low left-ventricle ejection fraction.

Strategies of chelation using a combination of desferrioxamine and deferiprone have been effective in individuals with severe iron overload. Retrospective, prospective, and randomized clinical studies have shown that combined iron chelation with deferiprone and desferrioxamine rapidly reduces myocardial siderosis, improves cardiac and endocrine function, reduces liver iron and serum ferritin concentration, reduces cardiac mortality, and improves survival; toxicity is manageable [Tanner et al 2007, Galanello et al 2010].

Cardiac Disease

Particular attention has been directed to the early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac disease because of its critical role in determining the prognosis of individuals with β-thalassemia. Assessment of myocardial siderosis and monitoring of cardiac function combined with intensification of iron chelation can result in excellent long-term prognoses [Wood 2008, Kirk et al 2009, Chouliaras et al 2011].

Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is a common complication in adults with thalassemia major or thalassemia intermedia [Voskaridou & Terpos 2008]. Its origin is multifactorial, making it difficult to manage. Treatment involves appropriate hormonal replacement, an effective regimen of transfusion and iron chelation, calcium and vitamin D administration, and regular physical activity. Sufficient evidence exists to support the use of bisphosphonates in the management of thalassemia-associated osteoporosis (to prevent bone loss and improve the bone mineral density). Further research is warranted to establish their anti-fracture efficacy and long-term safety [Giusti 2014]. However, since the origin of bone disease in thalassemia major is multifactorial and some of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are still unclear, further research in this field is needed to allow for the design of optimal therapeutic measures [Skordis & Toumba 2011].

Surveillance

A general timetable for clinical and laboratory evaluation in thalassemia major has been provided by Thalassemia International Federation [Cappellini et al 2014] and is available at the TIF web site.

For individuals with thalassemia major, follow up to monitor the effectiveness of transfusion therapy and chelation therapy and their side effects includes the following:

Monthly physical examination by a physician familiar with the affected individual and the disease

Every three months: assessment of liver function tests (serum concentration of ALT), determination of serum ferritin concentration, and assessment of growth and development (during childhood)

Annual

Ophthalmologic and audiologic examinations

Complete cardiac evaluation, and evaluation of thyroid, endocrine pancreas, parathyroid, adrenal, and pituitary function

Liver ultrasound evaluation and determination of serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration in adults with hepatitis C and iron overload for early detection of hepatocarcinoma

Bone densitometry to assess for osteoporosis in the adult

Regular gallbladder echography for early detection of cholelithiasis [Origa et al 2009], particularly in individuals with the Gilbert syndrome genotype (i.e., presence of the (TA)7/(TA)7 motif in the UGT1Apromoter)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Alcohol consumption, which in individuals with liver disease has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage

Iron-containing preparations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate older and younger sibs of a proband as early as possible. Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of β-thalassemia, allows prompt, appropriate treatment and monitoring.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, hematologic testing can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Provided that a multidisciplinary team is available, pregnancy is possible and safe, and usually has a favorable outcome in women with β-thalassemia. An increasing number of women with thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia may, therefore, have children. Although hypogonadotropic hypogonadism remains a common condition in thalassemia major, gonadal function is usually intact and fertility is usually retrievable.

Pregnancy also appears to be safe in most women with thalassemia intermedia, although larger and more detailed studies are needed. Indeed, an increased risk for certain complications cannot yet be excluded. For example, women with thalassemia intermedia who had never previously received a blood transfusion or who had received a minimal quantity of blood are reported to be at risk for severe alloimmune anemia if blood transfusions are required during pregnancy [Origa et al 2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

New chelation strategies are under investigation. A metabolic iron balance study in six affected individuals wherein the relative effectiveness of deferasirox (30 mg/kg/day) and deferoxamine (40 mg/kg/day) was compared, alone and in combination, demonstrated a negative iron balance in 5/6 using the combination of drugs just three days a week [Grady et al 2013]. This finding has been confirmed in some clinical studies [Arandi et al 2015]. Moreover, preliminary studies using in combination the two oral chelators deferasirox and deferiprone appear to be encouraging [Berdoukas et al 2010, Farmaki et al 2011, Voskaridou et al 2011, Elalfy et al 2015].

A study in a mouse model of hemochromatosis demonstrated that the use of minihepcidins (small drug-like hepcidin agonists) in a hepcidin-deficient mouse could be beneficial in iron overload disorders when used either alone for prevention or possibly as adjunctive therapy with phlebotomy or chelation [Ramos et al 2012].

Induction of fetal hemoglobin synthesis can reduce the severity of β-thalassemia by improving the imbalance between alpha and non-alpha globin chains. Several pharmacologic compounds including 5-azacytidine, decytabine, and butyrate derivatives have had encouraging results in clinical trials [Pace & Zein 2006]. These agents induce Hb F by different mechanisms that are not yet well defined. Their potential in the management of β-thalassemia syndromes is under investigation [Perrine 2008, Boosalis et al 2011].

The efficacy of hydroxyurea treatment in individuals with thalassemia is still unclear. Hydroxyurea is used in persons with thalassemia intermedia to reduce extramedullary masses, to increase hemoglobin levels, and, in some cases, to improve leg ulcers [Levin & Koren 2011]. Hydroxyurea prevents hemolysis and hypercoagulability by modifying the defective hemoglobin synthesis and reducing thrombocytosis. A retrospective study found no pulmonary hypertension in 50 individuals with thalassemia intermedia treated with hydroxyurea for seven years [Karimi et al 2009, Taher et al 2010]. A good response, correlated with particular polymorphisms in the beta-globin cluster (i.e., C>T at -158 G gamma), has been reported in individuals with transfusion dependence [Bradai et al 2003, Yavarian et al 2004]. However, controlled and randomized studies are warranted to establish the role of hydroxyurea in the management of thalassemia syndromes.

Modulators of erythropoiesis, such as TGF-β-like molecules or inhibitors of JAK2, could soon revolutionize the treatment of β-thalassemia and related disorders.

Activins, members of the TGF-β family signaling, are key regulators of human hematopoiesis, modulating various cellular responses such as proliferation, differentiation, migration and apoptosis. A modified activin type IIB receptor inhibiting signaling induced by some members of the TGF-β superfamily promotes maturation of terminally differentiating erythroblasts. In thalassemic mice (Hbbth1/th1), it ameliorates hematologic parameters as well as co-morbidities that develop as a consequence of the erythroid hyperplasia [Suragani et al 2014].

The discovery that JAK2 plays an important role in the progression and exacerbation of ineffective erythropoiesis suggests that drugs inhibiting JAK2 activity could mitigate ineffective erythropoiesis and reverse splenomegaly. In fact, in preclinical studies it has been shown that a JAK2 inhibitor dramatically decreased the spleen size and modulated the ineffective erythropoiesis [Breda & Rivella 2014].

The possibility of correction of the molecular defect in hematopoietic stem cells by transfer of a normal gene via a suitable vector or by homologous recombination is being actively investigated. The most promising results in the mouse model have been obtained with lentiviral vectors [Persons 2009].

A clinical trial for β-thalassemia has begun in France, and one individual with transfusion-dependent HbE/beta-thalassemia has demonstrated a therapeutic effect after transplantation with autologous CD 34(+) cells, genetically modified with a beta-globin lentiviral vector [Kaiser 2009]. The levels of genetically modified cells increased from 2% in the first few months to 11% at 33 months post transplant. The affected individual was last transfused on June 6, 2008, and four years after transplantation (despite being slightly anemic and undergoing repeated phlebotomies for the decrease of iron overload) does not require blood transfusions. Although most of the therapeutic benefit results from a dominant, myeloid-biased cell clone, in which the integrated vector causes transcriptional activation of HMGA2 (a potential oncogene in various types of cancer) in erythroid cells, this integration seems hitherto benign [Cavazzana-Calvo et al 2010]. Very encouraging preliminary data on individuals with HbE/β-thalassemia and homozygous β-thalassemia transplantated with autologous CD34+ cells transduced with a replication-defective, self-inactivating lentiviral vector containing an engineered β-globin gene (βA-T87Q) were recently reported by the same group [Cavazzana et al 2014, Thompson et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Attempts at in utero transplantation using the father as a haploidentical donor have consistently failed.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome (BAP1-TPDS), the following evaluations are recommended [Rai et al 2016]:

Atypical Spitz (ATS) tumors, cutaneous melanoma (CM), and/or basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Full-body skin examination by a dermatologist with excision of any lesions suggestive of an atypical Spitz tumor

Uveal melanoma (UM). Dilated eye examination and imaging by an ocular oncologist

Malignant mesothelioma (MMe). No screening modalities exist; however, if an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Abdominal ultrasound examination, urinalysis, and abdominal MRI (consider also requesting assessment of the pleura and peritoneum)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatments for BAP1-TPDS tumors are those used in standard practice.

Uveal melanoma. Because of the increased aggressiveness of BAP1-related uveal melanoma, all uveal melanomas should be managed as the more aggressive tumors (ie., those determined to be class 2 by expression profiling and those with monosomy 3) [Njauw et al 2012].

Malignant mesothelioma. MMe is highly refractory to conventional therapies including aggressive surgical intervention and multimodality strategies; thus, a cure is unlikely.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is treated in the usual manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Uveal melanoma. Arc welding has been associated with risk of uveal melanoma and this should be avoided if possible.

Sunglasses with high UVA and UVB protection can reduce risk of cancer on the eyelids, but data regarding the benefit of sunglasses for uveal melanoma are lacking.

Malignant mesothelioma. As with all individuals, asbestos exposure and smoking should also be avoided.

Cutaneous melanoma. Primary prevention is limited to those measures typically used to reduce the risk for cutaneous melanoma, including limiting of sun exposure, regular use of sunscreen and protective clothing, and regular dermatologic examinations.

Surveillance

Consensus management recommendations have not been established; however, several groups have proposed variations of the following [Carbone et al 2012, Battaglia 2014, Rai et al 2016]:

Uveal melanoma. Yearly dilated eye examinations and imaging by an ocular oncologist beginning around age 11 years

Malignant mesothelioma. No reliable early disease symptoms or screening modalities

Annual evaluation is recommended for late manifestations of mesothelioma, which can include chest pain, cough, fever, shortness of breath, dysphagia, hoarseness, weight loss, fever, upper body and face edema (chest mesothelioma) and abdominal pain, ascites, nausea, vomiting, and/or constipation (peritoneal mesothelioma). Annual physical examination is recommended to look for signs of pleurisy (pleural inflammation), peritonitis, ascites and/or pleural effusion.

If an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure.

Cutaneous melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and atypical Spitz tumors. Annual full body dermatologic examinations beginning around age 20 years

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Protocol similar to von Hippel Lindau disease with annual abdominal ultrasound examination; consideration of annual urinalysis and abdominal MRI every two years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Arc welding

Asbestos

Smoking

Unnecessary and prolonged sun exposure

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the BAP1 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of screening and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently no open treatment trials specifically target patients with BAP1-TPDS.

One NCI-sponsored trial using vorinostat in the treatment of metastatic uveal melanoma is assessing BAP1 mutation status as a secondary outcome measure.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial (BWCFF) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopy

Hearing assessment

Brain MRI

EEG (if brain MRI is abnormal)

Neurology (adult or child) consultation in case of brain MRI anomaly and/or seizures

Neurocognitive evaluation

Echocardiogram for evidence of congenital heart defects

Abdominal ultrasound examination for evidence of malformation of the kidneys and/or ureters

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no specific treatment of BWCFF syndrome. Symptomatic management involves the following.

Ptosis may require surgical treatment.

Coloboma and/or microphthalmia may lead to poor vision and require routine care for these findings.

Hearing loss may require routine care including hearing aids.

Epilepsy is treated using standard protocols.

Developmental delay requires specific support (speech therapy, physical therapy) adapted to the severity of the disability.

Malformations of the heart, urinary tract, and oral clefts are treated using standard procedures.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Neurodevelopmental follow up by a multidisciplinary team involved in cognitive impairment and appropriate support

Coloboma or microphthalmia: ophthalmologic follow-up (at least yearly) with systematic screening for intraocular hypertension and glaucoma. Although glaucoma has not been reported to date, it is a known complication of colobomatous microphthalmia. Early detection allows specific treatment of intraocular hypertension.

Routine follow up of deafness for any evidence of progression

Cardiac defect: cardiology follow up (adapted to the type of congenital heart disease identified)

Renal tract anomaly: nephrology follow up adapted to the anomaly and the risk of renal insufficiency

Screening for malignancies. The risk of malignancies is not established for BWCFF syndrome; screening for hematologic malignancies must be considered in case of physical deterioration or unexplained chronic fever.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and medical needs in an individual diagnosed with Barth syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count and differential

Echocardiogram

ECG

Plasma amino acids

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of heart failure. There is no specific treatment for cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmia in Barth syndrome. Standard heart failure (HF) medications are used to improve symptoms, effect reverse remodeling of the ventricle, and improve ventricular function as measured by ejection fraction (EF).

These medications include ACE-inhibitors, beta blockers, and digoxin for typical outpatient management, and intravenous inotropes, including milrinone for in-patient management of acute decompensation.

Therapy received by 22 individuals in the French cohort [Rigaud et al 2013] included: 16/22 beta blockers, 9/22 beta blockers, 11/22 digoxin, 17/22 diuretics, 5/22 anticoagulants, and 5/22 aspirin.

Although no studies are available to evaluate the effectiveness of medical therapy in males with Barth syndrome, when medications are stopped a decline in heart function is often observed. However, this can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from the natural fluctuations of the clinical phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description, Heart failure).

Aspirin should be considered for prevention of clot formation (and thus reduction in the risk for stroke) in males with severe cardiac dysfunction and/or marked LVNC. Suggested aspirin dose is 5 mg/kg daily for children and 81 to 325 mg daily for adults.

The potential role of prophylactic antiarrhythmic medication or implantable cardiac defibrillator for primary arrhythmia prevention has not been clarified.

Cardiac transplantation has been successful when heart failure is severe and intractable [Mangat et al 2007, Roberts et al 2012]; however, given the natural history of improving ventricular function after infancy, cardiac transplantation should be carefully considered.

Management of neutropenia. The treatment of neutropenia in children with Barth syndrome varies, including regular administration of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), administration of G-CSF during times of high risk only (e.g., surgery or infection), prophylactic antibiotics, and other preventive treatment strategies.

Early on, it was suggested that the administration of G-CSF during times of suspected or known bacterial infection may be effective in reducing the incidence of severe infections [Cox et al 1995]. The usual starting dose of G-CSF is 2-3 μg/kg/dose with a frequency of administration ranging from twice a week to every other day [Clarke et al 2013].

In 83 patients, 42 of whom had been treated with G-CSF, the median dose was 2.78 ± 0.78 (SEM) μg/kg/dose (range: 0.45-12.8 μg/kg/dose) [Dale et al 2013]. On average, G-CSF was begun at age 5.8 years, with an average exposure of 7.3 years; none developed acute myeloid leukemia, and treatment responses to G-CSF were maintained long-term.

Of note, although neutropenia appears to improve with G-CSF treatment, in the French cohort in which six affected males were actively treated with G-CSF, two developed a severe infection, including one episode of septic shock [Rigaud et al 2013].

Nutrition. Uncooked cornstarch given prior to bedtime has been recommended as a means of avoiding muscle protein loss overnight. Specific dosing according to age and weight can be obtained from the Barth Syndrome Foundation [Avery 2006].

Educational support in school. The excessive fatigue that boys with Barth syndrome experience and the characteristic cognitive phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description) warrant educational support during the early school-age years [Mazzocco et al 2007] with particular attention to mathematics [Raches & Mazzocco 2012].

Physical therapy. The goal should be attainment of development milestones and functional outcomes while at the same time monitoring cardiovascular status [Jarvis et al 2001].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis has been used to prevent recurrent infections. In the French study of 22 patients, four received antibiotic prophylaxis [Rigaud et al 2013].

As males with Barth syndrome may be predisposed to hypoglycemia, episodes of fasting (such as prior to surgery) should be as short as possible and accompanied by intravenous glucose infusion [Schlame 2013].

Potassium issues:

Increased risk for hypokalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome can rapidly become potassium-depleted during a gastrointestinal illness (as would anyone with marked muscular hypoplasia) [Kelley 2002], serum potassium levels should be monitored during episodes of diarrhea.

Increased risk for hyperkalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome lack normal muscle “reservoir” for potassium, they can rapidly develop hyperkalemia when given intravenous fluids containing potassium [Kelley 2002]; thus, serum potassium levels should be monitored during the administration of intravenous fluids.

Because of their growth delay, males with Barth syndrome have lower than normal caloric requirements, and attempts to induce growth by overfeeding can lead to chronic diarrhea [Kelley 2002].

Surveillance

Height and weight should be monitored on a regular basis with consideration of Barth syndrome-specific growth patterns [Roberts et al 2012].

Standardized cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitoring should be considered at least yearly [Spencer et al 2005].

A low threshold for performing an electrophysiologic study to assess for a potentially serious arrhythmia is appropriate, especially in the presence of symptoms such as palpitations and syncope, abnormal arrhythmia screening tests, or a family history of sudden death [Spencer et al 2005].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

The use of rectal thermometers in those with neutropenia

The use of succinylcholine, as non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers could have a prolonged effect [Schlame 2013]

The use of human growth hormone is usually discouraged, as the majority of affected males will attain normal stature by adulthood.

Although the use of sevoflurane has been reported without adverse effects, the muscular involvement in Barth syndrome may increase the risk for malignant hyperthermia compared to the general population [Schlame 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger brothers of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the TAZ pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs.

If the TAZ pathogenic variant in the family is not known, testing by means of MLCL:CL ratio (if available) can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs.

If MLCL:CL ratio is not available, a combination of urine organic acid analysis, complete blood count with differential, and echocardiogram may be able to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs. However, such testing cannot completely exclude a diagnosis of Barth syndrome.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Given that Barth syndrome has been variably associated with different prenatal complications including intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios, intrauterine ventricular dysfunction, and hydrops fetalis [Cardonick et al 1997, Steward et al 2010], it seems prudent to recommend that pregnancies of male fetuses known to have Barth syndrome be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician. Of note, there are no specific recommendations regarding mode, timing, or location of delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Pantothenic acid. The original report of successful treatment of Barth syndrome with pantothenic acid [Ostman-Smith et al 1994] was not substantiated by later reports [Kelley 2002, Rugolotto et al 2003].

Coenzyme Q10. The rationale behind the use of coenzyme Q10 is based on the fact that both coenzyme Q10 and 3-methylglutaconic acid (3-MGC) can be produced from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP), an intermediate in the synthesis of cholesterol. Thus, if coenzyme Q10 production is impaired, more DMAPP could potentially be shunted towards the production of 3-MGC [Costeff et al 1998]. However, no formal study has been undertaken to prove the efficacy of coenzyme Q10 therapy in males with Barth syndrome. In a study of 15 males with Barth syndrome, three took coenzyme Q10 [Spencer et al 2011].

Carnitine. Although early reports claimed significant benefit from carnitine supplementation in males with Barth syndrome [Ino et al 1988], subsequent reports identified rapid deterioration in cardiac function in some cases with carnitine supplementation [Ostman-Smith et al 1994, Kelley 2002]. Thus, unless plasma carnitine levels are low, its supplementation has no role in the treatment of Barth syndrome.

Arginine. Because low plasma arginine levels detected in males with Barth syndrome [Rigaud et al 2013, Vernon et al 2014] could contribute to growth delay and cardiac abnormalities by impairing protein synthesis, it has been proposed that oral arginine supplementation be used. Improvements in ventricular function have also been noted concurrently with normalization of the amino acid profile [R Kelley, personal communication]. However, to date no formal assessments of the efficacy of this treatment have been published.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic assessment to determine visual acuity, field deficits, or refractive errors. Fundoscopic photographs should be filed for later comparison.

Examination of the genitalia in both sexes. It is important to image the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina in all affected females. Pelvic ultrasound examination is preferred.

Calculation of body mass index (BMI) (weight in kg divided by the height in meters squared) can aid in identifying medically significant obesity.

Dietary evaluation if obesity is present (BMI >30)

Renal function studies and renal ultrasound examination for assessment of possible structural renal anomalies. If significant abnormalities are identified, referral to a nephrologist is desirable.

Baseline blood pressure assessment

As nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a commonly overlooked feature of BBS, questioning the individual or parents with regard to the individual’s fluid intake and output can be a simple but helpful diagnostic aid. In some instances, tests of renal concentrating ability by initial urinalysis may be helpful.

Cardiac evaluation including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography

Developmental assessment and/or educational evaluation for the purpose of intervention and planning

Endocrinologic testing as needed including glucose tolerance testing (GTT) for diabetes mellitus, lipid levels, and assessment of thyroid and liver functions. More formal tests of pituitary function may be warranted particularly in assessing fertility and development of secondary sex characteristics. Infertility should not be assumed in all males or females.

Hearing evaluation. Otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and audiometry may reveal subclinical sensorineural hearing loss in adults. Conductive hearing loss is common in children as a result of recurrent otitis media.

Dental evaluation to assess for hygiene, dental crowding, and hypodontia

Neurologic examination to assess for ataxic gait, poor coordination, dysdiadochokinesia, inability to perform tandem gait walking, poor two-point discrimination, and diminished fine motor skills

Consider referral to a clinical geneticist.

Treatment of Manifestations

No therapy exists for the progressive visual loss, but early evaluation by a low-vision specialist facilitates introduction of low vision aids and mobility training. Educational planning should take the prospect of future blindness into consideration.

To manage obesity, multiple strategies are advocated, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies. Education and dietary measures to control weight gain must be initiated at an early age. No formal trials of drug therapy (appetite suppressants or lipase inhibitors) have been reported; however, such therapy may be attempted providing the individual does not have contraindications to specific drug use (i.e., renal or hepatic dysfunction).

Complications of obesity, such as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes mellitus, should be treated as in the general population.

Cognitive disability should be addressed through early intervention and special education, as indicated by evaluation. It is advisable to assess individual needs with respect to education, as many adults are capable of attaining independent living skills.

Speech therapy should be offered at the first sign of speech delay and/or impairment.

Renal transplantation has been successful, although the immunosuppressants used following transplantation can compound the weight problem.

Surgical correction of hydrocolpos, vaginal atresia, or hypospadias may be warranted.

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and sex hormone levels should be monitored to determine if hormone replacement therapy is indicated.

It is important to offer contraceptive advice to all affected females rather than assume likely infertility.

The earliest and most common intervention for polydactyly is removal of the accessory digit. Indicators are functional interference and poorly fitting footwear. Most children have their accessory digits removed within the first two years.

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities is the same as for the general population.

Dental extractions are appropriate as required for dental crowding.

Prompt treatment for acute and chronic otitis media should be considered. Insertion of grommets is commonplace.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.

Surveillance

A multidisciplinary approach is required to effectively manage this pleiotropic condition. Suggested surveillance is summarized here:

Annual ophthalmologic evaluations with annual electroretinogram in those older than age five years

Routine (at least annual) measurement of blood pressure

A baseline renal ultrasound scan and annual renal function tests for all individuals with BBS. If a structural renal malformation is detected, review by a nephrologist and follow-up sonography is indicated.

Monitor BUN and serum concentration of creatinine if a progressive obstructive urinary tract anomaly is detected or if bilateral renal malformations are observed and satisfactory renal growth is not observed on follow-up ultrasonography.

In individuals with renal impairment (elevated serum creatinine) as a result of an underlying structural malformation, six-month to annual monitoring by a nephrologist for complications of chronic kidney disease is indicated.

Annual endocrinology review

Regular testing for diabetes mellitus by measurement of fasting glucose concentration or glucose tolerance testing

Annual thyroid function tests, liver function tests and lipid profile

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any substances contraindicated in persons with renal impairment should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs or relatives who have clinical features similar to those of the individual with BBS warrant genetic consultation. If the relative is deemed affected, molecular genetic testing, consultation with an ophthalmologist, and a renal sonogram to evaluate for structural renal malformations are recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Expectant mothers affected with BBS require close monitoring for any deterioration in renal function or pregnancy-related complications due to structural abnormalities of the reproductive tract.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline measurement of head circumference, preferably with plotting on a chart that accounts for height. Evidence of rapid increase in centiles should prompt further investigation to exclude hydrocephalus.

Physical examination for birth defects of clinical significance (e.g., orofacial clefts, polydactyly)

X-rays to evaluate for rib and vertebral anomalies and falx calcification

Ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of strabismus, cataract, orbital cyst, microphthalmia, and pigmentary changes of the retinal epithelium

Evaluation by a dentist or orthodontist familiar with NBCCS; jaw x-ray (orthopantogram) in individuals age eight years or older to evaluate for jaw keratocysts and other anomalies

Skin examination by a dermatologist familiar with NBCCS

Ultrasound examination of the ovaries to evaluate for ovarian fibromas prior to pregnancy

Echocardiography in the first year of life to evaluate for cardiac fibromas

Clinical genetics consultation

Because mesenteric and pleural cysts are rare, evaluation is not necessary in the absence of symptoms.

Treatment of Manifestations

Manifestations should be treated by specialists (e.g., oral surgeon, dermatologist, plastic surgeon, pediatrician, clinical geneticist) experienced with the condition.

Keratocysts usually require surgical excision.

Early treatment of BCCs is essential to prevent long-term cosmetic problems, particularly on the face. The priorities are to ensure complete eradication of aggressive BCCs, and to preserve normal tissue to prevent disfigurement. Surgical excision is supplemented by a number of other possible treatments including cryotherapy and laser treatment for early lesions and photodynamic therapy. Photodynamic therapy is particularly suitable for thin lesions of <2 mm on ultrasound [Basset-Seguin et al 2014]. Surgical treatment using Mohs' microsurgery [Mohs et al 1980] appears particularly effective.

Systemic treatment with retinoids (e.g., etretinate) is possible but often not well tolerated.

Treatment of individuals with severe BCC manifestations and/or advanced lesions with sonic hedgehog inhibitors such as vismodegib is now possible. Although side effects are common and quite severe there is a high resolution of advanced lesions and reduction in new BCCs [Sekulic et al 2012]. Sonic hedgehog inhibitors may be particularly helpful with lesions around the eyes [Ozgur et al 2015].

Cardiac fibromas may be asymptomatic and can be monitored by a pediatric cardiologist.

If ovarian fibromas require surgical treatment, preservation of ovarian tissue is recommended, although it involves a risk of recurrence [Seracchioli et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Affected individuals should cover up exposed skin by wearing long sleeves, high collars, and hats; complete sunblock should be used.

Surveillance

Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computed tomography (CT) scans should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity. A recent consensus meeting has suggested annual head MRI scans until age eight years in affected children [Bree et al 2011], but this would require general anesthesia for many children and is probably not now justified in PTCH1-related NBCCS with only a 2% risk. However, it may well be justified in infants with SUFU pathogenic variants [Smith et al 2014].

No other tumors occur at a frequency that warrants surveillance above that offered to members of the general population.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Use of radiotherapy can lead to the development of thousands of BCCs in the radiation field [Strong 1977, Evans et al 1991a] and therefore should be avoided if there are alternative treatments, especially in childhood. If the treating team believes that no other treatment modality is possible, radiotherapy should be used through as few skin ports as possible.

Diagnostic x-rays should be used sparingly.

Individuals with NBCCS should be advised to avoid direct sun exposure as much as possible. Excessive sun exposure increases the likelihood of developing BCCs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives, including children, of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance (see Surveillance) for complications of NBCCS (most notably medulloblastoma in children and jaw cysts and BCCs in adults) and the need to avoid x-rays and sun exposure (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Clinical examination and x-rays of the skull for calcification if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known; these may be less likely to clarify the genetic status in a very young child because of the age-related features of NBCCS.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Since individuals with NBCCS have a large head circumference, a woman who is carrying an affected fetus should be assessed for the need for either early induction of labor or caesarean section delivery due to cephalopelvic disproportion.

Therapies Under Investigation

Photodynamic therapy (with infra-red light) showed early promise and appears safe [Haylett et al 2003]. A recent study showed outcomes in 33 individuals with NBCCS treated with photodynamic therapy (PDT) with a near-60% control rate [Loncaster et al 2009].

Aminolevulinic acid has been investigated [Itkin & Gilchrest 2004, Oseroff et al 2005]. It is usually used in conjunction with PDT [Loncaster et al 2009].

Topical treatment with 5-fluorouracil (Efudex®) or imiquimod (5%) has been investigated [Kagy & Amonette 2000, Marks et al 2001, Stockfleth et al 2002]. A recent review suggested control rates approaching 90% for superficial BCCs and 50% for aggressive or nodular BCCs with imiquimod [Alessi et al 2009].

Topical 5-fluorouracil appears effective for superficial multicentric BCCs without follicular involvement but should not be used for deeply invasive BCCs.

Recently topical use of sonic hedgehog antagonists has entered clinical trials and is showing promise [Saran 2010]. Systemic use of sonic hedgehog antagonists in individuals with NBCCS who have advanced or refractory BCCs has also been effective [Sekulic et al 2012, Tang et al 2012], with a 43% response rate in 63 affected individuals with locally advanced BCCs. Response rates were very high in individuals with NBCCS but 53% discontinued therapy because of adverse side effects [Tang et al 2012]. Sonic hedgehog antagonists may be particularly useful for periocular lesions [Ozgur et al 2015]. A recent report suggests that anti-sonic hedgehog agents may also resolve keratocysts when given for BCC treatment [Goldberg et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Bethlem myopathy. To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Bethlem myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of degree of muscle weakness and mobility

Joint examination for contractures

Physiotherapy assessment and advice regarding stretches/splints for contractures and mobility aids

Possibly orthopedic evaluation if surgery is to be considered for tendon Achilles contractures

Assessment of respiratory status

Seek history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence.

Inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD). To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Ullrich CMD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of degree of muscle weakness and mobility

Examination of back for scoliosis

Joint examination for contractures and hyperlaxity

Physiotherapy assessment and advice regarding stretches/splints for contractures and mobility aids such as swivel walkers and standing frames to achieve upright posture and protect against the development of scoliosis and other contractures

Possibly x-rays of thoracolumbar spine and orthopedic evaluation if scoliosis is clinically suspected

Possibly orthopedic evaluation if hip dislocation is suspected or surgery is to be considered for tendon Achilles contractures

Assessment of respiratory status

Seek history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence.

Inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry.

Assessment of growth and feeding. Feeding difficulties may manifest as failure to thrive or excessive time taken to finish eating a meal.

Treatment of Manifestations

Bethlem myopathy

Physiotherapy and possibly orthopedic management of contractures are useful to maintain mobility. Contractures may be dynamic and may require stretching and splinting.

Symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation respond well to noninvasive respiratory support such as mask ventilation [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Approximately two thirds of individuals over age 50 years need supportive aids for outdoor mobility [Jöbsis et al 1999].

Ullrich CMD

Children require active physiotherapy management as soon as the diagnosis is established to promote mobility and independence. Early mobilization in standing frames is important to achieve upright posture and protect against the development of scoliosis and other contractures.

Contractures tend to be aggressive and may require surgery.

Feeding difficulties may manifest as failure to thrive or excessive time taken to finish eating a meal. Consultation with a nutrition specialist may be required to boost calorie intake; for serious problems, feeding by gastrostomy may be the best solution to promote a normal weight gain.

Respiratory support with nocturnal ventilation usually becomes necessary in the first or second decade and can be effective in reducing symptoms, promoting quality of life, and allowing normal schooling [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Scoliosis frequently develops in the first or second decade and requires active management including surgery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prophylaxis of chest infections with vaccination and physiotherapy as well as early and aggressive use of antibiotics may prevent further respiratory problems in both disorders.

Surveillance

Bethlem myopathy

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry)

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly annually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.

Ullrich CMD

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, scoliosis, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Once scoliosis is evident, regular orthopedic follow up

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry);

Clinical assessment of nutritional status

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly biannually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For a pregnant woman with a collagen VI-related disorder, no specific pregnancy management issues exist; however, prenatal physiotherapy may be indicated.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.KCNQ2-related disorders represent a broad prognostic spectrum, and evaluation following a positive KCNQ2 genetic test differs depending on severity of the phenotype.

Individuals with benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE)

In-depth neurologic examination

Developmental evaluation

Individuals with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy (NEE)

Video EEG monitoring including sleep phase to obtain information on presence of seizures. A burst suppression EEG pattern might only be seen during sleep.

Cognitive and behavioral neuropsychological testing

Assessment of digestive and other non-neurologic comorbidities

All individuals with a KCNQ2-related disorder. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is also recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

KCNQ2-BFNE. Seizures in individuals with BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam and topiramate, are often used (off-label and despite limited data) in neonates with refractory seizures [Tulloch et al 2012]. Refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ2-related BFNE.

KCNQ2-NEE. Children with KCNQ2-related neonatal epileptic encephalopathy generally present with tonic seizures accompanied by motor and autonomic features, similar to seizures in KCNQ2-BFNE. However, individuals with KCNQ2-NEE clearly differ from those with KCNQ2-BFNE as to seizure response. Although seizure response to any of the AEDs has been described in isolated patients, many patients at onset show multiple daily seizures resistant to multiple common old- and new-generation AEDs, alone or in combination. Seizures then tend to gradually decrease by age nine months to four years [Weckhuysen et al 2012].

A favorable response to drugs acting on voltage-gated sodium channels has been suggested in several studies [Kato et al 2013, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Numis et al 2014, Pisano et al 2015]. It has been suggested that early effective treatment reduces cognitive disability [Pisano et al 2015]; however, it remains a matter of debate whether early control of seizures translates to better neuropsychological outcome.

VGB or ACTH therapy can be tried for treatment of infantile spasms that can occur during the course of the disease [Dedek et al 2003, Borgatti et al 2004, Serino et al 2013].

Management should further focus on the optimization of the patient’s functional and communication skills. A multidisciplinary team approach including physiotherapists, speech therapists, and behavioral therapists is best suited to addressing the individual’s needs. Augmentative communication techniques can be valuable for many patients.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As seizure frequency tends to decrease with age, the option to taper and eventually stop AED after a sufficient seizure-free period should be considered in order to prevent complications of long-term AED use. Some children may require lifelong antiepileptic treatment.

Surveillance

KCNQ2-BFNE. EEG at age three, 12, and 24 months is appropriate. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

KCNQ2-NEE. Video-EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Serial neuropsychological evaluation of neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral problems is advised.

Regular follow up by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to nutritional intake, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In patients with known gain-of-function pathogenic variants in KCNQ2, the use of the potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine may be contraindicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The pregnancy management of a woman with a KCNQ2 pathogenic variant and epilepsy does not differ from that of any other pregnant woman with a seizure disorder.

A fetus with a KCNQ2 pathogenic variant may have neonatal seizures in the first few days of life. Therefore, a woman who is carrying a fetus at risk of inheriting a KCNQ2-related disorder should consider delivering in a hospital with a neonatal intensive care unit.

Therapies Under Investigation

A recent report described a positive effect of vitamin B6 on seizures in a few patients with KCNQ2-NEE [Reid et al 2016], but further studies are needed to confirm the antiepileptic effect of pyridoxine in the absence of an inherited disorder of vitamin B6 metabolism.

The selective neuronal KCNQ potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine, an AED introduced in 2013 as adjunctive treatment of partial epilepsy in adults [Porter et al 2012], may represent a targeted therapy for KCNQ2-NEE. However, the discovery of additional side-effects in the early post-marketing (blue discoloration of skin and retina) raise concerns about its use in children. Although a good effect on seizures was described in one patient [Weckhuysen et al 2013], additional experience has not yet been reported. Furthermore, given existing in vitro evidence that some variants may lead to a gain of function, the use of retigabine/ezogabine may theoretically even be contraindicated in some patients. Further studies are needed to address whether early use of the drug in specific patient groups is effective.

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary familial brain calcification (PFBC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough neurologic and neuropsychiatric assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Pharmacologic treatment to improve anxiety, depression, and obsessive-compulsive behaviors

To alleviate dystonia and other associated involuntary movements, pharmacologic therapies as typically used in neurologic practice for the treatment of movement disorders

For urinary urgency or incontinence, oxybutynin or other anticholinergic medications

Antiepileptic treatment for seizures

Symptomatic treatment for headaches

Surveillance

Thorough neurologic and neuropsychiatric assessment is indicated annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic medications should be used cautiously, since they may exacerbate extrapyramidal symptoms [Cummings et al 1983]. A poor response to neuroleptics was noted in a family with PFBC and mainly psychotic manifestations [Callender 1995]. Extrapyramidal symptoms may also be elicited or worsened by other drugs (e.g., some antiepileptics, medications to treat vertigo or dizziness).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The response of parkinsonian features to levodopa therapy is generally poor. Manyam et al [2001a] attributed a positive response to levodopa in an affected member of a family with PFBC to the coexistence of PFBC and idiopathic Parkinson disease.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with biotin-thiamine responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation by a pediatric neurologist

Assessments by specialists in rehabilitation medicine, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy

Psychology evaluation for assessment of IQ

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment includes the following:

ICU care during acute encephalopathic episode, including treatment of seizures and increased intracranial pressure

Biotin and thiamine therapy. Biotin is given as 5-10 mg /kg and thiamine as 300-900 mg orally. (Note: In one report 20mg/kg/day in a neonate was used.)

Symptoms typically resolve within days. (Note: SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transport and some patients respond only to thiamine.)

Biotin and thiamine need to be given lifelong.

During acute decompensation thiamine may be increased to double the regular dose and given intravenously.

In the acute stage empiric treatment with antimicrobial/antiviral agents. Recommended until infectious causes of the acute/subacute encephalopathy are ruled out.

Fever control. Paramount as fever downregulates SLC19A3 and may exacerbate the disease.

Antiepileptic drugs for effective control of seizures

Symptomatic treatment of dystonia, including administration of L-dopa

Rehabilitation, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy

Educational programs adapted to individual needs

Education of the family regarding the importance of lifelong compliance with medical therapy

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Appropriate measures include the following:

Prompt administration of biotin and thiamine early in the disease course (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Avoidance of triggers/stressors including trauma and surgery

Surveillance

Evaluation every six months by the treating subspecialists (pediatric neurologist, metabolic genetic specialist, physiotherapist, and psychologists) is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Stress and trauma should be avoided as they can precipitate acute attacks.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, perform molecular genetic testing on at-risk relatives (e.g., sibs of the proband) in order to begin biotin and thiamine therapy as soon as possible in all individuals with biallelic SLC19A3 pathogenic variants, even those who are asymptomatic.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected women should continue biotin and thiamine therapy during pregnancy. No information regarding risk to the fetus of an affected mother is available.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Routine administration of immunizations is recommended (without any specific precautions).To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Baller-Gerold syndrome, occupational therapy assessment to evaluate hand and arm function is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

When craniosynostosis is bilateral, surgery is usually performed before age six months.

Pollicization of the index finger to restore a functional grasp has had satisfactory results in a number of persons with absence of the thumb [Foucher et al 2005]. However, many children with aplasia of the thumb can use their first and second digits for grasping without pollicization.

Surveillance

For persons with pathogenic RECQL4 variants that correlate with an increased risk for osteosarcoma, attention to clinical findings such as bone pain, limp, and fracture is warranted. Currently no data are available regarding the effectiveness of routine screening such as x-rays, MRI, and bone scan. Furthermore, the risk of added radiation exposure from diagnostic studies and the benefit of "early" detection of osteosarcoma are unknown.

Because lymphoma has been observed in individuals with BGS [Debeljak et al 2009] and its allelic disorders RAPADILINO syndrome (4/14 cases) [Siitonen et al 2009] and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome [Simon et al 2010], it seems reasonable to monitor individuals for lymph node swelling and /or mediastinal enlargement on chest radiographs.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Sun exposure is to be avoided because of predisposition to skin cancer.

Testing of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other
To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed dermatologic examination and punch biopsy of suspected cutaneous lesion

High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) or CT of the chest highly recommended for visualization of pulmonary cysts. Individuals who have symptoms/signs of pneumothorax should immediately undergo chest x-ray and CT of the chest and appropriate treatment.

Baseline abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast or MRI to screen for renal tumor. Renal ultrasound examination may distinguish cystic from solid renal lesions.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In general, fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas are benign lesions for which no treatment is required; however, affected individuals may seek treatment for such lesions for cosmetic purposes, particularly when multiple cutaneous lesions are located on the face. Treatment of fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas is difficult, as they tend to be numerous and recurring. Erbium-YAG or fractional CO2 laser ablation may result in substantial improvement, but relapse can occur [Gambichler et al 2000, Jacob & Dover 2001, Kahle et al 2001]. Shaving or other ablative methods have been used with variable results.

Treatment of pneumothorax is the same as in the general population.

Nephron-sparing surgery is the treatment of choice for renal tumors whenever possible, depending on the size and location of the tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Because of the bilateral, multifocal nature of BHDS-associated kidney cancer, a management approach involving observation of small tumors until they reach 3 cm in size is often recommended [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Therefore, renal tumors greater than 3.0 cm and/or rapidly growing tumors usually require partial nephrectomy. When surgical intervention is recommended, an attempt is made to remove all or most of the visible tumors. Although surgical management is not considered “curative” for BHDS-associated renal cell carcinoma (RCC), BHDS-associated renal tumors often are slow growing, and only infrequently are multiple surgical procedures required during a an affected individual’s lifetime to control the tumor burden and prevent the development of metastasis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No preventive or curative treatment is available for BHDS. However, development of renal cell carcinoma has the strongest positive association with cigarette smoking [Moore et al 2005].

Surveillance

There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the recommendations given are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with known BHDS, individuals known to have a pathogenic variant in FLCN without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone genetic testing should have regular monitoring by physicians familiar with the spectrum of BHDS.

Renal tumor screening

Renal imaging is appropriate for individuals age 18 years or older when the clinical diagnosis of BHDS is established or if a pathogenic variant in FLCN is confirmed. However, earlier testing and surveillance for renal tumors should be personalized based on family history of renal tumor development, when available.

Yearly MRI of the kidneys is the optimal screening modality to assess for kidney lesions.

Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast is an alternative when MRI is not an option. However, the long-term effects of cumulative radiation exposure in individuals with BHDS is unknown and has not been studied.

As a result of the low aggressiveness of kidney tumors and the 3.0-cm rule used by surgeons in treating renal tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005], affected individuals without a family history of kidney tumors who have had two to three consecutive annual MRI examinations without the detection of kidney lesions may be screened every two years until a suspicious lesion is identified.

Note: The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in further characterization of kidney lesions but should not be used as a primary screening modality.

If any suspicious lesion (<1.0 cm in diameter, indeterminate lesion, or complex cysts) is noted on screening examination, annual MRI should be instituted. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast may be used as an alternative in those for whom MRI is not an option.

Renal tumors less than 3.0 cm in diameter are monitor by periodic imaging. When the largest renal tumor reaches 3 cm in maximal diameter evaluation by a urologic surgeon is appropriate with consideration of nephron-sparing surgery [Stamatakis et al 2013].

Rapidly growing lesions and/or symptoms including pain, blood in the urine, or atypical presentations require a more individualized approach. PET-CT scan is an option for evaluation of these lesions.

Melanoma. Because of a concern for a possible increased risk of melanoma in those with BHDS, full body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Cigarette smoking

High ambient pressures, which may precipitate spontaneous pneumothorax

Radiation exposure

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When the family-specific pathogenic variant is known, use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members improves diagnostic certainty and reduces costly screening procedures in at-risk members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant.

Early recognition of clinical manifestations may allow timely intervention and improve outcome. Therefore, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early detection is appropriate.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Bietti crystalline dystrophy (BCD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Fundoscopic examination

Full-field electroretinogram (ffERG) to establish a baseline

Visual field testing (perimetry) to evaluate the degree of visual field constriction or presence of scotomas and to establish a baseline

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) to evaluate for complications such as choroidal neovascularization (CNV) or macular hole formation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No treatment for BCD currently exists; affected individuals should be referred to services specific to those with vision impairment:

Low vision specialists can prescribe low vision aids/devices to help optimize remaining vision.

State services for the Blind or organizations/professionals trained to work with the visually impaired provide access to services related to employment, education, and counseling regarding the psychosocial adaptation to visual loss

Note: Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) is uncommon in BCD. Laser photocoagulation is not usually considered for CNV in inherited forms of retinal degeneration and has recently been superseded by the use of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy in a fashion similar to its use in age-related macular dystrophy.

Surveillance

Ophthalmologic examination is recommended every one to two years to monitor disease progression. Examination should include visual field testing particularly as it relates to determination of driving eligibility and eligibility for government programs and/or disability.

Patients should be aware of the possibility of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) and the option of self-monitoring using an Amsler grid under direction of their primary care ophthalmologist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in a symptomatic individual diagnosed with biotinidase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

History of seizures, balance problems, feeding problems, breathing problems, loss of hair, fungal infections, skin rash, conjunctivitis

Physical examination for hypotonia, ataxia, eye findings such as optic atrophy, eczematous skin rash, alopecia, conjunctivitis, breathing abnormalities such as stridor, thrush, and/or candidiasis

Evaluation for psychomotor deficits

Evaluation for sensorineural hearing loss

Ophthalmologic examination

Identification of cellular immunologic abnormalities because of the increased risk of recurrent viral or fungal infections caused by immunologic dysfunction

Consultation with a metabolic specialist or clinical geneticist

To establish the extent of disease and needs in infants or children diagnosed with biotinidase deficiency following newborn screening, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination for neurologic findings (e.g., hypotonia, ataxia), eye findings (e.g., conjunctivitis), skin findings (eczematous rash, alopecia), breathing abnormalities (e.g., stridor) and fungal infections caused by immunologic dysfunction (thrush and/or candidiasis).

Evaluation for psychomotor deficits

Evaluation for sensorineural hearing loss

Ophthalmologic examination (for finding such as optic atrophy)

Consultation with a metabolic specialist or clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

Although newborn screening for biotinidase deficiency has resulted in almost complete ascertainment of children with biotinidase deficiency in the United States and in many other countries, occasionally a child who has not been screened or has been mistakenly thought to have normal biotinidase activity on newborn screening will present with clinical symptoms. These children may become metabolically compromised and require hydration, occasionally bicarbonate for acidosis, and procedures to ameliorate hyperammonemia. Once it is recognized that the child has a multiple carboxylase deficiency, administration of biotin – or a multivitamin “cocktail” containing biotin – can rapidly resolve the metabolic derangement and improve many of the clinical symptoms within hours to days.

Compliance with biotin therapy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) improves symptoms in symptomatic individuals.

Some features such as optic atrophy, hearing loss, or developmental delay may not be reversible; they should be addressed with ophthalmologic evaluations and intervention, hearing aids or cochlear implants, and appropriate interventions for developmental deficits.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

All individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency (<10% mean normal enzyme activity), even those who have some residual biotinidase enzyme activity, should be treated with biotin independent of their genotype [Wolf 2003]. Note: Although Möslinger et al [2003] stated that children with greater than 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may not need treatment, a child with 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may be just as likely to develop symptoms as one with total loss of enzyme activity [Wolf 2002]. It is therefore strongly recommended that all children with profound biotinidase deficiency, regardless of the residual biotinidase enzyme activity, be treated with biotin.

Note: Because genotype/phenotype correlations in biotinidase deficiency are not well established, decisions regarding treatment should be based on the results of enzyme activity rather than molecular genetic testing.

Biotinidase deficiency is treated by supplementation with oral biotin in free form as opposed to the bound form. Children with biotinidase deficiency identified by newborn screening will remain asymptomatic with compliance to biotin therapy.

All symptomatic children with biotinidase deficiency have improved after treatment with 5-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin is usually dispensed as a tablet or a capsule (most of which is filler: the quantity of biotin is minute relative to the quantity of filler). To administer biotin to an infant or young child, the tablet can be crushed or the contents of the capsule can be mixed with breast milk or formula in a spoon, medicine dispenser, or syringe. Note that the contents of the tablet or capsule should not be put into a bottle because the mixture will stick to the bottle and/or fail to pass through the nipple, thus delivering inconsistent doses.

Although biotin occasionally is dispensed as a solution or syrup, these liquid preparations are not recommended because the mixture – which is a suspension – tends to settle (especially upon refrigeration) and to grow bacteria upon storage. The liquid preparations usually do not provide a consistent dose and should not be added to milk in a bottle.

The biochemical abnormalities and seizures rapidly resolve after biotin treatment, followed by improvement of the cutaneous abnormalities. Hair growth returns over a period of weeks to months in children who have alopecia. Optic atrophy and hearing loss may be resistant to therapy, especially if a long period has elapsed between their onset and the initiation of treatment. Some treated children have rapidly achieved developmental milestones, whereas others have continued to show delays.

Only a few anecdotal reports exist regarding symptoms in children with partial biotinidase deficiency who were not treated with biotin. Because there is no known toxicity for biotin, children with partial deficiency are usually treated with 1-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin therapy is lifelong. There are no known adverse side effects from pharmacologic doses of biotin. In fact, the major problem is the lack of treatment or non-compliance with prescribed treatment.

More data are required to determine the dosage of biotin that is necessary for older children with either profound or partial biotinidase deficiency, but essentially all children have tolerated 10 mg/day of oral biotin with no side effects. Anecdotally, two girls with profound biotinidase deficiency developed hair loss during adolescence that resolved following increase of their biotin dosages from 10 mg per day to 15 or 20 mg per day.

A protein-restricted diet is not necessary.

Surveillance

For all children with biotinidase deficiency:

Yearly ophthalmologic examination and auditory testing for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Regularly scheduled appointments with primary care physicians or as needed

Yearly evaluation by a clinical geneticist or metabolic specialist for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Symptomatic children with residual clinical problems should be seen as directed by the appropriate sub-specialists:

Evaluation of urinary organic acids if return of symptoms with biotin therapy (most commonly the result of non-compliance)Note: Measurement of biotin concentrations in blood or urine is not useful except to determine compliance with therapy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Raw eggs should be avoided because they contain avidin, an egg-white protein that binds biotin, thus decreasing its bioavailability. (Thoroughly cooked eggs present no problem because heating inactivates avidin, rendering it incapable of binding biotin.)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

A newborn with an older sib with biotinidase deficiency should be treated at birth with biotin pending results of the definitive biotinidase enzyme activity assay and/or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known).

The genetic status of older sibs (even if asymptomatic) of a child with biotinidase deficiency should be clarified by assay of biotinidase enzyme activity or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known) so that biotin therapy can be instituted in a timely manner.

The genetic status of any relative with symptoms consistent with biotinidase deficiency should be clarified by assay of biotinidase enzyme activity or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known) so that biotin therapy can be instituted in a timely manner.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The only special pregnancy management considerations for a woman who is carrying a baby with biotinidase deficiency or is at risk of having a baby with biotinidase deficiency is consideration of biotin supplementation of the mother. An optimal prenatal dose has not been determined.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To evaluate an individual newly diagnosed with Bloom’s syndrome (BSyn) the following are recommended in addition to the routine medical history, family history, and physical examination:

Evaluation for gastroesophageal reflux and micro-aspirations into the lung of gastric contents

Fasting blood glucose determination at the time of diagnosis and annually thereafter

Determination of plasma immunoglobulin concentrations

Observation of urination for evidence of urethral obstruction

If diagnosis occurs in adulthood, colonoscopy and stool guaiac at the time of diagnosis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Psychosocial. Family and teachers are encouraged to relate to persons with BSyn appropriately for their chronologic age rather than the younger age suggested by their unusually small size.

Growth. Growth hormone administration to children with BSyn has not increased growth rate or adult height in most persons, but some have experienced improved linear growth. Use of growth hormone has been approached cautiously in this population, because of the theoretic increase in their risk to develop tumors as a result of their treatment. Supplemental feeding results in increased fat deposition but not in improved linear growth.

Diabetes mellitus. Treatment of diabetes mellitus in BSyn is the same as in other persons.

Cancer. The hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to both DNA-damaging chemicals and ionizing radiation ordinarily necessitates modification of standard cancer treatment regimens, which usually includes a reduction of both dosages and durations. Absence of information as to the ideal dosages makes such treatment particularly challenging to the physician; nevertheless, the fact that the cancers themselves often appear unusually responsive to the treatment justifies the special effort.

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Too few persons with BSyn have had BMT to permit conclusions as to its value (which in theory could be great). The required ablative therapy prior to BMT often may require modification of standard protocols because of the hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to DNA-damaging agents.

Surveillance

Families benefit from counseling regarding the risk of cancer in persons with BSyn. The wide variety of types and sites of cancer in Bsyn – plus the unusually early onset of solid tumors such as carcinomas and sarcomas – makes surveillance for cancer a life-long undertaking, requiring planning and cooperation among the affected person, the family, and the physician in charge.

In persons younger than age 20 years, leukemia is the main type of cancer. Until evidence becomes available that treatment at the earliest stages of leukemia is more effective than treatment after full-blown symptoms appear, hematologic surveillance other than that used in general pediatrics appears unnecessary, if not contraindicated.

Close contact between individuals age 20 years and older and their physicians is advisable, and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated promptly as potential early indicators of cancer.

Screening for colon cancer, the most common solid tumor in individuals with BSyn (see Table 2), should begin decades earlier than in others, and should be carried out more frequently.

In adults, colon cancer screening may include colonoscopy every one to two years, and stool guaiac testing for blood every three to six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Sun exposure to the face, particularly in infancy and early childhood, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from avoidance of sun exposure to the face and early surveillance for cancer (see Surveillance).

Molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate sibs if the BLM pathogenic variants in the family are known.

An unusually low birth weight followed by short stature throughout childhood is typically present in affected sibs; sibs of normal stature are likely unaffected and may not need further testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to the testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS), the following studies are recommended:

CT imaging of the temporal bone to anticipate optimal hearing correction [Raveh et al 2000, Tekin et al 2009, Stoetzel et al 2009]

Echocardiogram if there is a murmur or cardiac symptoms

Renal ultrasonography

The following consultations are recommended:

Examination of the skin defects by a pediatric plastic surgeon to delineate the extent of the lesion(s), to determine if there is a sinus and, most importantly, to determine if a thymic remnant could be present

Formal evaluation of cleft lip/palate and other possible facial abnormalities by a cleft lip/palate team, which often includes a clinical geneticist, pediatric plastic surgeon, otorhinolaryngologist, speech and language therapist, dental and orthodontic specialist, and ophthalmologist

Complete eye examination by a pediatric ophthalmologist to assess for visual limitations, strabismus, and nasolacrimal duct obstruction

Referral of those with anophthalmia and/or severe microphthalmia to support services for the visually impaired

Referral to a nephrologist if renal abnormalities are identified

Referral to an audiologist

For those with a cleft, assessment by a speech therapist

Development assessment particularly for children with visual and/or hearing problems

Monitoring for depression, attention dysregulation

Note: Motor delays are not part of BOFS, and thus, physical and occupational therapy is not anticipated.

Treatment of Manifestations

Milunsky et al [2011] provided management guidelines.

In general, children with BOFS and multiple anomalies should be followed in a setting in which multispecialty care can be provided by a team including, for example, craniofacial specialists, plastic surgeons, otolaryngologists, and speech therapists [adapted from Milunsky et al 2011] (full text; see Table III).

Ideally, multispecialty evaluations and surgery should be performed within a craniofacial clinic. Surgical treatment should be done only by a pediatric plastic surgeon experienced in treating cleft lip. Lesser forms of cleft lip (formerly known as “pseudocleft”) may need surgical correction [Lin et al 2009]. In addition to the nasal tip flattening or asymmetry that may be associated with cleft lip, a characteristic full, flat nasal tip may need a corrective procedure. In addition affected individuals may need reconstruction of malformed protruding pinnae. If diagnosed in early infancy, auricular molding may be indicated.

When branchial or supra-auricular skin defects are small, linear, or superficial, they may heal spontaneously. The larger skin defects should be treated like a moist “wound” by a plastic surgeon, but generally do not need surgical intervention. They should not be cauterized. Most larger skin defects require surgical excision. Importantly, a sinus tract must be dissected by an experienced pediatric plastic surgeon. Exploration for a thymic remnant may be necessary, which should be sent for histopathologic examination.

Obstruction from nasolacrimal duct stenosis or atresia must be relieved and monitored for restenosis. Severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia may be managed by inserting a conformer into the eye socket to encourage its growth.

Hearing loss is treated routinely (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

The teeth should be monitored for size and number, caries, and malocclusion.

Sensory, psychologic, and developmental challenges should be treated with supportive therapies. Currently, data are insufficient to make recommendations that more severely affected individuals require more psychologic support.

Surveillance

Monitor for changes related to the major findings over time.

Monitor older children as they enter adolescence for signs of low self-esteem and other psychologic issues.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a branchiootorenal spectrum disorder (BOR/BOS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Second branchial arch anomalies. Cervical examination for fistulae; computed tomography of the neck if a mass is palpable under the sternocleidomastoid muscle above the level of the hyoid bone

Otologic findings

A complete assessment of auditory acuity using ABR, emission testing, and pure tone audiometry (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Computed tomography of the temporal bones, especially if the hearing impairment fluctuates or is progressive

Renal anomalies. Renal ultrasound examination and/or excretory urography (intravenous pyelography); tests of renal function: BUN and creatinine; urinanalysis

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Recommended treatment:

Second branchial arch anomalies. Excise branchial cleft cysts/fistulae.

Otologic anomalies

Fit with appropriate aural habilitation as indicated.

Enroll in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired.

Consider canaloplasty to correct an atretic canal; however, in individuals with BOR/BOS, associated middle ear anomalies (e.g., a facial nerve overriding the oval window) can preclude a successful result. Evaluate the status of the middle ear preoperatively by obtaining thin-cut CT images of the temporal bones in both the axial and coronal planes.

Renal anomalies

Treat urologic and renal abnormalities in the standard manner.

If renal anomalies (e.g., vesicoureteral reflux) are present, medical and surgical treatment may prevent progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

If ESRD develops, consider renal transplantation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Otologic manifestations of disease can often be surgically corrected with correction of the cupped-ear malformation and occasionally improvement in the conductive component of the hearing loss.

Branchial arch anomalies can be surgically corrected.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Renal anomalies such as vesicoureteral reflux can lead to progressive renal failure, a secondary complication that can be avoided by surgical correction of retrograde flow of urine from the bladder into the ureter.

Surveillance

Surveillance for otologic and renal anomalies should be offered as described below.

Otologic anomalies. Serial audiometry to survey for progression of hearing loss:

Annual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual examination for hearing impairment and annual audiometry to assess stability of hearing loss (more frequent if fluctuation or progression is described by the affected individual)

Renal anomalies

Regular assessment of renal function to prevent progression to ESRD

Semiannual/annual examination by a nephrologist and/or urologist if indicated, based on level of renal function and type of renal and/or collecting system malformation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with renal abnormalities should use appropriate caution when taking medications (i.e., antibiotics and analgesics) that can impair renal function or require normal renal physiology for clearance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives at risk for BOR/BOS to determine if a treatable and/or possibly progressive otologic and/or renal abnormality is present.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Comprehensive physical examination (to include hearing evaluation and renal imaging and function studies) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic examination and developmental assessment including evaluation of motor function, speech/language, swallowing, and sleep

EEG monitoring, including sleep EEG, for any child with features (by history or observation) to suggest overt or occult seizures. Early referral to a neurology epilepsy sub-specialist is recommended if hypsarrhythmia or another aggressive electrographic pattern is found on EEG.

Assessments by specialists in physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy

Ophthalmologic examination

Assessment of nutrition by a nutritionist or dietician

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Seizures. As seizure severity and complexity varies widely, management should be tailored to the individual.

Some children with BPAN may have no evidence of seizures or experience only rare febrile events and require no ongoing pharmacologic intervention. Others have severe, refractory epilepsy with multiple seizure types warranting the involvement of specialists in pediatric epilepsy and consideration of multiple therapeutic modalities, including antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), ketogenic diet, and/or vagus nerve stimulation.

Short-term treatment with ACTH, prednisolone, or vigabatrin should be considered early in the care of a child with epileptic spasms, based on the guidelines in the US consensus report from the International League Against Epilepsy [Pellock et al 2010].

Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Global Developmental Disability/Intellectual Disability

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an individualized education program (IEP) should be developed by the local public school district based on each individuals’ level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

For all ages. In the United States, individuals are protected under IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) and should receive free and appropriate public education in the least restricted environment.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Developmental pediatricians can also provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

Consideration of private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs is recommended. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation.

In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction. Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers)

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox® anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., writing, feeding, grooming, and dressing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the indvidual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Parkinsonism. Involvement of a neurologist specializing in movement disorders may be helpful once parkinsonism emerges in adolescents/adults.

In the treatment of parkinsonism, dystonia, and spasticity the usual pharmacologic agents can be considered with the caveat that these therapies could exacerbate the cognitive deficits that also occur in this age group.

Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism with dopaminergic medications usually has an initial striking benefit in males and females with improved motor function, affect, appetite, and interest in activities, followed by equally consistent disabling motor fluctuations (“on-off” phenomena) and dyskinesias [Hayflick et al 2013, Hogarth 2015].

As cognitive deficits progress in those with advanced disease, carbidopa/levodopa formulations may carry a lower risk of adverse neuropsychiatric effects than dopamine agonists. Amantadine may be helpful for dyskinesias, but also carries a risk (especially in higher doses) of adverse psychiatric effects such as hallucinations and agitation.

Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity can include (if indicated) clonazepam or other benzodiazepines, oral baclofen, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen. Trihexyphenydyl may also be useful for dystonia but may worsen cognitive dysfunction in advanced stages of the disease.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Other Features

Disordered sleep. Pharmacologic treatment of sleep abnormalities with melatonin, chloral hydrate, or benzodiazepines may be indicated.

Ophthalmologic findings. Eye findings are treated in a routine manner.

Other

Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed

A gastric feeding tube to help maintain adequate weight (which becomes more difficult with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia, if indicated

Monitoring for complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease with institution of pharmacologic management if indicated. There are no data on the efficacy of fundoplication in BPAN.

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Regular pulmonary hygiene to manage risk for pulmonary complications; tracheostomy as indicated when secretions are difficult to manage

Surveillance

Routine follow up by a neurologist for medication management and interval assessment of ambulation, seizure activity, speech, and swallowing. Often done every three to six months, follow up may be annual for those who are more stable.

For those receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism), monitoring for adverse neuropsychiatric effects and disabling motor fluctuations and dyskinesias

Follow-up ophthalmologic examination every one to two years

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because women with mild manifestations of BPAN could potentially reproduce, the potential for teratogenic effects of medication taken during pregnancy needs to be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation

Because BPAN falls in the category of NBIA and because individuals with BPAN have high brain iron, the possibility of chelation therapy is sometimes raised. The chelator deferiprone is currently under investigation for treatment of another NBIA disorder, PKAN. However, to date there is no evidence that iron chelation initiated early in the disease course prevents or delays the parkinsonian degeneration in adulthood or otherwise alters the course of PKAN. Nonetheless, results of these studies may inform its use in BPAN and/or lead to additional clinical trials.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination by a (pediatric) ophthalmologist for visual acuity, refractive error, extraocular movement, strabismus, size of palpebral apertures, and eyelid elevation. Those with amblyopia or strabismus should be referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist for management [Beckingsale et al 2003].

Genetic evaluation and genetic counseling by a clinical geneticist to discuss recurrence risk and assess risk for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). In girls with BPES, the family history can indicate the type of BPES in affected females (with type I inferred by the association with subfertility or infertility). In uninformative families or simplex cases (i.e., single occurrence in a family), molecular genetic testing may be helpful in some cases in assessing the risk for POI.

Referral of females with BPES to a pediatric or adult endocrinologist during late puberty or early adulthood to assess onset and course of POI

Treatment of Manifestations

Management requires the input of specialists including a clinical geneticist, pediatric ophthalmologist, oculoplastic surgeon, (pediatric or adult) endocrinologist, reproductive endocrinologist, and gynecologist.

Eyelid surgery. Timing of eyelid surgery is controversial; it involves weighing the balance of early surgery to prevent deprivation amblyopia and late surgery to allow for more reliable ptosis measurements, the latter of which provides a better surgical outcome. Furthermore, ptosis surgery is hampered by the dysplastic structure of the eyelids [Beckingsale et al 2003].

The surgical management is traditionally performed in two stages and involves a medial canthoplasty for correction of the blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus at ages three to five years, followed about a year later by ptosis correction, which usually requires a brow suspension procedure.

Many surgical techniques have been described for medial canthoplasty and none of the existing methods is free from criticism. If the epicanthal folds are small, a Y-V canthoplasty is traditionally used; if the epicanthal folds are severe, a double Z-plasty is used. An alternate technique for medial canthoplasty has been described recently using the skin redraping method, which has a simple flap design, less scarring, and the effective repair of epicanthus inversus and telecanthus [Sa et al 2012].

To correct telecanthus, the medial canthal tendon is usually shortened or fused with a transnasal wire.

Ptosis correction is particularly important as it can address the disfigurement as well as functional concerns. Frontal muscle flap suspension is mostly used for severe ptosis in adults; however, it remains controversial. A major concern is that the frontal muscle development may be restrained by surgery. Decock et al [2011b] reported that super-maximal resection and frontalis suspension is the preferred method as it leads to a good cosmetic outcome as well as to an improved muscle function.

Alternatively, a one-stage procedure in which medial canthoplasty and ptosis correction are performed simultaneously has been described [Wu et al 2008]. Two recent retrospective, interventional studies including 21 patients demonstrated that one-stage correction using a standard combination of surgical techniques is safe and efficient [Sebastiá et al 2011, Liu et al 2014].

Recent insights into the causes of the abnormal lower eyelid positioning allow a more targeted surgical reconstruction that produces a more natural appearance [Decock et al 2011a]. Ten individuals with molecularly proven BPES were noted to have a laterally displaced inferior punctum (i.e., in the lower eyelid) due to temporal displacement of the entire lower eyelid. Addition of a simple surgical step corrected the position of the lower eyelid and its abnormal downward concavity (the temporal ectropion), and the lateral displacement of the inferior punctum. This approach eliminates the epicanthus inversus fold without the need for double Z-plasty [Decock et al 2011b].

Ovarian insufficiency. Management of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) needs to address the two following major medical issues that are applicable to primary ovarian insufficiency in general and not specific for BPES (no data specific to BPES are available):

Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the International Menopause Society recommend estrogen replacement therapy for women with primary ovarian insufficiency (amenorrhea and a menopausal serum FSH concentration). Although no data from randomized trials guide the use of hormonal therapy in women with BPES and POI, a reasonable regimen would be 100 μg of transdermal estradiol and 10 mg of oral medroxyprogesterone acetate daily for the first 12 days of each month. Women should keep a menstrual calendar and have a pregnancy test promptly in the case of late menses [Nelson 2009].A pelvic ultrasound examination and measurement of bone mineral density are indicated at the time of diagnosis of ovarian insufficiency. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency should be encouraged to maintain a lifestyle that optimizes bone and cardiovascular health, including engaging in regular weight-bearing exercise, maintaining an adequate intake of calcium (1200 mg daily) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU daily), eating a healthy diet to avoid obesity, and undergoing screening for cardiovascular risk factors, with treatment of any identified risk factors.

Infertility. No therapies have been shown to restore ovarian function and fertility. Some couples are averse to adoption and to reproductive technologies and are content not to become parents.For couples who decide to pursue parenthood actively, the options are adoption, foster parenthood, embryo donation, and egg donation. The rates of pregnancy with egg donation appear to be similar among older and younger women. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency who become pregnant as a result of oocyte donation may have an increased risk of delivering infants who are small for gestational age and of having pregnancy-induced hypertension and postpartum hemorrhage, but these findings are controversial [Nelson 2009].The issue of POI is emotionally charged and should be discussed with the patient with this in mind.

Surveillance

The frequency of ophthalmic follow-up should be individualized depending on age, procedures performed in the past, and results of visual acuity testing.

Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are advised in females in whom the BPES type is unknown or in whom BPES type I is suspected based on a positive family history or FOXL2 pathogenic variant. Frequency of endocrinologic follow-up to monitor ovarian status is individualized and can involve pelvic ultrasound examination, measurement of serum FSH concentrations, and assessment of menstrual pattern (ages of menarche and onset of oligomenorrhea and secondary amenorrhea).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Ovarian transplantation has been performed in rare instances in which the affected woman has an identical twin sister with normal ovarian function [Nelson 2009].

Note: (1) Cryopreservation has not yet been reported in BPES. (2) Children who are at risk for POI are most likely to benefit from cryopreservation as their ovaries contain more primordial follicles than those of adult women; it is expected that by the time these children are mature and need their ovarian tissue, the modalities for its optimal use would become available. (3) At the time that they might wish to consider an IVF procedure, adult women with BPES usually do not have sufficient appropriate primordial follicles for embryo cryopreservation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Individuals who have a germline pathogenic variant in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are counseled at the time of disclosure of molecular genetic test results about their options for Surveillance and Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Treatment of Manifestations

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines suggest that women with a BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant could consider bilateral mastectomy as a primary surgical treatment of breast cancer because of their elevated rate of ipsilateral and contralateral breast cancer. See NCCN guidelines for the treatment of breast cancer and the treatment of other BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated malignancies (registration required).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Breast cancer

Consider prophylactic bilateral mastectomy

Given the conflicting data on the degree of risk reduction of breast cancer associated with prophylactic oophorectomy, consider discussing the risks and benefits of this approach with a genetics specialist.

Chemoprevention. In a retrospective study tamoxifen reduced the risk for breast cancer by 62% among healthy women with a BRCA2 germline variant [King et al 2001]. The sample size, however, was extremely small. In a nested case-control study, tamoxifen use was associated with a 41%-50% reduction in the risk of developing contralateral breast cancer [Narod et al 2000, Metcalfe et al 2005]. There have been no prospective randomized trials of tamoxifen as a chemoprevention agent in women with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants.

Breast feeding for a cumulative total of more than one year reduced the risk for breast cancer [Jernström et al 2004].

Ovarian cancer/fallopian tube cancer

Consider prophylactic oophorectomy, recognizing that completion of childbearing may factor into this decision. Several studies have documented a significant (80%-96%) risk reduction in ovarian cancer following risk-reducing oophorectomy [Kauff et al 2002, Rebbeck et al 2002, Rutter et al 2003].

Salpingectomy. Recent advances in understanding the molecular events preceding ovarian cancer have established the fallopian tube as the origin of the majority of high-grade serous ovarian cancers, leading to the consideration of salpingectomy with ovarian retention until the age of natural menopause as the first step in primary prevention. This approach is likely to reduce the health hazards of premature menopause, but its adoption will require prospective data to establish its safety and efficacy [Daly et al 2015].

Tubal ligation. A meta-analysis of 13 studies showed a reduction in risk for ovarian cancer of 34% in the general population after tubal ligation [Cibula et al 2011]. A meta-analysis of modifiers of risk of cancer in individuals with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 found a reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer in females with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, although study design issues limit the impact of these findings [Friebel et al 2014].

Oral contraceptive use has been associated with a reduction in ovarian cancer risk of 14% among women who had ever used oral contraceptives and 38% among long-term users [Whittemore et al 2004a].

Note: There is no evidence that use of current (after 1975) oral contraceptive formulations increases the risk for early-onset breast cancer for women with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Significant adverse consequences of tamoxifen treatment included higher rates of endometrial cancer and thromboembolic episodes (including pulmonary embolism) in those individuals who took the medication than in those who did not. Women with a history of thromboembolic disease or with a coagulation disorder should avoid taking tamoxifen. Women on tamoxifen should be counseled to report any abnormal vaginal bleeding immediately to their gynecologist.

Surveillance

Women

Monthly breast self-examination

Clinical breast examination every 6-12 months beginning at age 25

Annual breast MRI beginning at age 25, or individualized based on family history if a breast cancer diagnosis before age 30 is present

Annual mammogram beginning at age 30

Annual transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125 concentration beginning at age 35 years (or individualized based on the earliest age of onset in the family) may be considered for those women who have not elected to undergo prophylactic oophorectomy.

Note: Annual pelvic ultrasound and/or CA-125 concentration has not been effective in detecting early-stage ovarian cancer, either in high-risk or average-risk women.

Men

Breast self-examination training and regular monthly breast self-examination beginning at age 35

Annual clinical breast examination beginning at age 35

Annual prostate cancer screening beginning at age 45

Women and men

Screening for melanoma should be individualized based on the family history.

Screening of asymptomatic individuals for pancreatic cancer is not generally recommended, but is possible in research settings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No data specific to individuals with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants are available.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a cancer-predisposing BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline variant has been identified in a family, testing of at-risk relatives can identify those family members who also have the familial variant and thus need increased surveillance and early intervention when a cancer is identified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several studies currently underway are looking at novel approaches to the treatment of BRCA-associated breast and ovarian cancer. The majority of the studies involve PARP inhibitors, and have led to FDA approval for one of these agents in treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer. Newer studies are exploring the use of PARP inhibitors in other BRCA-associated cancers (e.g., pancreatic cancer). Given the experimental data showing increased sensitivity of BRCA cell lines to platinum-based agents, there is interest in platinum-based regimens for breast cancer in the neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and metastatic setting.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). General population studies suggest that long-term estrogen replacement therapy in postmenopausal women may increase breast cancer risk, but that short-term use to treat menopausal symptoms does not. However, even relatively short-term combined estrogen plus progestin use was shown to increase the incidence of breast cancers in a randomized, placebo control trial of HRT [Chlebowski et al 2003].

Three observational studies on the impact of HRT on breast cancer risk in BRCA 1/2 heterozygotes have been published. Rebbeck et al [2005] evaluated breast cancer risk associated with HRT after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy in a cohort of 462 women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant and found that HRT of any type after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy did not significantly alter the reduction in breast cancer risk associated with the surgery. The postoperative follow up was 3.6 years. It was concluded that short-term HRT does not substantially increase the risk for breast cancer in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant. A subsequent study of expanded data from this cohort included 1299 women with a mean follow-up of 5.4 years. There was no increase in breast cancer risk, and a significant decrease in breast cancer risk was found among BRCA1 heterozygotes [Domchek et al 2011]. In another matched case-control study of 472 postmenopausal women with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, the use of HRT was associated with a reduction in breast cancer risk [Eisen et al 2008]. Finally, a case-control study of 432 matched pairs with a mean follow up of 4.3 years also found a decrease in the risk for breast cancer in BRCA1 heterozygotes [Kotsopoulos et al 2016]. Taken together, these studies support the short-term use of HRT among BRCA1/2 heterozygotes who have undergone surgical menopause.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Brugada syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Electrocardiogram

Induction with sodium blockers (ajmaline, procainamide, pilsicainide, flecainide) in persons with a type 2 ECG or type 3 ECG and suspicion of the disease

Electrophysiologic study to assess risk of sudden cardiac death. Although the data are controversial, no other risk stratification parameter is presently available for asymptomatic individuals [Nunn et al 2010].

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Brugada syndrome is characterized by the presence of ST-segment elevation in leads V1 to V3. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are the only therapy currently known to be effective in persons with Brugada syndrome with syncope or cardiac arrest [Brugada et al 1999, Wilde et al 2002]. See Figure 3 for risk stratification and recommendations of ICD in individuals with Brugada syndrome.

Electrical storms respond well to infusion of isoproterenol (1-3 µg/min), the first line of therapy before other antiarrhythmics [Maury et al 2004].

It is important to:

Eliminate/treat agents/circumstances such as fever, cocaine use, electrolyte disturbances, and use of class I antiarrhythmic medications and other non-cardiac medications that can induce acute arrhythmias;

AND

Hospitalize the patient at least until the ECG pattern has normalized.

Controversy exists regarding the treatment of asymptomatic individuals. Recommendations vary [Benito et al 2009, Escárcega et al 2009, Nunn et al 2010] and include the following:

Observation until the first symptom develops (the first symptom can also be sudden cardiac death)

Placement of an ICD if the family history is positive for sudden cardiac death

Use of electrophysiologic study (EPS) to identify those most likely to experience arrhythmias and thus to benefit the most from placement of an ICD

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Quinidine (1-2 g daily) has been shown to restore ST segment elevation and decrease the incidence of arrhythmias [Belhassen et al 2004, Hermida et al 2004, Probst et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

During surgery and in the post-surgical recovery period persons with Brugada syndrome should be monitored by ECG.

Surveillance

At-risk individuals with a family history of Brugada syndrome or a known pathogenic variant should undergo ECG monitoring every one to two years beginning at birth [Oe et al 2005]. The presence of type I ECG changes should be further investigated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following can unmask the Brugada syndrome ECG [Antzelevitch et al 2002]:

Febrile state

Vagotonic agents

α-adrenergic agonists [Miyazaki et al 1996]

β-adrenergic antagonists

Tricyclic antidepressants

First-generation antihistamines (dimenhydrinate)

Cocaine toxicity

The following should be avoided [Antzelevitch et al 2003]:

Class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs including flecainide and propafenone

Class 1A agents including procainamide and disopyramide

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives is appropriate because:

ECG changes have low sensitivity in establishing the diagnosis [Priori et al 2003];

Identification of individuals at risk allows preventive measures such as avoidance of medications that can induce ventricular arrhythmias;

Surveillance can then be limited to family members who have the identified pathogenic variant [Benito et al 2009, Escárcega et al 2009, Nunn et al 2010].

If the pathogenic variant has not been identified in the family, relatives should be screened with an ECG. If a type I ECG is identified, further investigation is warranted.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Hormonal changes during pregnancy can precipitate arrhythmic events in women with Brugada syndrome. Recurrent ventricular tachyarrhythmia can be inhibited and the electrocardiographic pattern can normalize following IV infusion of low-dose isoproterenol followed by oral quinidine [Sharif-Kazemi et al 2011].

Quinidine is not known to be teratogenic to the developing fetus and is a preferred drug to treat arrhythmia in pregnancy. For more information about medication use during pregnancy, visit www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSCL), the following clinical evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count

Serum concentration of electrolytes, AST, alanine transaminase, urea, creatinine, insulin, C-peptide, triglycerides, and cholesterol

Oral glucose tolerance test; when appropriate, clamp glucose homeostasis study

Ultrasound of the liver to evaluate liver size and fatty content

Echocardiogram to evaluate for cardiac hypertrophy

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for kidney size

Physical examination for orthopedic complications including reduced hip mobility and genu valgum

Skeletal survey, especially of the long bones, to evaluate for bone cysts

Bone age and assessment of sexual maturity rating/pubertal status

Complete ophthalmologic examination, including slit lamp examination, to evaluate for ophthalmologic complications due to hyperlipemia and/or diabetes mellitus

Assessment of cognitive ability with age-appropriate scales

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Restriction of total fat intake between 20% and 30% of total dietary energy is often sufficient to maintain normal triglyceride serum concentration.

Fibric acid derivatives and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids derived from fish oils can be tried for the treatment of extreme hypertriglyceridemia.

Leptin treatment has proven successful in controlling both hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes mellitus [Garg et al 1999, Beltrand et al 2007, Ebihara et al 2007]. Despite the absence of well-controlled randomized studies that could provide a more thorough assessment of the possible adverse effects of leptin therapy, the United States Food and Drug Administration granted approval of leptin administration [Tsoukas et al 2015].

Management of diabetes mellitus does not differ from that of childhood-onset diabetes mellitus.

Special education is required for individuals with psychomotor retardation or intellectual disability.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary restriction of total fat intake may prevent hypertriglyceridemia (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Periodic screening for glycosuria as a manifestation of diabetes mellitus

For individuals with diabetes mellitus, follow-up in a diabetes clinic every six months to monitor for possible retinal, peripheral nerve, and renal complications

Yearly cardiac ultrasound and EKG

Yearly or biennial liver ultrasound examination to detect fatty infiltration

Ultrasound surveillance is a noninvasive procedure that can, along with serum lipid concentrations and liver enzymes, provide information on the degree of lipid control and compliance with the fat-restricted diet.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Excessive dietary fat intake should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected pregnant women should be followed in a high-risk pregnancy care unit by a multidisciplinary team including a specialist in fetal medicine and an expert in diabetic management. Pregnancy may increase the risk of diabetic decompensation. Babies born to women with diabetes are at an increased risk for fetal anomalies and postnatal complications compared to babies born to women without diabetes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Other drugs, including fenfluramine, have no proven efficacy and should be avoided.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Burn-McKeown syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

In newborns, airway assessment for evidence of upper-airway obstruction with choanal stenosis/atresia

Ophthalmology assessment for lower-eyelid coloboma for possible corneal involvement

Audiology assessment (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Examination for midline cleft palate or unilateral cleft lip/palate; referral to multidisciplinary cleft palate team as required

Cardiology and/or echocardiographic assessment for structural heart defects

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation or surgical correction of choanal stenosis/atresia.

Defects of the lower eyelids that can result in corneal exposure require care by an ophthalmologist to reduce the risk of corneal scarring.

Treatment of hearing loss is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aids.

Treatment of craniofacial manifestations (e.g., cleft lip and/or palate, preauricular tags, prominent ears) is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, and speech/language therapy.

Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in craniofacial disorders. Clinical follow up should include body measurements, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To determine the stage of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, ophthalmologic examination should be performed. Medical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Low vision aids provide benefit for those individuals with significant deterioration in visual acuity.

Stage 4c fundus lesions or choroidal neovascularization and hemorrhage can be managed by direct laser photocoagulation. Marano et al [2000] suggested a conservative approach in the treatment of choroidal neovascularization based on two individuals with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy whose visual acuity improved. No clinical trials comparing the efficacy of laser photocoagulation to conservative treatment have been conducted.

Anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents are the standard treatment for individuals with subfoveal choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Leu et al [2007] injected intravitreal bevacizumab in a 13 year-old with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy and CNV, hastening visual recovery and regression of the CNV. Intravitreal ranibizumab has also been used with success [Querques et al 2009]. There are no reports on the use of aflibercept. Long-term follow up of these affected individuals is unknown. There are currently no clinical trials to demonstrate the effectiveness of anti-VEGF agents on CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

Andrade et al [2003] performed photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin for CNV on one person with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. The CNV regressed and the subretinal hemorrhage resolved. The authors suggested that PDT may be an option for treatment of CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

Genetic counseling and occupational counseling should be offered.

Surveillance

Ophthalmologic examination should be performed annually to monitor the progression of the fundus lesions; in childhood, annual examinations are important in preventing the development of amblyopia. Affected individuals should be advised to see their ophthalmologist in the event of decreased vision or metamorphopsia, which could be signs of CNV.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Cessation of smoking helps prevent neovascularization of the retina [Clemons et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment for airway sufficiency in the presence of macroglossia

Evaluation by a feeding specialist if macroglossia causes significant feeding difficulties

Assessment of neonates for hypoglycemia; evaluation by a pediatric endocrinologist if hypoglycemia persists beyond the first few days of life.

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess for organomegaly, structural abnormality, and tumors

Comprehensive cardiac evaluation including ECG and echocardiogram prior to surgical procedures or when a cardiac abnormality is suspected on clinical evaluation

Alpha-fetoprotein assay at the time of initial diagnosis to evaluate for hepatoblastoma. It is important to utilize normal ranges for specific age categories to guide result interpretation, especially in very young infants.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia to reduce the risk of central nervous system complications. Because onset of hypoglycemia is occasionally delayed for several days, or even months, parents should be informed of the symptoms of hypoglycemia so that they can seek appropriate medical attention.

Abdominal wall repair for omphalocele soon after birth. Generally, this surgery is well tolerated.

Management of difficulties arising from macroglossia:

Anticipation of difficulties with endotracheal intubation [Kimura et al 2008]

Assessment of respiratory function, possibly including sleep study to address concern regarding potential sleep apnea

Management of feeding difficulties using specialized nipples such as the longer nipple recommended for babies with cleft palate or, rarely, short-term use of nasogastric tube feedings

Follow up by a craniofacial team including plastic surgeons, orthodontists, and speech pathologists familiar with the natural history of BWS. Tongue growth does slow over time and jaw growth can accelerate to accommodate the enlarged tongue. Some children benefit from tongue reduction surgery; however, surgical reduction typically affects tongue length but not thickness; residual cosmetic and speech issues may require further assessment/treatment [Tomlinson et al 2007].

Orthodontic intervention as needed in later childhood/adolescence

Assessment of speech difficulties

Management of cleft palate following standard protocols

Referral to a craniofacial surgeon if facial hemihyperplasia is significant

Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon if hemihyperplasia results in a significant difference in leg length. Surgery may be necessary during early puberty to close the growth plate of the longer leg in order to equalize the final leg lengths.

Treatment of neoplasias following standard pediatric oncology protocols

In some individuals with BWS, developmental anomalies of the renal tract are associated with increased calcium excretion and deposition (i.e., nephrocalcinosis). In individuals with evidence of calcium deposits on renal ultrasound examination, assessment for hypercalciuria and a CT scan of the kidneys may be helpful.

Referral to a pediatric nephrologist if urinary calcium is elevated and/or a structural renal anomaly is identified

Referral of children with structural GI tract abnormalities to the relevant specialist

Management of cardiac problems following standard protocols

Standard interventions such as infant stimulation programs, occupational and physical therapy, and individualized education programs for children with developmental delay

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prompt evaluation and standard treatment for suspected urinary tract infections is appropriate to prevent secondary renal damage.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia, especially in the neonatal period

Screening for embryonal tumors, which has traditionally involved the following(see also Note):

Abdominal ultrasound examination every three months until age eight years [Beckwith 1998, Tan & Amor 2006, Clericuzio & Martin 2009, Zarate et al 2009]

Measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration every two to three months in the first four years of life for early detection of hepatoblastoma [Clericuzio & Martin 2009]. AFP serum concentration may be elevated in children with BWS in the first year of life [Everman et al 2000]. If the AFP is elevated and imaging reveals no suspicious lesion, follow-up measurement of serum AFP concentration plus baseline liver function tests one month later can be used to determine the trend in serum AFP concentrations over time. If the concentration is not decreasing, it is appropriate to undertake an exhaustive search for an underlying tumor [Clericuzio et al 2003]. Note: (1) Some have proposed revising the tumor surveillance guidelines based on the molecular alteration detected. Scott et al [2006] suggested that children with BWS and IC2 alterations did not require Wilms tumor screening. Brioude et al [2013] proposed that children with BWS and loss of methylation at IC2 should have an ultrasound evaluation at the time of clinical diagnosis and only continue with ultrasound surveillance if visceromegaly or ‘severe’ hemihyperplasia are present; otherwise, clinical examination alone was recommended. Mussa et al [2016b] questioned the rationale for ultrasound surveillance and ‘tumor markers’ for individuals with loss of methylation at IC2 but subsequently, in their guidelines from the Italian Scientific Committee on BWS, suggested that in the near future, tumor screening in clinical practice will cease. Based on personal experience, the present authors continue to recommend tumor surveillance for all children with BWS regardless of the molecular etiology. (2) Although periodic chest x-ray and urinary VMA and VHA assays to screen for neuroblastoma have been suggested, they have not been incorporated into most screening protocols because of their low yield.

Annual renal ultrasound examination between age eight years and mid-adolescence to identify those requiring further evaluation for findings such as nephrocalcinosis and medullary sponge kidney disease. Those with positive findings should be referred to a nephrologist for further assessment and follow up. Since the natural history of renal disease in adults has not as yet been evaluated, adult-onset renal disease without early findings remains a possibility. Therefore, consideration should be given to periodic renal evaluation in adulthood.

Consideration of annual or biannual measurement of urinary calcium/creatinine ratio from the time of BWS diagnosis as it may be abnormal in individuals with BWS who have normal findings on ultrasound examination [Goldman et al 2003]

Developmental screening as part of routine childcare

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the newborn sib of an individual with BWS in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Genetic testing if a maternal CDKN1C pathogenic variant or familial duplication, deletion, or cytogenetically visible alteration of 11p15 is known;

Monitoring of an at-risk newborn sib for hypoglycemia, even in the absence of obvious clinical findings on prenatal investigation;

Strong consideration of tumor surveillance for the apparently unaffected twin of monozygotic twins who are discordant for BWS, given the possibility of shared fetal circulation and resulting somatic mosaicism.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with carbonic anhydrase VA (CA-VA) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of serum lactate, plasma ammonia, serum glucose, blood gases, plasma amino acids, urine ketone bodies, and urine organic acid profiles (during periods of illness; when stable for monitoring, preferably fasting)

Liver function parameters (coagulation, albumin, AST, ALT) as acute liver failure can occur in the urea cycle disorders which are metabolically similar

Consideration of:

Brain MRI to define extent of or to exclude brain edema

Neurodevelopmental testing

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

During acute episodes. Admit to the hospital children with insufficient intake or refusal to take anything orally and/or signs of metabolic decompensation such as encephalopathy. The following are recommended:

Always provide IV fluids (with glucose at maintenance doses) and extra calories via IV lipids; restrict protein intake if plasma ammonia is elevated.

Always monitor plasma ammonia, serum lactate, serum glucose, blood gases, electrolytes, and liver parameters.

Consider administration of carglumic acid (which – though not approved yet for this indication – enhances CPS1 activity and thus partially compensates for reduced HCO3- resulting from CA-VA deficiency). In the three children who were given carglumic acid during the acute phase, hyperammonemia and clinical symptoms resolved within 12 hours. Without carglumic acid, hyperammonemia persisted longer (i.e., an additional 1-2 days).

Other ammonia-lowering medications such as sodium benzoate would also be reasonable.

To prevent metabolic decompensation during any catabolic state (viral illness or fasting conditions)

Use a sick day formula (extra calories, with limited proteins and extra lipids).

Monitor plasma ammonia, serum glucose, blood gases, serum lactate, and plasma amino acids (frequency according to patient’s clinical state and physician’s expertise).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There is no evidence to date that use of a special diet and/or cofactor (zinc) treatment during periods of wellness prevents metabolic decompensations.

Surveillance

Follow up with a metabolic disease specialist every three to six months for physical and neurologic examinations. Consider neurodevelopmental testing and measurement of: plasma ammonia and amino acids (to check for chronic hyperammonemia and citrulline deficiency as well as general nutritional state); serum lactate and glucose; blood gases; liver parameters; and urine organic acids.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Acetazolamide should be avoided, as it inhibits carbonic anhydrase activity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When both CA5A pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate all sibs in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt treatment when symptoms appear.

Of note, in some families, asymptomatic (older) sibs were found to have biallelic CA5A pathogenic variants through family screening [van Karnebeek et al 2014b]. This finding suggests a possible “susceptibility period” during childhood after which individuals with biallelic CA5A pathogenic variants may no longer be at risk of developing signs of CA-VA deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

For an affected mother. No pregnancy manaagement issues are known.

For an affected child

No special management is required during pregnancy.

Delivery in hospital is indicated with monitoring for several days (including physical examination and measurement of plasma ammonia, serum lactate, serum glucose, blood gases, plasma amino acids, and urine organic acids).

Therapies Under Investigation

Zinc treatment to enhance residual CA-VA activity is under investigation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with childhood ataxia with central nervous system hypomyelination/vanishing white matter disease (CACH/VWM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Brain MRI

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic examination

Physical therapy/occupational therapy assessment as needed

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation for motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia)

Ankle-foot orthotics in individuals with hypotonia and weakness of ankle dorsiflexors

Antiepileptic drugs for treatment of seizures and abnormalities of behavior and mood

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Considering the known adverse effect of fever, it is important to prevent infections and fever as much as possible (e.g., through the use of vaccinations, including anti-flu vaccination); low-dose maintenance antibiotics during winter time, antibiotics for minor infections, and antipyretics for fever are appropriate. For children, wearing a helmet outside helps minimize the effects of possible head trauma.

Surveillance

Close surveillance for several days following head trauma or major surgical procedure with anesthesia is indicated because neurologic deterioration (presumably stress related) may follow.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma

Stressful emotional and physical situations (e.g., extreme temperatures)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

In general, corticosteriods and intravenous gamma globulin are not effective in the treatment of CACH/VWM. Corticosteriods have been used with inconsistent results in acute situations, including intractable status epilepticus.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CADASIL, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation

Psychometrics with particular attention to executive function

Standard brain MRI (FLAIR sequence)

Clinical genetics consultation

Psychiatric consultation should be considered

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no treatment of proven efficacy for CADASIL. Antiplatelet treatment is frequently used, but not proven effective in CADASIL.

Migraine should be treated symptomatically and prophylactically, depending on the frequency of manifestations. There is no evidence that triptans and ergot derivatives should be avoided, although some argue that vasoconstrictive medication should be used with prudence.

Co-occurrence of hypertension, diabetes, or hypercholesterolemia should be treated.

Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

Further discussion of medical management options for individuals with CADASIL was published by del Río-Espínola et al [2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There are no preventive measures for stroke or vascular dementia.

Migraine attacks can be treated symptomatically and prophylactically according to migraine care standards.

Surveillance

There are no standard international surveillance guidelines for CADASIL. Several countries have developed CADASIL guidelines which can be referred to, such as the medical guideline for CADASIL published (in French) by the French Health Authority (HAS).

Yearly follow up by a neurologist with expertise in CADASIL is recommended from the time of diagnosis.

A consultation with a neuropsychiatrist is recommended when there are symptoms of depression or other psychiatric manifestations.

Consultation of other medical specialists (e.g., rehabilitation physician, physical therapist, and psychologist) is as required.

The interval at which individuals with CADASIL should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the patients and their care givers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Angiography and anticoagulants are contraindicated in CADASIL as they may provoke cerebrovascular accidents [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001].

Smoking increases the risk of stroke in individuals with CADASIL and should be avoided [Singhal et al 2004].

Thrombolytic therapy (intravenous thrombolysis) is contraindicated because of the presumed increased risk for cerebral hemorrhage in view of the fact that patients with CADASIL have microbleeds on MRI [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001, Dichgans et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although no formal studies have been performed, no evidence from clinical practice suggests that fetuses affected with CADASIL are at an increased risk for intrauterine complications or complications during/after delivery.

Women with a NOTCH3 pathogenic variant have been described as at increased risk for neurologic events in pregnancy during and shortly after delivery (puerperium) [Roine et al 2005]. However, it should be noted that this study was performed retrospectively. In the authors’ experience, most women with CADASIL have an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery, but transient neurologic events are sometimes reported (mostly consistent with migraine aura) [Lesnik Oberstein, unpublished observation based on clinical practice].

Therapies Under Investigation

Small-scale observational studies have suggested a beneficial effect of acetazolamide on migraine [Donnini et al 2012]. Acetazolamide has also been shown to have a beneficial effect on cerebral blood flow in one case report [Park et al 2011]. Acetazolamide is not given to patients with CADASIL on a routine basis.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies suggest that disease progression is faster in individuals with CADASIL who have increased blood pressure [Peters et al 2004, Holtmannspötter et al 2005, Peters et al 2006]. However, no controlled data are available regarding the effect of antihypertensive treatment on disease progression.

Based on experience with stroke in general, many neurologists prescribe salicylates. Whether these are of any efficacy in preventing stroke in individuals with CADASIL has not been studied.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Caffey disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation for joint range of motion, tissue hyperlaxity, and hernias

Radiographs of long bones, ribs, scapulae, clavicles, and mandible to assess extent of disease and the stage of hyperostosis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Anti-inflammatory agents, antipyretics, and analgesics can be used in the short term to decrease swelling and fever and to relieve pain [Thometz & DiRaimondo 1996, Parnell & Parisi 2010].

Although immunoglobulins have also been tried [Berthier et al 1988], no definitive treatment guidelines exist.

No recommendations for the prevention of recurrence of hyperostosis currently exist.

Surveillance

Currently, no standard surveillance protocols exist. However, given that Caffey disease is a collagenopathy, yearly evaluation of stature, joint extensibility, hernias, fracture history, and dental health is recommended.

Although no systematic reviews of bone mineral density in adults with the defining pathogenic variant have been performed, reports of fractures and short stature in adults with other COL1A1 pathogenic variants suggest that assessment of bone mineral density may be prudent in adults with a history of Caffey disease in childhood.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No special recommendations for management of either a fetus known to be heterozygous for the disease-defining pathogenic variant or a mother known to have had Caffey disease in childhood.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-OHD CAH), the following evaluations are recommended:

To assess for salt wasting

Plasma renin activity (PRA)

Serum electrolytes

To distinguish classic from non-classic forms of 21-OHD CAH

Baseline 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, cortisol, and aldosterone

ACTH stimulation test to compare stimulated concentration of 17-OHP to the baseline level

To assess the degree of prenatal virilization in females

Careful physical examination of the external genitalia and its orifices

Vaginogram to assess the anatomy of urethra and vagina

To assess the degree of postnatal virilization in both males and females

Bone maturation assessment by bone age

Serum concentration of adrenal androgens (unconjugated dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA], Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended for those individuals with a new diagnosis of 21-OHD CAH.

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency have been published [Speiser et al 2010] (full text).

It is imperative to make the diagnosis of 21-OHD CAH as quickly as possible in order to initiate therapy and arrest the effects of cortisol deficiency and mineralocorticoid deficiency, if present.

A multidisciplinary team of specialists in pediatric endocrinology, pediatric urology/surgery, clinical genetics, and psychology is essential for the diagnosis and management of the individual with ambiguous genitalia [Hughes et al 2006]. A pioneer project of CAH comprehensive care centers was implemented [Auchus et al 2010]. Two CAH comprehensive care centers which can provide multidisciplinary care from diagnosis through all stages of growth and development have been designated in the United States.

Classic 21-OHD CAH

Glucocorticoid replacement therapy. The goal of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is to replace deficient steroids, minimize adrenal sex hormone and glucocorticoid excess, prevent virilization, optimize growth, and promote fertility [Clayton et al 2002].

Hydrocortisone in tablet form is the treatment of choice in growing children. The use of oral hydrocortisone suspension is discouraged. Treatment for CAH principally involves glucocorticoid replacement therapy, usually in the form of hydrocortisone (10-15 mg/m2/24 hours) given orally in two or three daily divided doses [New et al 2013]. Glucocorticoid therapy for children involves balancing suppression of adrenal androgen secretion against iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in order to maintain a normal linear growth rate and normal bone maturation.

Note: Overtreatment with glucocorticosteroids can result in cushingoid features and should be avoided. It often occurs when serum concentration of 17-OHP is reduced to the physiologic range for age. An acceptable range for serum concentration of 17-OHP in the treated individual is higher (100-1,000 ng/dL) than normal, provided androgens are maintained in an appropriate range for gender and pubertal status.

During periods of stress (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, shock, major trauma), all individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require increased amounts of glucocorticoids. Typically, two to three times the normal dose is administered orally or by intramuscular injection when oral intake is not tolerated.

Affected individuals should carry medical information regarding emergency steroid dosing.

Individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require lifelong administration of glucocorticoids. After linear growth is complete, more potent glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone and dexamethasone) that tend to suppress growth in childhood can be used.

Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy. Treatment with 9α-fludrohydrocortisone (Florinef®) (0.05-0.2 mg/day orally) and sodium chloride (1-2 g/day added to formula or foods) is necessary in individuals with the salt-wasting form of 21-OHD CAH.

All individuals with the classic form should be treated with both 9α-fludrohydrocortisone and sodium chloride supplement in the newborn period and early infancy [Speiser et al 2010].

Sodium chloride supplementation may not be necessary after infancy; the amount of mineralocorticoid required daily may likewise decrease with age.

Feminizing genitoplasty. Per the 2006 joint LWPES/ESPE (Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society/European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology) consensus statement [Lee et al 2006] (full text):

“Surgery should only be considered in cases of severe virilization (Prader III-V) and be performed in conjunction, when appropriate, with repair of the common urogenital sinus. Because orgasmic function and erectile sensation may be disturbed by clitoral surgery, the surgical procedure should be anatomically based to preserve erectile function and the innervation of the clitoris. Emphasis is on functional outcome rather than a strictly cosmetic appearance. It is generally felt that surgery that is performed for cosmetic reasons in the first year of life relieves parental distress and improves attachment between the child and the parents; the systematic evidence for this belief is lacking.”

The Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines [Speiser et al 2010] (full text) state:

“[C]litoral and perineal reconstruction [should] be considered in infancy and performed by an experienced surgeon in a center with similarly experienced pediatric endocrinologists, mental health professionals, and social work services.”

Although there are no randomized controlled studies of either the best age or the best methods for feminizing surgery, the recommended procedures are neurovascular-sparing clitoroplasty and vaginoplasty using total or partial urogenital mobilization.

When necessary, vaginoplasty is usually performed in late adolescence because routine vaginal dilation is required to maintain a patent vagina.

Precocious puberty. The true precocious puberty that may occur in 21-OHD CAH can be treated with analogs of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH).

Testicular adrenal rest tumors. Response of testicular adrenal rest tumors to intensified glucocorticoid treatment may decrease the tumor size and improve testicular function [Bachelot et al 2008]. Testis-sparing surgery is considered in males who fail medical treatment, but the outcome has not been favorable, perhaps because of long-standing obstruction of the tubules [Claahsen-van der Grinten et al 2008]. Assistive reproductive technologies (ART) may also be considered to achieve fertility [Sugino et al 2006].

Transition from adolescence to adulthood. Improved care for individuals with 21-OHD CAH has resulted in a good prognosis and normal life expectancy. However, a prospective cross-sectional study of adults with 21-OHD CAH in the UK showed the following [Arlt et al 2010]:

Affected individuals were significantly shorter and had a higher body mass index.

Women with classic CAH had increased diastolic blood pressure.

Metabolic abnormalities were common among studied individuals, and included obesity (41%), hypercholesterolemia (46%), insulin resistance (29%), osteopenia (40%), and osteoporosis (7%). Subjective health status was significantly impaired and fertility compromised.

Transition of pediatric individuals to medical care in the adult setting is an important step to ensure optimal lifelong treatment, aiming to achieve good health with a normal life expectancy and quality of life [Reisch et al 2011].

Care for adults with CAH requires a multidisciplinary approach, including psychological support by specialists [Ogilvie et al 2006a].

Adrenalectomy. Bilateral adrenalectomy has been reported as a treatment of individuals with severe 21-OHD CAH who are homozygous for a null variant and who have a history of poor control with hormone replacement therapy [Van Wyk et al 1996, Meyers & Grua 2000]. It is thought that these individuals may be more successfully treated as individuals with Addison disease; however, compliance with the medication regimen postoperatively is exceedingly important. Thus, bilateral adrenalectomy can be considered only in selected individuals who have failed medical therapy; the risk for non-compliance must be considered before surgery [Speiser et al 2010].

Only small series of adults undergoing adrenalectomy have been reported (see review in Bachelot et al [2008]), the largest of which included five persons [Ogilvie et al 2006b]. The three main indications for adrenalectomy were: infertility, virilization, and obesity. Improvements in all three areas were noted in all reported individuals. More long-term data are needed to determine the outcome of those undergoing adrenalectomy, since the potential increase in ACTH postoperatively can worsen adrenal rest tissues.

Non-Classic 21-OHD CAH

Individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH do not always require treatment. Many are asymptomatic throughout their lives, or symptoms may develop during puberty, after puberty, or post partum.

The hyperandrogenic symptoms that require treatment include advanced bone age, early pubic hair, precocious puberty, tall stature, and early arrest of growth in children; infertility, cystic acne, and short stature in both adult males and females; hirsutism, frontal balding, polycystic ovaries, and irregular menstrual periods in females; and testicular adrenal rest tissue in males [New 2006].

In previously treated individuals, an option of discontinuing therapy when symptoms resolve should be offered [Speiser et al 2010].

Traditionally, individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH have been treated with lower amounts of glucocorticoid than those required for individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Salt-wasting crisis. Newborn screening programs aim to identify infants with classic 21-OHD CAH in order to initiate glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid treatment prior to a potentially life-threatening salt-wasting crisis.

See Treatment of Manifestations, Glucocorticoid replacement therapy and Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Short stature. Short stature may result from glucocorticoid-induced growth suppression caused by over-treatment with glucocorticoids or from advanced skeletal maturation caused by inadequate glucocorticoid treatment. Evidence derived from observational studies suggests that the final height of individuals with CAH treated with glucocorticoids is lower than the population norm and lower than expected given parental height [Muthusamy et al 2010]. See Therapies Under Investigation for a discussion of treatment of short stature in individuals with CAH.

Surveillance

The following evaluations should be performed every three to four months when children are actively growing. Evaluation may be less often thereafter. The frequency of evaluation should vary depending on individual needs [Speiser et al 2010].

Efficacy of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Early-morning serum concentrations of 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone approximately every three months during infancy and every three to six months thereafter. (In some instances, measurement of urinary pregnantriols and 17 ketosteroids in a 24-hour urine sample may help assess hormonal control. However, the process of urine collection makes it less practical than a simple blood draw.)

Linear growth, weight gain, pubertal development, and clinical signs of cortisol and androgen excess

Bone age to assess osseous maturation (at 6- to 12-month intervals)

Efficacy of mineralocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Blood pressure

Early morning plasma renin activity or direct renin assay in a controlled position (usually upright)

Monitoring for testicular abnormalities in males. Periodic imaging of the testes either by ultrasonography or MRI should begin after puberty and be repeated every three to five years.

Monitoring fertility and metabolic risks in adults. In affected adults, periodic measurements and/or monitoring of the following should be performed:

Fecundity and fertility

Weight

Lipid profile

Blood pressure

Bone mineral density

Imaging studies. No routine adrenal imaging or bone mineral density is recommended [Speiser et al 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Physical stress such as febrile illness, gastroenteritis with dehydration, surgery accompanied by general anesthesia, and major trauma can precipitate an adrenal crisis in individuals with classic CAH. Increased doses of glucocorticoids are recommended in these situations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If prenatal testing for 21-OHD CAH has not been performed, it is appropriate to evaluate newborn sibs of a proband in order to facilitate early diagnosis and treatment.

Serum 17-OHP concentration should be measured in addition to newborn screening.

Molecular genetic testing is indicated if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant females with classic 21-OHD CAH. Pregnant females who have classic salt-wasting 21-OHD CAH need to be monitored closely by an endocrinologist during pregnancy. Maintenance doses of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid usually need to be increased because adrenal androgens tend to increase during pregnancy. Despite excess production of maternal adrenal androgens, the genitalia of their female fetuses are not virilized [Lo et al 1999].

Therapies Under Investigation

Affected female fetus with genital ambiguity. Through molecular genetic testing of fetal DNA, defects in 21-OHD CAH synthesis can be diagnosed in utero. Genital ambiguity in female fetuses may be reduced or eliminated by suppressing fetal androgen production through administration of dexamethasone to the mother beginning early in gestation and continuing until delivery. Prenatal treatment should continue to be considered experimental and should only be used within the context of a formal IRB-approved clinical trial. Noninvasive prenatal diagnostic methods for earlier diagnosis of affected female fetuses have been developed and may eliminate the unnecessary prenatal treatment of males and unaffected females [New et al 2014, Tardy-Guidollet et al 2014].

Treatment of short stature. Injections of human growth hormone alone or in combination with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) may be used to improve height prognosis in individuals with 21-OHD CAH who have significant growth failure [Lin-Su et al 2011]. Aromatase inhibitors to slow bone age advancement have been used. However, these approaches are considered experimental treatment and should not be used outside of formally approved clinical trials [Speiser et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with campomelic dysplasia (CD), the following investigations are recommended:

Karyotype analysis to identify abnormalities involving the SOX9 locus on 17q24.3-q25.1 and especially in phenotypic females to identify those with a 46,XY karyotype

Full skeletal survey including views of the cervical spine to identify cervical vertebral abnormalities

Hearing screening

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In children with CD and cleft palate, care by a craniofacial team and surgical closure are recommended.

In individuals with a 46,XY karyotype and female genitalia, gonadectomy is recommended because of the increased risk of gonadoblastoma. (No data regarding the appropriate age for this procedure are available.)

Most survivors with CD require orthopedic care. Club feet require surgical correction. The hips should be checked for luxation.

Cervical fusion surgery is sometimes needed for cervical vertebral instability resulting from vertebral malformations.

Surgery is often required in childhood for progressive cervico-thoracic kyphoscoliosis that compromises lung function [Thomas et al 1997]. Bracing is usually not helpful.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Risk associated with use of anesthesia prior to imaging or surgery. If a cervical spine abnormality is identified, special care should be exercised for any surgical procedure.

Surveillance

Most long-term survivors require annual monitoring of growth and spinal curvature by clinical and radiographic measurements.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with neonatal/infantile (severe) Canavan disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Brain MRI

Developmental assessment

Nutritional assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Treatment is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious diseases, and protecting the airway.

Children benefit from physical therapy to minimize contractures and to maximize abilities and seating posture, from other therapies to enhance communication skills (especially in those with a more gradual clinical course), and from early intervention and special education programs.

Seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

A feeding gastrostomy may be required to maintain adequate intake and hydration in the presence of swallowing difficulties.

Diamox® seems to reduce intracranial pressure.

Botox® injections may be used to relieve spasticity.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. These individuals may require speech therapy or tutoring but require no special medical care.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Contractures and decubiti need to be prevented by exercise and position changes.

Feeding difficulties and seizures increase the risk of aspiration, which can be reduced with use of a G-tube for feeding.

Surveillance

Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease. Follow up at six-month intervals to evaluate developmental status and evidence of any new problems is suggested.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. Annual routine follow up is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Humans

Gene transfer to the brains of two children with Canavan disease using a nonviral vector was well tolerated [Leone et al 2000, Janson et al 2002]. Some biochemical, radiologic, and clinical changes may have occurred; however, the children continued to follow the course of those with untreated Canavan disease.

In ten children with Canavan disease, multisite injection with AAV2 as the vector for ASPA was well tolerated [McPhee et al 2006]. Three developed AAV2 neutralizing antibodies. No children improved.

Lithium citrate may reduce N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) concentration in the brain. Six persons with Canavan disease given lithium citrate for 60 days were reported to have reduced NAA in the basal ganglia and mild improvement in frontal white matter [Assadi et al 2010]. The clinical significance of use of lithium citrate is not known.

The enzyme defect in Canavan disease leads to decreased levels of acetate in the brain. In a clinical trial with glycerol triacetate in two persons with Canavan disease the compound was well tolerated; however, there was no clinical improvement [Madhavarao et al 2009]. It is speculated that higher doses of glycerol triacetate may be needed.

Animal models

A knock-out mouse has been created, with a phenotype similar to that of human Canavan disease [Matalon et al 2000]. This model is being used to investigate pathophysiology [Surendran et al 2004] gene therapy and other modes of treatment [Matalon et al 2003].

Gene therapy with AAV2 was given to knock-out Canavan disease mice: localized improvement did not spread to the entire brain [Matalon et al 2003].

Stem cell therapy in knock-out Canavan disease mice was done in collaboration with Genzyme Corporation: The stem cells produced some oligodendrocytes but not enough to make myelin [Surendran et al 2004].

Enzyme replacement therapy using native ASPA and pegylated ASPA (i.e., ASPA in which covalent attachment of polyethylene glycol polymer chains masks the enzyme from the host allowing for longer circulation and less renal clearance) were injected into the peritoneum of Canavan disease mice. Preliminary results show that the enzyme passed the blood brain barrier and there was a decrease of NAA in the brain. These experiments were short term; longitudinal studies are being planned [Zano et al 2011].

A mouse that seems to have a Canavan disease phenotype was produced by using the mutagen ethylenenitrosourea (ENU) to change the residue Gln193 to a termination codon in exon 4 (577C>T) [Traka et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Cantú syndrome and related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Cardiology evaluation with echocardiogram and electrocardiogram

Skeletal survey to assess for the associated bone abnormalities

Evaluation for scoliosis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Consider referral to a dermatologist for discussion of treatment options for hypertrichosis. Possible treatments may include shaving and, in teenagers and adults, use of depilatories or laser hair removal.

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) often requires surgical closure in infancy or early childhood. Of note, the PDA in Cantú syndrome is frequently described as being very large.

Pericardial effusion sometimes requires pericardiocentesis and ultimately pericardial stripping to prevent reaccumulation of the effusion.

Scoliosis may require bracing or surgical correction.

Standard management for peripheral edema, including compression stockings, is indicated.

Surveillance

If cardiac abnormalities are present, follow-up intervals should be determined by the cardiologist according to the specific clinical manifestations. Otherwise, yearly echocardiogram and electrocardiogram are recommended to monitor cardiac size and function, as well as for evidence of pericardial effusion. These studies should be started in infancy, or as soon as the diagnosis is made, and continued throughout life.

Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis should be performed if there is concern based on physical examination. If scoliosis is present, continued monitoring by an orthopedist is recommended.

Consider brain MRI with magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) to evaluate persistent headaches or other neurological symptoms, given the increased risk for cerebral vascular abnormalities.

Affected individuals should be monitored for edema –which often develops in adolescence or early adulthood- by reviewing the medical history regarding swelling of the limbs, and by physical examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic ABCC9 or KCNJ8 variant in an affected family member is known, relatives at risk who are suspected of having Cantú syndrome can be offered molecular genetic testing to clarify their genetic status. Family members who are affected should be evaluated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy of a fetus with Cantú syndrome warrants monitoring for:

Polyhydramnios. The cause of polyhydramnios is unknown. In some instances, severe polyhydramnios has required serial amniotic fluid reductions and has led to premature labor and delivery.

Macrosomia. It is unknown if fetal size warrants special consideration at the time of delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CARASIL, the following evaluations are recommended:

T2* gradient echo imaging to check cerebral microbleeds

Spine MRI to check the degenerative change in lumbar or cervical spine

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

Gait disturbance from spasticity and pyramidal signs in the lower extremities may require walking aids or medication such as baclofen or tizanidine.

Personality change may require antipsychotic medication.

If spinal spondylosis is severe and patients show some neurologic deficit due to spinal compression, orthopedic treatment may be helpful to relieve symptoms.

A wig or hairpiece may be helpful for alopecia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anti-platelet therapy and anti-hypertension therapy may be recommended; however, there is no evidence for their effectiveness.

Surveillance

The interval at which a person with CARASIL are followed depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the affected individual and care givers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Smoking and a high-salt diet, which may hasten the progression of arteriosclerosis, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It has been speculated that hypertension or smoking may influence the age of onset and frequency of stroke episodes in individuals with CARASIL; smoking may result in earlier disease onset [Singhal et al 2004] and smoking or hypertension may increase the frequency of stroke episodes in individuals with CADASIL [Samii et al 2010]. Therefore, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures such as oral administration of anti-hypertensive drugs and abstinence from smoking.

If the HTRA1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, brain MRI can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No special management is necessary in pregnancy for individual with CARASIL.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There is no clinical trial for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Carney complex (CNC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Imaging or biochemical screening for endocrine tumors for diagnostic purposes only

Thyroid ultrasonography, recommended as a satisfactory, cost-effective method for determining thyroid involvement in pediatric and young adults with CNC. Its value, however, is questionable in older individuals.

In males, testicular ultrasonography at the initial evaluation

In females, transabdominal ultrasonography during the first evaluation. Unless an abnormality is detected initially, the test need not be repeated because of the low risk for ovarian malignancy.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following interventions are routine:

Cardiac myxoma. Open-heart surgery

Cutaneous and mammary myxoma. Surgical excision

Cushing syndrome. Bilateral adrenalectomy

Pituitary adenoma. Transsphenoidal surgery

Thyroid adenomas. Surgery if cancerous

LCCSCT. Orchiectomy usually required for boys with aggressively growing LCCSCT and gynecomastia to avoid premature epiphyseal fusion and induction of central precocious puberty. Tumors with lack of growth and mild gynecomastia can be treated medically with aromatase inhibitors.

PMS. Surgery to remove primary and/or metastatic lesions

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The only preventive measure in an asymptomatic individual is surgical removal of a heart tumor (cardiac myxoma) prior to the development of heart dysfunction, stroke, or other embolism.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Development of metabolic abnormalities from Cushing syndrome or arthropathy and other complications from acromegaly may be prevented by medical or surgical treatment of the respective endocrine manifestations.

Surveillance

Recommended clinical surveillance for individuals with CNC include the following:

Pre-pubertal pediatric individuals

Echocardiogram (annually; biannually for those with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound for boys; close monitoring of growth rate and pubertal staging (annually)

Post-pubertal pediatric and adult individuals

Echocardiogram (annually or biannually for adolescent individuals with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound (annually)

Thyroid ultrasound (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Transabdominal ultrasound of the ovaries (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Urinary free cortisol levels (annually)

Serum IGF-1 levels (annually)

Further evaluation of affected individuals of all age groups, as needed

For primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, in addition to urinary free cortisol levels:

Diurnal cortisol levels (11:30 pm, 12:00 am and 7:30 am, 8:00 am sampling)

Dexamethasone-stimulation test (modified Liddle’s test, as per Stratakis et al [1999])

Adrenal computed tomography

For gigantism/acromegaly, in addition to serum IGF-1 levels:

Pituitary MRI

Three-hour oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT)

90-minute thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) testing

For psammomatous melanotic schwannoma: MRI (brain, spine, chest, abdomen, retroperitoneum, pelvis)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance).

If the PRKAR1A pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a CASK-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation including EEG

Developmental assessment including gross motor and fine motor skills and speech and language

Assessment of feeding

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Orthopedic evaluation

Ultrasound of heart and kidneys to evaluate for rare but possible cardiac or renal/urologic anomalies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific therapy is available.

Treatment is symptomatic and includes nutritional support, treatment of hearing loss, and use of physiotherapy.

Management of seizures in children with MICPCH is standard treatment and based on the specific seizure type and frequency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CATSPER-related male infertility, the following evaluations are recommended (if not performed previously as part of the diagnostic evaluation):

In males, pubertal age or older, semen analysis to assess sperm number, motility, and morphology

In males and females with DIS, hearing evaluation including otologic examination and audiologic assessment (including measurement of bone conduction)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Infertility. No available treatment can reverse the morphologic and/or motility defects observed in CATSPER-related asthenospermia or asthenoteratospermia (low motility with increased number of abnormal forms). For infertile males, one option is to bypass these morphologic and motility abnormalities using assisted reproductive technologies such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) [Smith et al 2013]. This approach has been used successfully in males with DIS [Zhang et al 2007].

Deafness. For males and females with DIS, treatment of hearing loss is best achieved by fitting hearing aids for amplification. For school-age children or adolescents, special educational assistance may also be warranted and, where possible, should be offered. (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview and Related Genetic Counseling Issues for other issues pertinent to the care of deaf and hard-of-hearing persons.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae. Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production.

Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies. In contrast, early auditory intervention, whether through amplification, otologic surgery, or cochlear implantation, is effective [Smith et al 2005] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Although decreased cognitive skills and performance in mathematics and reading are associated with deafness, examination of persons with hereditary hearing loss has shown that these deficiencies are not intrinsically linked to the cause of the deafness.

Thus, early identification and timely intervention are essential for optimal cognitive development in children with prelingual deafness.

Surveillance

Annual monitoring of hearing loss is not required in individuals with DIS because hearing loss is non-progressive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with DIS should avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace or during recreation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband with DIS in infancy or early childhood in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early support and management of hearing loss. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing for the causative contiguous gene deletion;

Otologic examination and audiologic assessment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with caveolinopathies, initial evaluation includes the following:

Orthopedic examination to assess the presence of scoliosis

Analysis of respiratory function: spirometry (patients age >5 years), measurement of arterial pO2 and pCO2, measurement of transcutaneous O2 saturation

Cardiac examination: 24-hour electrocardiogram and echocardiogram

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific treatment is currently available for caveolinopathies.

Aggressive supportive care is essential to preserve muscle function, to maximize functional ability, and to treat complications, especially in cases with LGMD features. Management should include the following:

Weight control to avoid obesity

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998]

Prevention of Secondary Complications

In individuals with isolated hyperCKemia, special precautions during surgical procedures and anesthesia should be considered, despite the fact that malignant hyperthermia (MH) has not been reported in association with CAV3 mutations. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Surveillance

Periodic monitoring of the following is recommended:

Spine: orthopedic consultation and, if needed, x-ray analysis

Respiratory function: spirometry

Cardiac function: 24-hour electrocardiography and echocardiography

Mobility and muscle function: physiatrist and physical therapist consultation

The interval between visits is determined based on the symptoms and signs observed in the individual patient.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism, the following evaluations are recommended.

In an unstable patient:

Serial metabolic evaluations of blood gases, electrolytes, glucose, ammonia, liver function, total and direct bilirubin, renal function, lactate dehydrogenase, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma methylmalonic acid (MMA), and total plasma homocysteine (tHcy) to guide acute management until the patient stabilizes

Complete blood count (CBC) with differential to evaluate for megaloblastic anemia, cytopenias

Peripheral blood smear to evaluate for the presence of schistocytes, in the presence of other manifestations of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)

Molecular genetic testing to identify pathogenic variants, if not previously performed, to aid in genetic counseling and prediction of disease severity

Once the patient becomes stable:

Clinical assessment of growth parameters, head circumference, ability to feed, developmental status, and neurologic status

Laboratory assessment of nutritional status (electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels [including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D], and trace minerals) and renal function; complete blood count to monitor for cytopenias

Echocardiogram

EEG and brain MRI in symptomatic individuals

Ophthalmologic examination

Treatment of Manifestations

Prognosis is poor in patients with early-onset cblC who are undiagnosed and untreated [Rosenblatt et al 1997]. Institution of therapy during acute illness results in rapid improvement of clinical, biochemical, and hematologic manifestations in patients with early- and late-onset cblC [Bartholomew et al 1988, Rosenblatt et al 1997, Bodamer et al 2001, Tomaske et al 2001, Kind et al 2002, Van Hove et al 2002, Fowler et al 2008].

Parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) is the mainstay of therapy and should be instituted as soon as a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism is suspected. Infants are started with daily 1.0 mg intramuscular or subcutaneous injections. Patients with cblC are often highly responsive to this therapy.

Patients with elevated tHcy should also receive betaine (250 mg/kg/day) and folate or folinic acid.

Acute metabolic decompensation. Although less common in the disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism than in methylmalonic acidemia, severe acidotic/ketotic crises due to profound methylmalonic acidemia do occur. Such critically ill individuals should be managed in consultation with a metabolic specialist. MedicAlert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Treatment includes volume replacement with isotonic solutions containing high (10%-12.5%) glucose to reverse catabolism, correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate, and prompt reintroduction of feedings — preferably enterally, but parenterally if enteral route cannot be established.

Thromboembolic complications a cause of mortality in cblC are likely associated with increasing plasma concentrations of tHcy [Carrillo-Carrasco & Venditti 2012]. The proper management of thromboembolic complications, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic microangiopathy, should include initiation of OHCbl and betaine or an increase in their doses [Van Hove et al 2002, Sharma et al 2007].

Long-term management. The goals of long-term management include improving the metabolic derangement by lowering plasma tHcy and MMA concentrations and maintaining plasma methionine concentrations within the normal range. These are accomplished by:

Parenteral OHCbl. The most experience derives from the treatment of patients with cblC. Infants are usually started at a daily dose of 1.0 mg (~0.3 mg/kg/d) of OHCbl given IM or SQ. Parenteral OHCbl (not the cyanocobalamin form or oral form) is the only effective preparation. Placement of a SQ catheter that minimizes cutaneous punctures [Freehauf et al 2011] and pre-filled injections may increase compliance.

Weight-appropriate adjustment of the OHCbl dose is recommended and can be attained by the ability to concentrate OHCbl up to 30 mg/mL. Further titration of the dose may be empirically adjusted as needed for worsening clinical manifestations [Van Hove et al 2002] or for metabolic control of plasma tHcy, MMA, or methionine concentrations [Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2009].

Betaine. Oral betaine (starting at ~250 mg/kg/day) is recommended in patients with defective MeCbl production (cblC, cblD, cblE, cblF, cblG, and cblJ). Betaine augments the non-methionine synthase-dependent conversion of homocysteine to methionine (however, this is not uniformly accepted). Optimal dosing and monitoring have not been adequately established.

Folate and folinic acid. Folic acid and folinic acid can potentially augment remethylation and may help improve plasma tHcy and methionine concentrations. Folinic acid may be preferred as it crosses the blood brain barrier more efficiently than folic acid. The adult dose of folate is 1.0 mg by mouth per day, titratable down to 0.5 mg for maintenance. Doses for children and infants are available in the Harriet Lane Handbook [Tschudy & Arcara 2012] and other common reference texts.

Dietary management. Patients may be able to tolerate a normal diet: the use of a low-protein diet is under debate and needs further clinical studies to clarify the benefits of its use.

Most importantly, methionine restriction should be avoided, as hypomethioninemia can be detrimental [Ribes et al 1990, Rossi et al 2001, De Bie et al 2009].

Gastrostomy tube placement may be required in the present of feeding difficulties and failure to thrive.

Other therapeutic considerations that have not been fully validated:

Methionine supplementation. Hypomethioninemia is usually responsive to appropriate treatment with OHCbl and betaine. The need for exogenous methionine supplementation may be minimized by these strategies, as the efficacy of this therapy is uncertain [Smith et al 2006].

Pyridoxine. Vitamin B6 is a cofactor for cystathionine beta synthase and, therefore has been proposed as a means of maximizing the removal of homocysteine. Persons with disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism generally do not respond to pyridoxine unless they have a dietary deficiency.

Levocarnitine. Indicated for low plasma carnitine levels

Treatment of infantile spasms, seizures, congenital heart defects, and hydrocephalus is done in a routine manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Early institution of therapy may reduce but not completely prevent primary manifestations.

To prevent metabolic decompensations, patients should be advised to avoid situations that result in catabolism, such as prolonged fasting and dehydration. Of note, during an intercurrent illness patients may be treated with glucose-containing IV fluid.

Flu prevention (i.e., immunization) should be a routine part of health maintenance.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antiplatelet doses of aspirin may be given to patients with isolated homocystinuria to decrease the risk for thrombosis [Brunel-Guitton et al 2010].

Surveillance

The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on age and disease severity.

During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated once or twice a month by a metabolic specialist.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of:

Growth including weight, linear growth, and head circumference;

Nutritional status;

Feeding ability;

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate.

Laboratory evaluation should include:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, plasma MMA concentration, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma tHcy concentration;

Complete blood count (CBC) to monitor for cytopenias;

Nutritional studies, if indicated: electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels (including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D), and trace minerals.

Routine evaluations should include:

Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal and optic nerve changes in patients with cblC and cblG and if visual symptoms are present;

Neurologic evaluations for early signs of psychomotor retardation, behavioral disturbances, seizures, and myelopathy;

Brain MRI and/or EEG as clinically indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Potentially exacerbating circumstances:

Prolonged fasting (longer than overnight without dextrose-containing intravenous fluids)

Dietary protein intake below the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for age or more than that prescribed by a metabolic specialist

Methionine restriction. Methionine-free formulas given to infants with methylmalonic acidemia should be avoided as the decreased methionine intake may worsen hypomethioninemia in patients with decreased methionine production.

Nitrous oxide, an anesthetic that is potentially toxic as it depletes the body stores of vitamin B12 and inhibits methionine synthase activity [Abels et al 1990, Drummond & Matthews 1994]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, at-risk sibs may be tested prenatally to allow initiation of treatment as soon as possible after birth.

If the newborn sibling of an affected individual has not undergone prenatal testing, the infant can be tested in the first week of life by urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, measurement of total plasma homocysteine, and acylcarnitine profile analysis for the purpose of early diagnosis and treatment. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to confirm the diagnosis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

A good pregnancy outcome was reported in a woman with cblC treated with OHCbl 1.0 mg IM, folic acid 5.0 mg per day, aspirin 80 mg per day, levocarnitine, and low-protein diet [Brunel-Guitton et al 2010].

Prenatal therapy of an affected fetus by administration of intramuscular OHCbl to the mother may decrease developmental abnormalities and improve neurocognitive outcome [Huemer et al 2005, Trefz et al 2012] but does not appear to affect the ophthalmologic outcome [Patton et al 2000]. The dose and frequency of administration of IM OHCbl has not been established. Favorable outcomes of prenatal treatment have been reported by using dosages between 1 to 10 mg per day, 2-3 times a week, starting as early as 15 weeks’ gestational age [Huemer et al 2005, Trefz et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CLCN2-related leukoencephalopathy (CC2L), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI if not performed at the time of diagnostic work up

Physical therapy/occupational therapy assessment, if significant neurologic problems are present

Ophthalmologic examination with attention to visual acuity and visual fields

Audiologic examination

For adult males: evaluation of testicular function

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive therapy includes the following as needed:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation to improve motor function

Special education

Treatment of headache

Guidance for visual impairment

For males with infertility: consultation with a male infertility specialist

Surveillance

Annual evaluations including:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Audiologic assessment

MRI follow up can be performed once every few years, in the event that the neurologic manifestations change.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using the CLCN2 pathogenic variants identified in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify those who would benefit from early diagnosis and routine surveillance for motor, cognitive, vision, and hearing impairment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No pregnancy complications have been identified in affected women to date [Author, personal observation].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiogram

Musculoskeletal examination for the presence of contractures and kyphosis/scoliosis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Classic CCA

Physical therapy for joint contractures helps increase joint mobility and ameliorate the effects of muscle hypoplasia (usually calf muscles). This type of therapy is best instituted in childhood. As affected individuals age, spontaneous improvement in camptodactyly is frequently observed.

Surgical release of contractures may be necessary.

The kyphoscoliosis tends to be progressive, requiring bracing and/or surgical correction. Consultation with an orthopedist is encouraged.

Aortic root dilation, if present, is managed in a standard manner.

Severe/lethal CCA. no general recommendations exist; findings need to be managed in a standard manner as they arise.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Echocardiogram every two years until it is clear that the aorta is not involved

At least annual physical examination for evidence of kyphosis/scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Establishing the diagnosis of CCA early in at-risk relatives may permit more careful surveillance of affected individuals (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full skeletal survey including the hands and feet, if not performed already as part of the initial diagnostic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Dental evaluation by a dentist familiar with CCD and its management

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Dental. Early referral to a dental clinic familiar with CCD allows for timely planning of necessary procedures.

The dental problems that need to be addressed include the retention of deciduous dentition, the presence of supernumerary teeth, and the non-eruption of the permanent dentition.

The goal of treatment is to improve appearance and to provide a functioning masticatory mechanism. The goals may be achieved with prosthetic replacements, with or without prior extractions; by removal of the supernumerary teeth followed by surgical repositioning of the permanent teeth; and by a combination of surgical and orthodontic measures for actively erupting and aligning the impacted permanent teeth. For a detailed review, see Becker et al [1997a] and Becker et al [1997b], and Roberts et al [2013].

Generally, an aggressive approach to coordinate multiple oral surgeries for removal of primary dentition and exposure of permanent dentition is recommended, as watchful waiting for spontaneous eruption after initial delay is not effective.

Speech therapy may be required during periods of dental treatment.

Sinus and middle ear infections require aggressive and timely treatment; tympanostomy tubes should be considered when middle ear infections are recurrent [Visosky et al 2003].

Craniofacial. The fontanels close with time in the majority of individuals and cranial remodeling is usually not necessary.

If the cranial vault defect is significant, the head should be protected from blunt trauma; helmets may be advised for high-risk activities. In these cases, evaluation by a craniofacial surgeon and rehabilitation services are indicated.

Affected individuals may consider having correction of the depressed forehead or lengthening of the hypoplastic clavicles for cosmetic reasons. There have been reports of successful surgical interventions in a very small number of affected individuals [Kang et al 2009, Sewell et al 2013].

Skeletal. If bone density is below normal on DEXA, treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplementation should be considered. Preventive treatment for osteoporosis should be initiated at a young age since peak bone mineral density is achieved in the second and third decade.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthetic management of those with CCD needs to be carefully planned since affected individuals may present with a large brachycephalic head with mandibular prognathism and maxillary underdevelopment. In addition, the depressed nasal bridge and hypoplastic sinuses disturb nasal breathing. The dental and craniofacial abnormalities result in predictably difficult airway management. If this is anticipated, an otolaryngologist should be consulted to assist in securing the airway, and alternative anesthetic approaches, including neuraxial block, should be considered [Ioscovich et al 2010].

Surveillance

Children with CCD should be monitored for the following:

Orthopedic complications

Dental abnormalities

Upper-airway obstruction. Because of the craniofacial involvement, signs and symptoms of obstructive upper-airway disease should be elicited. When symptoms are suggestive, a sleep study is indicated and surgical intervention may be required.

Sinus and ear infections

Hearing loss. Regular audiometry in individuals with repeated ear infections allows the identification and early management of hearing loss if it develops.

Osteoporosis. DEXA to measure bone mineral density should be done early in adolescence and every five to ten years thereafter. If there are clinical signs of osteopenia (increased number of fractures), evaluation and treatment should be started earlier.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

To avoid head trauma, helmets and protective devices should be worn when participating in high-risk sports and activities.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Pregnant women with CCD should be monitored closely for cephalopelvic disproportion, which may require delivery by cesarean section.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Individuals with CCD should by followed by their primary care physician and receive regular immunizations and anticipatory guidance as recommended.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital cataracts, facial dysmorphism, and neuropathy (CCFDN) and to address the most disabling manifestations, the following evaluations are recommended:

Visual impairment (ophthalmologic examination)

Peripheral neuropathy and ensuing physical handicap (neurologic and orthopedic examinations, measurements of nerve conduction velocity)

Endocrinologic evaluation, related to growth delay, fertility problems, and osteopenia

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment of cataracts is surgical. The surgical removal of cataracts may be complicated by the micropupils and fibrotic pupillary margins necessitating alternative mechanical methods of dilatation [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

Patients need close follow up because of unusually exaggerated postoperative inflammatory reactions and strong unspecific foreign-body reaction to contact lenses and intraocular lenses (intraocular lenses are generally better tolerated) [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

The management of the peripheral neuropathy includes rehabilitation and corrective surgery for the secondary bone deformities.

Hormone replacement therapy may be considered in young females with secondary amenorrhea and increased risk of osteoporosis. Regular rehabilitation can prevent or postpone osteoporosis.

Growth hormone levels in CCFDN are in low normal range and somatotropin hormone substitution is not expected to have considerable effect.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with CCFDN are prone to develop severe and potentially life-threatening complications related to anesthesia, such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004] and thus need close monitoring and possibly intensive postoperative care.

Affected individuals and care providers need to be aware of rhabdomyolysis as a potential complication following viral infections, and seek medical attention with the first recognizable symptoms. Oral corticosteroid treatment for two to three weeks can result in a full recovery within two to six months [Walter et al 2014]. The long-term outcome depends on the recurrence of rhabdomyolysis episodes [Walter et al 2014].

Surveillance

Annual examinations to monitor for possible ophthalmologic, neurologic, and endocrine complications are warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

General anesthesia in patients with CCFDN may cause complications such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004]. Although such complications have not been unequivocally documented, Masters et al [2017] recommend cautious use of general anesthesia until more information on related risks is available.

Prolonged exercise was reported to provoke myalgia in one patient with CCFDN [Merlini et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the CTDP1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known careful monitoring of at-risk sibs for the early disease manifestations (ocular, delayed motor milestones, early signs of peripheral neuropathy) will ensure timely diagnosis of those affected.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Experience is very limited, as only three females with CCFDN are known to have given birth [Tournev et al 2001, Walter et al 2014]. The pregnancies are reported as uneventful and were carried to term. Normal pregnancy and delivery have also been reported by mothers of children with CCFDN.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial cerebral cavernous malformation (FCCM), the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI imaging of the brain and/or spinal cord if not already performed

Cerebral angiography may be considered to better define a complex lesion with arterial or venous components identified on brain MRI; however, caution should be used as cerebral angiography carries a small but appreciable risk of stroke.

In those with epilepsy:

Electoencephalogram (EEG) and/or video-EEG

Wada testing (to determine which hemisphere is language dominant)

Magnetoencephalography to confirm the localization of the epilepsy and to exclude other epileptogenic lesions

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect. Surgical removal of lesions associated with intractable seizures or focal deficits from recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect has traditionally been recommended [Heros & Heros 2000, Selman et al 2000, Folkersma & Mooij 2001]; however, a recent large prospective study in Scotland reported that surgical excision increased the overall risk of short-term neurologic disability, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, and new focal neurosurgical deficits [Moultrie et al 2014], calling this practice into question.

Neuropsychological testing may be considered prior to any neurosurgical procedure.

Microsurgical techniques rely on intraoperative examination for precise localization.

Even when a large number of lesions are present, a surgical approach may be justified.

Gamma knife surgery or radiosurgery, while effective, appears to increase the risk of recurrent hemorrhage and remains unproven [Wang et al 2010, Steiner et al 2010]. Very large single lesions can be difficult to ablate, especially in the brain stem. In these instances, radiosurgery may be an option [Monaco et al 2010].

In a group of individuals with symptomatic cavernous malformations studied in Japan, radiosurgery using varying doses of radiation for deep lesions was compared with conservative (nonsurgical) management. Doses less than 15 Gray (Gy) were associated with the lowest level of complications. Complications were also lower when the lesions were of smaller size, with overall hemorrhage rates reduced initially but reverting to a rate similar to that of the natural history after the first two years post-radiosurgery [Kida et al 2015].

A study that carefully reviewed post-radiosurgery changes in individuals with CCM or AVM found that more than 30% developed radiation necrosis [Blamek et al 2010].

Seizures. Standard treatment for focal seizures using antiepileptic medication with early evaluation for surgical resection is appropriate (see Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect).

Headaches. Standard treatment and management of headaches is indicated unless the headache is severe, prolonged, or progressive, or associated with new or worsening neurologic deficits. In this circumstance, urgent brain imaging could lead to surgical management.

Neurologic deficits. Rehabilitation is indicated for those with temporary or permanent neurologic deficits.

Surveillance

Brain MRI imaging with GRE or SWI is indicated in individuals experiencing new neurologic symptoms. Interpretation can be difficult because new hemorrhages may be asymptomatic.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Limited evidence suggests an increased risk of hemorrhage with certain analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, naproxen) and aspirin. Individuals with headaches and other pain should avoid these medications if suitable substitutes are available.

Other medications that increase risk of hemorrhage (e.g., heparin, sodium warfarin [Coumadin®]) should be avoided or, when such medications are necessary for treatment of life-threatening thrombosis, should be closely monitored by the affected individual’s medical team [Schneble et al 2012, Flemming et al 2013, Erdur et al 2014].

The use of narcotic pain medications is also discouraged in chronic pain conditions because of the potential for addiction and because of their association with rebound headaches.

Radiation to the central nervous system is associated with de novo lesion formation in FCCM [Larson et al 1998, Nimjee et al 2006, Golden et al 2015]. The pathology of these lesions appears to be histologically different from the cavernomas found prior to radiation [Cha et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate both symptomatic and apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of screening and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Brain and/or spinal cord MRI imaging including GRE or SWI if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women with FCCM who have had recent brain or spinal cord hemorrhage, epilepsy, or migraine will require closer observation during pregnancy. Baseline MRI one year prior to delivery is recommended to determine lesion locations [De Jong et al 2012, Witiw et al 2012, Yamada et al 2013].

Simonazzi et al [2014] reported six women with CCM who had symptoms such as seizure or focal neurologic deficit during pregnancy or within six weeks post-delivery. Reviewing the literature they found ten further cases in which pregnancy outcome was published. Of the 16 women, hemorrhage occured in ten. Preterm delivery occurred in four of six cases, one because of neurologic symptoms at 30 weeks. Cæsarean (C-)section was performed in nine cases, eight of which were for concern over CCM.

Affected women and obstetricians are frequently concerned that the risk of increased blood pressure and intrathoracic pressure during stage 3 labor (pushing phase) could lead to CCM hemorrhage. However, in a study of 168 pregnancies (64 women), 28 with sporadic CCM and 36 with FCCM, only five symptomatic cerebral hemorrhages were reported, most commonly manifesting as seizures. Nineteen deliveries in this study were by C-section, mostly due to fear of possible intracranial hemorrhage. The risk of CCM hemorrhage was higher in the familial cases (3.6% compared with 1.8% in sporadic cases) [Kalani & Zabramski 2013].

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, visit MotherToBaby.

Therapies Under Investigation

Recent advances in the understanding of the pathobiology and molecular signaling of the CCM proteins (see Molecular Genetics) has identified several pathways which may be amenable to drug targeting. These are being investigation in in vitro assays and in live animal models.

Fasudil, a specific Rho kinase inhibitor, has been demonstrated in Krit1(+/-) and Ccm2 (+/-) mouse models of FCCM to reduce both lesion size and number, as well as to lesson hemorrhage, proliferation, and inflammation [Stockton et al 2010, McDonald et al 2012]. Fasudil is approved in Japan for treatment of vasodilation; it is not currently available with FDA approval in the United States.

Statin medications are nonspecific Rho kinase inhibitors and may be suitable for repurposing to treat CCM lesions. Strong in vitro data [Whitehead et al 2009] led to simvastatin being studied in people with CCM who are eligible to take this medication for other indications such as hyperlipidemia. This trial is in the final data collection and analysis phase (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01764451). However, a Ccm2 knockout mouse model treated with simvastatin did not show a significant decrease in lesion burden, raising questions about dosing and efficacy of statin drug therapy [Gibson et al 2015]. A further proof-of-concept human trial is planned for atorvastatin therapy (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02603328).

The chemotherapeutic drug sorafenib [Wüstehube et al 2010] has been investigated in murine models of FCCM caused by mutation of KRIT1 with the finding of reduced capillary sprouting.

Loss of function of KRIT1 leads to an increase in signaling of the TGFβ pathway leading to an inappropriate endothelial-to-mesenchymal cellular transition (EndMT): endothelial cells change to become more proliferative, with increased invasiveness and sprouting. Chemical inhibition of TGFβ decreases both the size and number of CCM lesions in mouse models [Maddaluno et al 2013]. Furthermore, inhibition of upstream Wnt/B-Catenin signaling related to EndMT with the drug sulindac restores junctional integrity between endothelia, and also reduces number and size of CCM lesions in a Pdcd10 knockout mouse model [Bravi et al 2015]. Sulindac is used clinically in humans for other indications, including for the treatment of colon cancer.

A repurposing drug screen identified vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) and tempol (a superoxide scavenger) as potential therapeutic drugs for CCM. Both of these molecules reduced lesion number in mouse models of CCM [Gibson et al 2015]. Vitamin D3 inhibits the signaling activation of RHOA, while tempol targets superoxide, suggesting a role for oxidative stress in CCM disease pathogenesis.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with central core disease (CCD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination with attention to features of congenital myopathy (hypotonia, failure to thrive, joint contractures, scoliosis), weakness of the limbs, and muscle cramps

Physical and occupational therapy assessments

Evaluation for feeding difficulties, including assessment for sucking and ability to swallow

Pulmonary function testing in most patients, especially those with scoliosis, hypotonia, signs of respiratory distress, and/or history of recurrent chest infections. History should be taken for symptoms of nocturnal hypoxia including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Since prognosis is mainly influenced by respiratory status and scoliosis, treatment geared towards these manifestations is essential.

Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms, but mainly consists of supportive measures and rehabilitation that address the following problems:

Hypotonia and weakness. Patients may benefit from physical therapy. Interventions may include stretching programs and mild to moderate low-impact exercise; activities should be balanced in such a way that exhaustion is avoided.

Scoliosis and joint contractures. Some patients may only require physical therapy, while others may need orthopedic surgery (e.g., scoliosis surgery, corrective surgery for congenital hip dislocation and foot deformities).

Respiratory. Patients with more severe symptoms may require respiratory support. Breathing exercises and chest physiotherapy for handling secretions may also be beneficial.

Feeding difficulties. Individuals may require diet supplementation and feeding by means of nasogastric/orogastric routes or gastrostomy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications can include respiratory compromise from scoliosis; hence, orthopedic intervention may reduce the risk of this problem.

Immunization against influenza is encouraged.

Prompt treatment of respiratory infection is important.

Joint contractures may be prevented by encouraging mobility and by active participation in physical therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of the spine for scoliosis and joints for contractures

Routine assessment of respiratory parameters such as respiratory rate, peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)

Sleep studies especially when patients show signs of nocturnal hypoxia

Regular assessment of motor abilities in order to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and assistive devices for ambulation, such as a wheelchair

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although it is unknown how CCD is associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility or which pathogenic variants in RYR1 are absolutely related to MH susceptibility, it is prudent for individuals with CCD to avoid inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details.

Individuals suspected of having MH susceptibility are advised to avoid extremes of heat, but this does not mean restriction of athletic activity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because CCD is associated with an increased risk for MH susceptibility, it is appropriate to test at-risk relatives of a proband (whether symptomatic or not) for the RYR1 pathogenic variant identified in the proband in order to caution those with the pathogenic variant about potential risks of inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because all patients with CCD are considered to be at risk for malignant hyperthermia, inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine should be avoided while considering general or regional anesthesia for delivery. Similar to most neuromuscular disorders, clinical progression of disease can be expected in CCD [Sax & Rosenbaum 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Orthopedic referral

Referral to a specialized skeletal dysplasia clinic if available

Echocardiogram

Treatment of Manifestations

The main focus of treatment has thus far been surgical correction of the abnormal joints. Presumably because of the basic defect present in CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia, surgical correction is often only partially successful and most patients have had multiple procedures by adulthood [Unger et al 2010].

Of note, physical therapy has not been demonstrated to be effective in this disorder.

Surveillance

Thus far, heart valve dysplasia has not required correction; thus, no firm guidelines for appropriate surveillance have been developed. Echocardiogram is suggested at time of diagnosis and, if normal, should probably be repeated at intervals of five years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Activities with a high impact on joints (e.g., jogging) should be avoided.

Obesity, which places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I), the following evaluations are recommended:

Hemoglobin concentration and serum bilirubin concentration

Serum ferritin concentration and other modalities used to assess iron overload including liver and myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for biliary stones

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Intramuscular or subcutaneous injections of interferon (IFN)-α2a or INF-α2b given two or three times a week increase hemoglobin and decrease iron overload in the majority of treated individuals [Lavabre-Bertrand et al 2004]. Peginterferon-α2b has also been given once a week. The mechanism behind this response is unknown. To date, only a limited number of individuals, including infants, have been treated.Treatment should be given by a physician who is experienced in interferon administration.

Successful allogenic bone marrow transplantation has been described in three children [Ayas et al 2002] and should be considered only in those transfusion-dependent persons who are resistant to IFN therapy.

Splenectomy is of unproved value; failure of this procedure to increase hemoglobin levels and also thromboembolic complications may follow splenectomy. Therefore, splenectomy should be cautiously considered in patients with CDA I, as is recommended for non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment of iron overload with regular phlebotomies, if possible, along with iron chelators as necessary, is indicated. Iron overload therapy should follow the guidelines used for non-transfusion dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].

Surveillance

Recommended monitoring for iron overload:

Measurement of hemoglobin, bilirubin, iron, transferrin and serum ferritin concentration every three months starting at age ten years

Annual myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI, if available, starting at age ten years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid any preparation containing iron.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of the younger sibs of a proband for early manifestations of CDA I is recommended so that monitoring of hemoglobin and ferritin levels and treatment can begin as soon as necessary in those who are affected.

Evaluation of at-risk family members should include CBC to identify macrocytic anemia as well as typical findings on blood smear including macrocytosis, elliptocytes, and basophilic stippling.

The diagnosis can be confirmed by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family have been identified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Anemia places pregnancies of affected women at high risk for delivery-related and outcome complications [Shalev et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) the following evaluations are recommended [Jaeken & Carchon 2001, Jaeken & Matthijs 2001, Grunewald et al 2002, Kjaergaard et al 2002, Miller & Freeze 2003, Grünewald 2009]:

Liver function tests

Measurement of serum albumin concentration

Thyroid function tests to evaluate for decreased thyroid binding globulin, elevated serum concentration of TSH, and low serum concentration of free T4

Coagulation studies including protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, and factor IX

Urinalysis to evaluate for proteinuria

Measurement of serum concentration of gonadotropins in adolescent and adult women to look for evidence of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Echocardiogram to evaluate for pericardial effusions

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for microcysts

Formal ophthalmologic evaluation since ocular anomalies are frequent and can involve both the structural components (development of the lens and retina) as well as ocular mobility and intraocular pressure [Morava et al 2009, Thompson et al 2013]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor with inclusion in a multi-disciplinary team if needed

Treatment of Manifestations

Failure to thrive. Infants and children can be nourished with any type of formula for maximal caloric intake. They can tolerate carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Early in life, children may do better on elemental formulas. Their feeding may be advanced based on their oral motor function. Some children require placement of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube for nutritional support until oral motor skills improve.

Oral motor dysfunction with persistent vomiting. Thickening of feeds, maintenance of an upright position after eating, and antacids can help children who experience gastroesophageal reflux and/or persistent vomiting. Consultation with a gastroenterologist and nutritionist is often necessary. Children with a gastrostomy tube should be encouraged to eat by mouth if the risk of aspiration is low. Continued speech therapy and oral motor therapy aid transition to oral feeds and encourage speech when the child is developmentally ready.

Developmental delay. Occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy should be instituted. As the developmental gap widens between children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their unaffected peers, parents need continued counseling and support.

"Infantile catastrophic phase." Very rarely, infants may have a complicated early course presenting with infection or seizure and hypoalbuminemia with third spacing that may progress to anasarca. Some children are responsive to aggressive albumin replacement with lasix, others may have a more refractory course. Symptomatic treatment in a pediatric tertiary care center is recommended. Parents should also be advised that some infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) never experience a hospital visit while others may require frequent hospitalizations.

Strabismus. Intervention by a pediatric ophthalmologist early in life is important to preserve vision through glasses, patching, or surgery.

Hypothyroidism. Thyroid function tests are frequently abnormal in children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). However, free thyroxine analyzed by equilibrium dialysis, the most accurate method, has been reported as normal in seven individuals with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Diagnosis of hypothyroidism and L-thyroxine supplementation should be reserved for those children and adults with elevated TSH and low free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis.

Stroke-like episodes. Supportive therapy includes hydration by IV if necessary and physical therapy during the recovery period.

Coagulopathy. Low levels of coagulation factors, both pro- and anti-coagulant, rarely cause clinical problems in daily activities but must be acknowledged if an individual with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) undergoes surgery. Consultation with a hematologist (to document the coagulation status and factor levels) and discussion with the surgeon are important. When necessary, infusion of fresh frozen plasma corrects the factor deficiency and clinical bleeding. The potential for imbalance of the level of both pro- and anti-coagulant factors may lead to either bleeding or thrombosis. Care givers, especially of older affected individuals, should be taught the signs of deep venous thrombosis.

Osteopenia. While present from infancy there does not appear to be a significant increased risk of fracture. Should fracture occur, management should follow standards of medical care.

Additional management issues of adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia)

Orthopedic issues—thorax shortening, scoliosis/kyphosis. Management involves appropriate orthopedic and physical medicine management, well-supported wheelchairs, appropriate transfer devices for the home, and physical therapy. Occasionally, surgical treatment of spinal curvature is warranted.

Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVT has been reported in two adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Rapid diagnosis and treatment of DVT are essential to minimize the risk of pulmonary emboli; sedentary affected adults and children are at increased risk for DVT.

Independent living issues. Young adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their parents need to address issues of independent living. Aggressive education throughout the school years in functional life skills and/or vocational training helps the transition when schooling is completed. Independence in self-care and the activities of daily living should be encouraged. Support and resources for parents of a disabled adult are an important part of management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) have less physiologic reserve than their peers, parents should have a low threshold for evaluation by a physician for prolonged fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. Aggressive intervention with antipyretics, antibiotics if warranted, and hydration may prevent the morbidity associated with the "infantile catastrophic phase."

Although only one individual with skeletal dysplasia in PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) has been reported, plain spine films assessing cervical spine anomalies may be useful [Schade van Westrum et al 2006].

Surveillance

Annual

Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and referral for speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy

Eye examination

Liver function tests, thyroid panel, protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III

Other

Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis and counseling about the risk of fractures

Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Acetaminophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.The following recommendations for evaluation of individuals diagnosed with Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) are based on recent guidelines [Kline et al 2007b] (full text) and the authors' experience:

Gastrointestinal evaluation (including upper GI series, endoscopy, milk scan and/or pH probe) to evaluate for malrotation and gastrointestinal reflux which, if undiagnosed or undertreated, can lead to feeding intolerance, life-threatening recurrent aspiration, and volvulus

Plotting growth parameters on CdLS-specific growth charts. See www.cdlsusa.org (girls; boys).

Evaluation by a nutritionist if CdLS growth curves reveal failure to thrive

Radiographs of the upper extremities to evaluate for radioulnar synostosis. Physical therapy must be performed with caution to avoid causing fractures if radioulnar synostosis is present.

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation to formulate education/therapeutic interventions with an emphasis on communication skills

Audiology evaluation with auditory brain stem response testing and otoacoustic emission testing to assess for hearing loss

Ophthalmologic evaluation, including assessment of visual acuity, dilated fundus examination, measurement of intraocular pressure, and evaluation of tear ducts for patency and function

Echocardiogram to screen for cardiac defects. ASDs are common and may not be picked up by auscultation.

Neurologic evaluation and EEG in all affected individuals

Renal ultrasonography to evaluate for structural kidney anomalies; if indicated, a vesicoureterogram (VCUG) to evaluate for vesicoureteral reflux

Urologic evaluation in males with hypospadias and/or cryptorchidism

Pelvic ultrasound to evaluate for bicornuate uterus in females; pelvic ultrasound can be performed at the same time as the renal ultrasound

Complete blood count if signs of anemia, bruising, bleeding are present

Complete blood count, immune profile (consisting of immunoglobulins; antibodies to tetanus, dipetheria, and pneumococcus; B-cell panel; and T-cell panel) and consideration of immunologic evaluation if recurrent infections are present

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux with consideration of fundoplication if GER is severe

Surgical correction of intestinal malrotation if present

Supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs if there is failure to thrive

Surgical intervention of arms/hands if limb defects hinder utilization or mobility

Ongoing physical, occupational, and speech therapies to optimize developmental outcomes; alternative communicative methods (e.g., sign language, picture exchange communication system [PECS]) to facilitate communication if verbal skills are inadequate to express wants and needs

Standard treatment for hearing loss

Aggressive treatment for nasolacrimal duct obstruction as massage therapy is often unsuccessful because of malformed ducts; standard treatment for refractive errors, strabismus, glaucoma, and ptosis

Standard interventions for cardiac defects

Appropriate treatment for seizures

Antibiotic prophylaxis and follow up for vesicoureteral reflux

Orchiopexy if cryptorchidism is present

Standard intervention for bicornuate uterus, if present

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To prevent secondary complications:

Preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease

Care during sedation and/or operative procedures in an institution with pediatric anesthesiologists experienced in the management of the small airways of children with CdLS

During anesthesia, attention to the risk of malignant hyperthermia (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility), which has been reported in a few children with CdLS [Papadimos & Marco 2003]

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual gastrointestinal evaluation including monitoring of growth

Annual evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and to target therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Routine monitoring of existing cardiac or renal anomalies

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No known agents exacerbate the severity of CdLS; however, caution should be exercised to avoid exacerbation of existing comorbidities including gastroesophageal reflux, self-injurious behavior, pica, and less commonly, thrombocytopenia and immunologic features.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 (CDPX1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full skeletal survey

Flexion, neutral, and extension lateral views of the C-spine in every patient. If clinical evidence suggests cervical myelopathy or if significant instability is demonstrated radiographically, a cervical MRI should be performed. Special consideration should be given to performing this study in flexion and extension positions as spinal cord compression may only occur with these movements (i.e., a normal neutral cervical MRI does not rule out dynamic compression).

Growth measures

Developmental assessment

Hearing assessment

Assessment of upper and lower airways if stridor is present

Polysomnography

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cardiac ultrasound examination

Brain imaging studies

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is supportive.

Respiratory difficulty can require frequent monitoring, nasal stents, and oxygen.

Severe maxillary hypoplasia or maxillary retrognathia may require reconstructive surgery in older individuals [Carach et al 2002].

Instability of the cervical spine may require a cervical collar or spinal fusion; cervical spine stenosis may require decompression.

Surveillance of the following is according to recommended pediatric practice, with closer follow-up recommended if abnormalities are identified:

Hearing

Growth

Development

Thoracic and lumbar spine (for scoliosis)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an individual with CDPX1 in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early screening for hearing loss. If the ARSE pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with systemic primary carnitine deficiency (CDSP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram

Serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration

Liver transaminases

Pre-prandial blood glucose concentration

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

L-carnitine supplementation. The main treatment for CDSP is oral levocarnitine (L-carnitine) supplementation. Typically, a high dose (100-400 mg/kg/day, divided in 3 doses) is required. Individuals with CDSP respond well if oral L-carnitine supplementation is started before irreversible organ damage occurs. Metabolic decompensation and skeletal and cardiac muscle function improve with L-carnitine supplementations.

Oral L-carnitine supplementation in infants with CDSP identified through newborn screening results in slow normalization of the plasma carnitine concentration. The carnitine dose needs to be adjusted according to the plasma carnitine concentrations, which should be measured frequently.

L-carnitine supplementation has relatively few side effects:

High doses of oral L-carnitine can cause increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and intestinal discomfort.

Oral L-carnitine can be metabolized by intestinal bacteria to produce trimethylamine, which has a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for 7-10 days and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor [Longo et al 2006].

Note: (1) An unaffected infant born to a mother with CDSP can have low carnitine levels detected on newborn screening; in these infants oral L-carnitine supplementation is followed by a rise in plasma carnitine concentration within days or a few weeks [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. (2) Asymptomatic adults with CDSP have been reported; however, the limited literature and the lack of follow up make it unclear whether these individuals have potential health risks. Because some fatty acid oxidation defects such as medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency can remain asymptomatic until they results in sudden death or another acute presentation during stress, it is prudent to treat asymptomatic individuals with CDSP with L-carnitine supplementation to prevent the possibility of decompensation during intercurrent illness or stress [El-Hattab et al 2010].

Other

Hypoglycemic episodes are treated with intravenous dextrose infusion.

Cardiomyopathy requires management by specialists in cardiology.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Maintaining appropriate plasma carnitine concentrations through oral L-carnitine supplementation (see Treatment of Manifestations) and preventing hypoglycemia (with frequent feeding and avoiding fasting) typically eliminate the risk of metabolic, hepatic, cardiac, and muscular complications.

Note: Hospitalization to administer intravenous glucose is recommended for individuals with CDSP who are required to fast because of medical or surgical procedures or who cannot tolerate oral intake because of an illness such as gastroenteritis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

L-carnitine supplementation is well tolerated and has relatively few side effects: increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor.

Surveillance

The following evaluations have been suggested [Magoulas & El-Hattab 2012]:

Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. Perform annually during childhood and less frequently in adulthood. Individuals with cardiomyopathy require management and follow up by specialists in cardiology.

Plasma carnitine concentration. Monitor frequently until levels reach the normal range, thereafter, measure three times a year during infancy and early childhood, twice a year in older children, and annually in adults.

Serum CK concentration and liver transaminases. Consider measuring during acute illnesses.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with CDSP should avoid fasting longer than age-appropriate periods.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs of affected individuals should be tested by measuring plasma carnitine concentrations. If the carnitine levels are low, further evaluation for CDSP is recommended by molecular genetic testing if the SLC22A5 pathogenic variants have been identified in the family or fibroblast carnitine transport assay.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is a metabolically challenging state because energy consumption significantly increases. In addition, plasma carnitine levels are physiologically lower during pregnancy than those of non-pregnant controls. Affected women can have decreased stamina or worsening of cardiac arrhythmia during pregnancy, suggesting that CDSP may manifest or exacerbate during pregnancy [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. Therefore, all pregnant women with CDSP, including those who are asymptomatic, require close monitoring of plasma carnitine levels and increased carnitine supplementation as needed to maintain normal plasma carnitine levels.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of a newborn or infant diagnosed with cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED), the following evaluations are recommended:

CT scan to determine if sagittal synostosis is the cause of dolichocephaly

X-ray of thorax and long bones to determine the extent of skeletal findings

Examination of the skin, hair, nails, and teeth

Renal ultrasound examination and urine measurements (including a urine collection test (and an optional DDAVP test) to assay polyuria, and osmolarity sampling of morning urine to determine concentrating ability). A biopsy is often taken after detection of abnormalities.

Liver ultrasound examination and measurement of liver enzymes

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Evaluation by a pulmonologist

Cardiac evaluation for detection of possible structural heart defects

Developmental evaluation

Brain MRI in individuals with developmental delay to assess the cause of the delay

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Surgery for correcting craniosynostosis (usually in first year of life) [Sensenbrenner et al 1975, Levin et al 1977, Genitori et al 1992, Gilissen et al 2010, Bacino et al 2012, Hoffer et al 2013].

Correction of polydactyly (optional)

Orthopedic care as required (e.g., for hip dysplasia)

Growth hormone treatment to stimulate growth when standard criteria for this treatment are met [Wilson et al 2003]. Growth hormone should only be prescribed to children with severe growth retardation in whom the therapy is expected to be successful.

Dental care. Timely detection and intervention of structural tooth abnormalities and/or olgiodontia may limit aesthetic, functional, and psychological issues.

Standard treatment for renal and liver abnormalities. While liver transplantation is a treatment option in advanced stages, it has only been proposed once for an individual with CED [Zaffanello et al 2006].

For those with progressive visual impairment, low vision aids and appropriate educational programs

Mechanical ventilation as required in newborns to treat respiratory insufficiency due to pulmonary hypoplasia. Pneumonia should be treated with antibiotics. Patients susceptible to recurrent respiratory infections should be treated with long-term prophylaxis. Asthma can be treated with steroids.

Standard treatment for cardiac abnormalities

For those with developmental delay, speech therapy and physical therapy to improve motor skills and appropriate educational programs

Surgical intervention as required for inguinal/umbilical hernias [Fry et al 2009]

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring growth and development during infancy and childhood starting at the time of diagnosis

Beginning at age one year, examination of teeth with regular follow-up during to detect tooth damage and oligodontia

Periodic monitoring starting at the time of diagnosis for signs of nephronophthisis (renal insufficiency, renal cyst formation), including osmolarity testing in morning urine, urine collection assays to test for polyuria, measurement of blood pressure, determination of serum creatinine and blood urea concentrations to establish renal function, and periodic renal ultrasound examination to establish kidney size and presence of cysts. Periodic measurement of liver enzymes starting at the time of diagnosis.

Annual ophthalmologic examinations starting at age four years. Note: Electroretinography (ERG) and fundoscopy can be performed at an earlier age if it is evident that vision is reduced.

Evaluation for respiratory infection (with x-rays and sputum analysis) when clinical findings suggest pneumonia

In those with structural heart defects, periodic monitoring of cardiac function including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants are known in a family, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk infants to allow early diagnosis and appropriate management and surveillance, particularly for respiratory complications, renal and liver disease, and visual impairment.

If the pathogenic variants are not known in a family, the following is recommended for at-risk children:

In the newborn period: physical examination by a pediatrician, and consultation with a clinical geneticist as determined by the clinical findings

Age 0-3 months: kidney and liver evaluation, including ultrasound examination and measurement of blood pressure, serum creatinine concentration, and liver enzymes

At six-month intervals: repeat the kidney and liver evaluations.

Parents should be alerted to the signs of CED and advised to contact their child’s healthcare provider if suspicious symptoms, such as polydipsia and/or jaundice, appear.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED), the initial evaluation should include the following:

Complete skeletal survey (if not performed as part of the diagnostic work up)

Assessment for cranial nerve deficits, including neurologic examination, hearing screen, and ophthalmologic evaluation

Baseline blood pressure if considering treatment with losartan

CBC to evaluate for anemia in individuals with significant endosteal involvement

If acute bone pain is present, consideration of ESR and bone scan as baseline measures of disease activity

In individuals with radiographic evidence of skull base sclerosis and neurologic symptoms, consideration of baseline CT of the head and neck to determine the extent of disease and allow consideration of surgical treatment options

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No consensus management guidelines have been developed to date.

Corticosteroids may relieve many of the symptoms of Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED). Several investigators report success with corticosteroid treatment in reducing pain and weakness; improving gait, exercise tolerance, and flexion contractures; and correcting anemia and hepatosplenomegaly [Lindstrom 1974, Baş et al 1999, Wallace et al 2004]. Unsuccessful steroid therapy was reported in one adult.

Individuals with severe symptoms can be treated with a bolus of prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg/day followed by rapid tapering to the lowest alternate-day dose tolerated. Less symptomatic individuals can be started on 0.5-1.0 mg/kg every other day. Some individuals may be able to discontinue steroid therapy during quiescent periods.

Higher-dose steroids may help with acute pain crises.

Note: Steroids may delay bone hyperostosis and prevent or delay the onset of skull involvement. Although histologic studies following steroid therapy showed increased bone resorption and secondary remodeling with increased osteoblastic activity and decreased lamellar bone deposition, several authors reported no regression of sclerosis on radiographic evaluation [Verbruggen et al 1985] or on scintigraphic evaluation [Baş et al 1999]. Lindstrom [1974] and Baş et al [1999] reported diminished sclerosis on radiographs following steroid therapy. Verbruggen et al [1985] and Inaoka et al [2001] reported reduced radioactivity on bone scintigraphy. Long-term follow-up studies should be conducted to evaluate the success of corticosteroid therapy in preventing anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, headaches, and cranial nerve impingement.

Calcitonin. Pain relief from intranasal calcitonin is reported in one patient [Trombetti et al 2012].

Losartan. Reduced bone pain and increased physical activity are reported in two patients treated with losartan [Ayyavoo et al 2014, Simsek-Kiper et al 2014]. Losartan has an anti-TGFβ effect and is being tested in individuals with Marfan syndrome.

Other analgesics and non-pharmacologic methods are frequently used for alleviation of pain.

Surgical treatment for persistent bone pain by intramedullary reaming was reported in a woman age 22 years diagnosed with Ribbing disease [Oztürkmen & Karamehmetoğlu 2011]. Pain in the tibia resolved completely following the surgery; at five-year follow-up, the individual remained pain free.

Craniectomy relieved increased intracranial pressure and headaches in two patients [Author, personal observation].

Hearing loss evaluation by an otolaryngologist should include a BAER and a CT with fine cuts through the inner ear. Reports of successful treatment of hearing loss in CED are rare. Surgical decompression of the internal auditory canals can improve hearing. However, the skull hyperostosis is progressive, and cranial nerve compression often recurs.

Corticosteroids may delay skull hyperostosis and cranial nerve impingement. Lindstrom [1974] reported no change in conductive hearing loss with steroid therapy. A woman age 30 years with a 75-dB neurosensory hearing loss on the right and a 65-dB neurosensory hearing loss of the left experienced some improvement in hearing with prednisone. Her hearing stabilized after decompression of the right internal auditory canal.

Bilateral myringotomy can improve conductive hearing loss resulting from serous otitis in individuals with CED.

A woman age 71 years with bilateral conductive hearing loss and patent internal auditory canals underwent a cochlear implantation, and speech detection improved from 75 dB to 45 dB [Friedland et al 2000]. General contraindications for cochlear implants include a narrowed internal auditory canal and absence of a functioning eighth nerve, both of which can be found in individuals with CED.

Carlson et al [2010] report six individuals with CED and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Three underwent internal auditory canal decompression with mixed results. Conservative management was used in the other three individuals with no worsening of symptoms (see also Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Initiation of steroids prior to the onset of proximal muscle weakness and/or sclerotic bone changes has not been reported. Because of the variable symptomatology and decreased penetrance, treatment of asymptomatic individuals cannot be recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Monitor blood pressure in individuals treated with corticosteroids and treat hypertension if necessary.

Individuals taking losartan also need regular blood pressure monitoring due to the increased risk for hypotension.

Taper corticosteroid dose as tolerated to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and compression fractures of the spine.

Surveillance

After initiating corticosteroids, affected individuals should be followed monthly, with efforts to taper the steroids to the lowest tolerated dose. Blood pressure should be monitored at each visit, as hypertension can develop following the initiation of steroid therapy.

When a maintenance steroid dose is achieved, ongoing evaluations should include the following:

Annual:

Complete neurologic examination

CBC

Measurement of blood pressure

Hearing screen

Evaluation of bone mineral densityNote: CED does not appear to cause an increase in spine density; therefore steroid therapy could lead to osteoporosis of the spine [Author, personal observation].

Routine monitoring of linear growth in children due to the possible side effect of delayed or stunted growth

The authors are aware of one affected teenage individual who died of a dilated ascending aorta dissection. Whether this is related to CED is unknown. Because the mechanism of CED involves increased TGFB1 signaling, also found in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, this death is of some concern. The authors are unaware of any other similar cases. Note: No recommendations for routine evaluation of the aorta can be made at this time.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid 

Bisphosphonates. Bone pain and uptake of 99mTc methylene diphosphonate by scintigraphy increased with pamidronate in a woman age 27 years with CED [Inaoka et al 2001]. Clodronate infusion caused increased bone pain in one individual with CED and no improvement in another individual reported by Castro et al [2005].

Excess phosphate. Treatment with cellulose phosphate led to worsening hypocalcemia and proximal myopathy in another individual.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify the diagnosis as early as possible, avoid potential misdiagnosis, and provide appropriate treatment for extremity pain.

If the TGFB1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, radiographic evaluation for hyperostosis can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with celiac disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Small-bowel biopsy in those who are well established on a gluten-containing diet to assess the degree of villous atrophy (Table 1). However, the degree of villous atrophy does not correlate with the severity of the clinical findings.

Baseline bone-density test in adults to evaluate for osteoporosis/osteopenia. In those with osteoporosis, vitamin D and parathyroid hormone concentrations should be evaluated [Green & Jabri 2003].

Screening tests for anemia, abnormal liver function, and nutrient deficiencies (iron, calcium, vitamin D, vitamin B12, folic acid)

Evaluation for a coexisting malignancy or autoimmune disease in symptomatic and/or elderly individuals [Alaedini & Green 2005, Pietzak 2005]

Treatment of Manifestations

Celiac disease. Ideally, the care of a newly diagnosed individual should be provided by a team including a gastroenterologist, primary care physician, and experienced nutritionist (see Figure 4). Local branches of national support groups can be helpful as additional resources [NIH Consensus Committee 2005] (see Figure 4).

The only treatment for individuals with celiac disease is strict adherence to a gluten-free diet that requires lifelong avoidance of wheat, rye, and barley:

Treatment with a gluten-free diet should be started only after the diagnosis has been established by intestinal biopsy.

A dietitian experienced in treating celiac disease should be involved.

In approximately 70% of affected individuals, symptoms improve within two weeks after starting a gluten-free diet.

For some patients, even a small amount of gluten (i.e., 100 mg) can damage the small intestine. Note that a slice of bread contains approximately 2.5 grams of gluten.

It can be difficult to adhere to the gluten-free diet, as gluten is found in many foods and other ingested products. Some hidden sources of gluten:

Non-starchy foods such as soy sauce and beer

Non-food items such as some medications, and cosmetics (e.g., lipstick)

Nutritional deficiencies and metabolic bone disease should be treated in the usual manner.

‘Unresponsive celiac disease’ refers celiac disease in patients who show no improvement on a gluten-free diet:

The most common reason for unresponsive celiac disease is the presence of small amounts of gluten in the diet. This gluten ingestion may be intentional, such as “cheating” at social events or using communion wafers, or unintentional, including ingestion of gluten in medications and gluten-containing foods in restaurants. Advice from a nutritionist experienced in management of the gluten-free diet is recommended to achieve the best results.

Assessment for lactose or fructose intolerance is important, as these conditions can be responsible for lack of response to the gluten-free diet [Green & Jabri 2003].

Assessment for alternative or additional diagnoses such as microscopic colitis, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, IBS, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and eating disorders is necessary in those in whom gluten contamination is not the explanation.

For individuals who are not responding to a gluten-free diet, identification of a celiac disease-susceptibility HLA haplotype can provide motivation to continue the diet, to examine the diet for hidden sources of gluten, to address the possibility of refractory sprue, or even to dismiss the previous diagnosis of celiac disease.

Refractory sprue or celiac disease. Individuals with persistent symptoms and intestinal inflammation despite adherence to a gluten-free diet may need to be treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., local-active budesonide) and immunosuppressants [Green & Jabri 2003, NIH Consensus Committee 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Breast-feeding had been thought to exert a protective effect against the development of celiac disease in early childhood; however, this was not shown to be the case in two recent clinical trials [Lionetti et al 2014, Vriezinga et al 2014].

Earlier studies comparing breast-fed children with children who were not breast-fed found that breast-fed children who then developed celiac disease were more likely to have:

A later age of onset of symptoms;

Fewer classic symptoms such as diarrhea, growth disturbance, vomiting, abdominal pain, or distention [Ivarsson et al 2002];

A higher rate of “non-classic” symptoms [D'Amico et al 2005].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment with a gluten-free diet can:

Reverse growth failure and the reduced bone mineralization in children with celiac disease;

Decrease the rate of spontaneous abortions and frequency of low-birth-weight infants in women with celiac disease;

Reduce to the general population level the risk for certain types of cancers including small-intestine adenocarcinoma, esophageal cancer, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma;

Reduce the excess risk of mortality in symptomatic individuals.

Surveillance

For individuals with celiac disease, abnormal celiac disease serologies should be followed to normalization, which usually occurs within six to 12 months of starting a strict gluten-free diet.

Follow-up biopsy can be considered to confirm healing of intestinal villi. Because some patients on a strict gluten-free diet can heal gradually, this should typically be done at least two years after the initial diagnosis.

For asymptomatic relatives who have the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 celiac disease-susceptibility haplotype on molecular genetic testing and negative antibody results, tTG IgA testing should be performed at three- to five-year intervals to screen for the development of celiac disease-associated antibodies [Hill et al 2005, NIH Consensus Committee 2005, Pietzak 2005].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Gluten in the diet (see Treatment of Manifestations and Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of first-degree relatives of individuals with celiac disease can identify those who are susceptible to developing celiac disease and who would benefit from serologic testing to screen for celiac disease or silent celiac disease. Of note, first-degree relatives do not need to be symptomatic to consider molecular genetic testing. (See Testing Strategies, In a Symptomatic Individual who is on a Gluten-Free Diet, Molecular genetic testing.)

Early diagnosis of celiac disease and treatment with a gluten-free diet can prevent secondary complications.

Individuals who do not have the celiac disease-associated HLA alleles DQ2 and DQ8 do not need to undergo serologic screening for celiac disease.

Individuals who have celiac disease-associated HLA alleles (Table 3) are followed by celiac disease-associated antibody testing at three- to five-year intervals.

Small-bowel biopsy is recommended when celiac disease-associated antibody testing is positive.

A definitive diagnosis of celiac disease is made in a person with a positive small-bowel biopsy and clinical and/or histologic improvement on a gluten-free diet.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Click here (pdf) for information on therapies under investigation for treatment of celiac disease.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Hematologic indices including reticulocytes and bilirubin (to assess hemolysis) and iron profile (to assess iron storage)

Serum calcium and vitamin D concentrations; bone densitometry

Hepatic function tests

Dermatologic evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Dental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Urine and erythrocyte porphyrins can be determined periodically after bone marrow transplant as a monitor of engraftment.

Treatment of Manifestations

Cutaneous photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment for this disease or specific treatment for the photosensitivity.

Currently the only effective treatment is prevention of blistering by avoidance of light exposure, including the long-wave ultraviolet sunlight that passes through window glass or light emitted by fluorescent sources:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective window films for cars and windows at home as well as at school/work to prevent exposure to UV light

Replacement of fluorescent lights with reddish incandescent bulbs or installation of filtering screens

Reflectant sunscreens containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Note, however, that these may be cosmetically unacceptable and, in any case, do not replace strict avoidance of sun/light exposure.

Skin trauma should be avoided.

Wound care is essential to prevent infection of opened blisters. Antiseptic and topical/oral antibiotic treatment may be indicated to avoid progression to osteomyelitis and bone resorption with subsequent mutilation.

Surgical intervention may be indicated for severe mutilation (repair of microstomia, correction of ectropion, reconstruction of the nose).

Laser hair removal can be used to treat facial hypertrichosis.

Note: (1) Beta-carotene has been tried in some individuals but without significant benefit. (2) Phototherapy with narrowband ultraviolet B radiation did not show any benefit.

Ocular manifestations

Avoidance of damage to the eyelids and cornea by wrap-around sun glasses

Topical antibiotics for corneal ulcers, scleritis, and blepharitis

Artificial tears and lubricants to help prevent dry eyes in those with ectropion

Corrective surgery of eyelids to help protect the cornea from injury in those with ectropion [Katugampola et al 2012a]

Bone manifestations. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with osteoporosis [Katugampola et al 2012a].

Hemolytic anemia

Consider blood transfusions when hemolysis is significant.

Chronic transfusions (every 2-4 weeks) with a target hematocrit greater than 35% can suppress erythropoiesis and decrease porphyrin production, which reduces porphyrin levels and photosensitivity [Piomelli et al 1986].

Note: In those who receive frequent transfusions, the body iron burden can be reduced with parenteral or oral chelators [Poh-Fitzpatrick et al 1988].

Iron deficiency induced by treatment with deferasirox improved photosensitivity and hemolysis in one patient [Egan at al 2015].

Note: Although oral charcoal and cholestyramine were thought to increase fecal loss of porphyrins, a clear clinical benefit has not been shown [Tishler & Winston 1990].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only cure for CEP and should be considered in children with severe cutaneous and hematologic involvement. Autologous as well as allogeneic stem cell transplants have been performed successfully [Thomas et al 1996, Tezcan et al 1998, Harada et al 2001, Shaw et al 2001, Dupuis-Girod et al 2005, Taibjee et al 2007, Faraci et al 2008]. The age of children with CEP receiving BMT ranges from younger than one year to 13 years [Katugampola et al 2012b]. Of note, although some of the first individuals with CEP to successfully undergo BMT in childhood should be in their 20s now [Thomas et al 1996, Zix-Kieffer et al 1996], no follow-up information is available and the long-term outcome in individuals with CEP post-BMT is unknown.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Strict avoidance of sunlight and protection from light are indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D supplementation is advised as affected individuals are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance

Monitor the following:

Hematologic indices including iron profile, reticulocyte count, and bilirubin to assess hemolysis every six months

Note: Individuals receiving transfusion therapy need closer monitoring.

Iron profile on a regular basis to assess for iron overload for those who are transfusion dependent

Hepatic function every six to twelve months

Vitamin D 25-OH levels in all patients whether or not they are receiving vitamin D supplements

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients undergoing surgeries, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs as newborns or infants in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early intervention (no phototherapy, strict sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of hemolytic anemia. Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known;

Biochemical testing for urinary or erythrocyte uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I isomer elevation if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Successful pregnancies in women with CEP resulting in healthy and unaffected children have been described [Hallai et al 2007, Katugampola et al 2012b].

Protective filters for artificial lights should be used in the delivery/operating room to prevent phototoxic damage to the mother during delivery [Wahlin et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

To date, gene therapy has been evaluated only in the murine CEP model [de Verneuil et al 2008, Fortian et al 2011, Di Pierro et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cystic fibrosis (CF) the following evaluations are recommended.

Respiratory

Sinus CT to assess for pan sinusitis in individuals with chronic nasal congestion and/or recurrent sinusitis

Pulmonary function testing (PFT), including infant PFT at specialized centers

Chest radiographic examination to screen for bronchiectasis, or chest computed tomography (CT) examination as indicated for worsening symptoms or concern for progression

Sputum culture in affected individuals who can expectorate a sputum sample, or culture of deep oropharyngeal swab in those who cannot

Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage to evaluate lower airway microbiology and inflammation as indicated

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Fecal elastase

Fecal fat content based on 72-hour stool collection

Vitamin A, D, and E serum concentrations

Prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (INR)

Random glucose

Overall clinical status / extent of disease

CBC with differential and cell count

Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine

Liver function tests (ALT, AST)

Consultation with a genetic counselor

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital absence of the vas deferens (CAVD) referral to a urologist is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

Cystic Fibrosis (CF)

Respiratory

Inhaled dornase alfa in all individuals age ≥6 years

Inhaled hypertonic saline in all individuals age ≥6 years

Azithromycin in individuals age ≥6 years with persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled tobramycin in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled aztreonam in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Ibuprofen in individuals age 6-17 years with FEV1 ≥60% predicted

Recommended sequence for inhaled medications:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

An aerosolized antibiotic

Ivacaftor for individuals age ≥2 years who are heterozygous for p.Gly551Asp and other specific pathogenic variants

Ivacaftor/lumacaftor combined therapy for individuals age ≥12 years who are homozygous for p.Phe508del

Lung or heart/lung transplantation; an option for some individuals with severe disease

Topical steroids, antibiotics, and/or surgical intervention if required for nasal/sinus symptoms

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Oral pancreatic enzyme replacement with meals

Nutritional therapy that may include breast milk, special infant formulas, supplemental feeding, salt supplementation, fat-soluble vitamin supplements, and zinc

Management of CF-related diabetes mellitus with endocrinology consultation and (if required) glucose monitoring and insulin therapy

Gastrointestinal. Meconium ileus and distal intestinal obstructive syndrome requires surgical evaluation and management.

Liver disease

Biliary sludging or frank obstruction, and associated hepatic inflammation, are treated with oral ursodiol.

Liver transplant indications include progressive hepatic dysfunction, intractable variceal bleeding, and hepatopulmonary and portopulmonary syndromes

Fertility. Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Congenital Absence of the Vas Deferens (CAVD)

Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

A variety of airway clearance techniques (ACTs) can mobilize airway secretions, minimize airway obstruction, and reduce airway infections. ACTs include manual chest percussion with postural drainage, hand-held devices (e.g., flutter valve, or Acapella®), and inflatable vest therapy devices that vibrate the chest wall. These treatments are most effective when used at least twice daily.

Dornase alfa and hypertonic saline help mobilize airway secretions in individuals age six years or older.

Airway clearance should be used in conjunction with inhaled medications given in a standard sequence:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

Inhaled corticosteroids and/or long-acting beta agonist (for select individuals)

Aerosolized antibiotic

The rationale for this sequence is to open the airway, decrease sputum viscosity, promote expectoration of secretions, and then deliver anti-inflammatory treatments and/or antibiotics as widely and deeply as possible within the bronchial tree.

Aggressive antibiotic treatment at the time of initial isolation of P. aeruginosa from cultured airway secretions helps prevent chronic airway infection.

All routine immunizations should be given at the recommended times. Especially important are vaccines that protect against microorganisms associated with pulmonary manifestations, including pertussis, measles, varicella, Haemophilus influenzae type B, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Influenza vaccine should be administered annually in infants age six months and older. Note: (1) Because the influenza vaccine may not be fully protective, consider immunizing an affected individual’s entire family. (2) CF individuals with suspected influenza should receive anti-viral medications targeted toward influenza A and B.

Anti-RSV monoclonal antibody (Synagis®) should be considered for infants up to age 12 months for the duration of the local RSV season, particularly in individuals with ongoing pulmonary symptoms.

Physical activity, exercise, and conditioning help maintain bone health and improve airway clearance.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Pancreatic enzyme replacement and supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins

High-calorie, high-fat nutritional supplements

Consultation with a nutritionist specializing in CF

Extra salt and water for hydration and salt losses in hot dry climates

Surveillance – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

Newborns are examined monthly by a CF care provider for the first six months of life and then bimonthly until age one year.

Individuals age one year and older should be examined quarterly by a CF care provider to monitor for subtle changes in physical examination that are not yet manifest as symptoms.

Culture respiratory tract secretions at least four times yearly. Some individuals may benefit from more frequent visits and respiratory tract surveillance cultures (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Pulmonary function studies, chest radiographic examination, and at least annual blood tests for electrolytes, fat soluble vitamin levels, and IgE levels are appropriate.

Bronchoscopy and chest CT examination are indicated for individuals with symptoms and signs of lung disease who fail to respond to intervention.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Weight gain and caloric intake are monitored monthly in newborns until age six months.

Fecal elastase may need to be repeated during the first year of life, particularly if infants have signs or symptoms of malabsorption or inadequate weight gain.

Measure oral glucose tolerance annually after age ten years during a period of stable health. Plasma glucose is measured fasting and two hours after an oral glucose load of 1.75 g/kg, or 75 g maximum.

Evaluate bone mineral density in adolescence.

Liver disease. Annual screening of liver function tests and liver ultrasound to monitor progression of liver disease is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid – Cystic Fibrosis

Avoid the following:

Respiratory irritants (e.g., smoke, dust)

Individuals with respiratory infections

Dehydration; add extra salt and water to diet in hot, dry climates because of perspiration-related salt losses (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who should be referred to a cystic fibrosis center for initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Sweat chloride testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies are well tolerated with improved nutrition, improved pulmonary treatment, aggressive management of infections, and a multidisciplinary care team, especially in women with mild to moderate disease. Pregnancy is not associated with an increased risk of death [Goss et al 2003]. In all studies published to date, the most important predictors of pregnancy outcome are the severity of maternal pulmonary impairment and nutritional status; deterioration during pregnancy may precipitate preterm delivery.

Females with CF of reproductive age should receive preconception counseling and take steps to optimize health prior to pregnancy.

The management of pregnancy and the immediate post-partum period for a woman with CF requires a dietician, members of the CF team, and a maternal fetal medicine specialist.

Maternal nutritional status and weight gain should be monitored and optimized aggressively and pulmonary exacerbations should be treated early.

Traditional screening paradigms for gestational diabetes mellitus may not be useful in pregnancies of women with CF; therefore, screening at each trimester of pregnancy has been suggested to improve the detection of diabetes mellitus.

As in pregnancies of women with other forms of diabetes mellitus, fetal outcome is optimized when glycemic control is achieved prior to pregnancy.

Mode of delivery is based on usual obstetric indications.

Therapies Under Investigation

Ursodeoxycholic acid may be cytoprotective and increase bile flow to improve hepatic enzyme levels, bile drainage, liver histology, and nutritional status [Desmond et al 2007, Cheng et al 2012, Leeuwen et al 2014]. However, whether ursodiol therapy can prevent progression of liver disease in the subset of individuals with CF who are at risk for this complication is uncertain [Brigman & Feranchak 2006, Leeuwen et al 2014].

CFTR pathogenic variant-specific candidate drugs:

CF correctors such as VX-661 are small-molecule therapies being developed to increase the quantity of functional CFTR protein at the cell surface in individuals with specific CFTR pathogenic variants (including the most common CF variant, p.Phe508del).

Inhaled dry powder mannitol has demonstrated relative sustained improvement in lung function in both European and American trials [Bilton at al 2011, Aiken et al 2012].

Alternate ion channel regulation is being investigated as a strategy to restore airway surface liquid.

Gene therapy. Gene therapy is in early clinical trials. Gene therapy is not able to control or treat the symptoms related to CF at this time [Prickett & Jain 2013]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

While there has been much interest in developing active and passive immunization strategies against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an effective vaccine against P. aeruginosa has not yet been developed.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with or suspected to have cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended. Evaluations are based on published consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span [Pierpont et al 2014]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Complete physical examination including measurement of growth parameters

Nutrition and feeding evaluation; consideration of swallow study

Endocrine evaluation

Psychomotor developmental evaluation

Neurologic evaluation

MRI of the brain to detect any structural changes

Electroencephalogram if seizures are suspected

Audiologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram and electrocardiogram

Full abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal and urogenital anomalies

Obtain history for possible bleeding diathesis

Dermatologic evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

Consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span have been published [Pierpont et al 2014].

CFC syndrome affects many organ systems and, therefore, the vast majority of individuals require ongoing care by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare providers. At present, phenotypic features caused by germline pathogenic variants in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, or KRAS are treated as in the general population.

Severe feeding issues during the first years of life require management by a pediatric gastroenterologist. Many children with CFC syndrome require nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding because of failure to thrive. Increasing caloric intake may be of benefit. Children with severe gastroesophageal reflux may require a Nissen fundoplication. Constipation affects the majority of individuals; increased fiber in the diet, under the direction of a pediatrician, may be beneficial.

Some individuals are growth hormone- and or thyroid hormone-deficient and may benefit from management by an endocrinologist. Individuals with a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy must be monitored closely while on growth hormone therapy.

Enrollment in early-intervention therapies to promote motor and intellectual development (e.g., occupational therapy, physical therapy, or speech therapy) is highly recommended.

Seizures are treated as in the general population. However, seizures may be refractory to single-agent therapy and may require polytherapy.

Recurrent otitis media may require placement of PE tubes.

Ocular abnormalities such as myopia or hyperopia are corrected with lenses as in the general population.

Cardiovascular management is dictated by the abnormality, with treatment similar to that in the general population: structural defects are managed surgically as needed; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is followed by serial echocardiograms, and cardiac arrhythmias are medically managed in an aggressive manner.

Xerosis and pruritus may be relieved by increasing the ambient humidity or using hydrating lotions. Hyperkeratoses are treated as in the general population.

Signs and symptoms of skin infection, especially in the presence of lymphedema, warrant thorough and immediate evaluation by a physician for the consideration of antibiotic treatment.

Musculoskeletal abnormalities, such as scoliosis or pectus deformity, are managed as in the general population.

Note: Specialized NF/Ras pathway genetics clinics are available in the US and United Kingdom.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valve dysplasias) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Anesthesia. Individuals with CFC syndrome may have an unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, tracheomalacia, or a predisposition to cardiac rhythm disturbances and should be evaluated for these issues prior to anesthetic administration.

Surveillance

If anomalies are identified in any organ system, lifelong periodic follow up is warranted. Consensus guidelines for surveillance in CFC syndrome have been established [Pierpont et al 2014].

Gastrointestinal. Monitor for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal reflux, constipation, and generalized dysmotility.

Endocrine. Monitor growth parameters to identify evidence of growth failure that may be associated with growth hormone deficiency. Monitor for signs of precocious puberty.

Cognitive development. Assess periodically to be certain that school programs or other supports are addressing learning needs.

Neurologic. Monitor neurologic signs and symptoms with period neurologic evaluations and MRI if indicated. Chiari malformation and later onset of seizures have been observed.

Audiologic. Annual evaluation of hearing is recommended.

Ophthalmologic. Periodic evaluation by an ophthalmologist to monitor for ocular issues (such as myopia, hyperopia, cataracts) is recommended.

Cardiac. If the initial cardiac evaluation is normal, periodic follow-up evaluations including an echocardiogram and an electrocardiogram are necessary as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and rhythm disturbances may develop later in life.

Dermatologic. As affected individuals age, formation of nevi may be progressive. At present, the natural history of the nevi is unknown. Periodic and routine dermatologic evaluation of nevi may be warranted to monitor for malignant change, although no individuals with CFC syndrome have been reported to have a malignant change.

Musculoskeletal. Periodic evaluation for scoliosis during young childhood is recommended.

Malignancy. No screening protocol exists at present, as it is unclear if individuals with CFC syndrome are at an increased risk for malignancies.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Over-exposure to heat. Individuals with CFC syndrome report heat intolerance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

A pregnant female suspected of having CFC syndrome warrants obstetric care from a trained maternal-fetal-medicine physician due to possible polyhydramnios, cardiac issues, and/or hypertension.

Therapies Under Investigation

Because the Ras/MAPK pathway has been studied intensively in the context of cancer, numerous therapeutics that specifically target this pathway are in development.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Ophthalmologic examination

Determination of resting gaze position, head position with eyes in resting gaze position, and vertical and horizontal gaze restrictions

Evaluation for aberrant movements including synergistic convergence and divergence, globe retraction, Marcus Gunn jaw wink

Palpebral fissure size measurement

Anterior segment evaluation to detect corneal exposure

Levator function testing

Optional forced duction testing

Refraction, including cycloplegic refraction in children

Photographic documentation for future comparison

Neuroimaging suggested if there are any additional neurologic symptoms or developmental delays

Strongly recommended if eye muscle surgery is planned:

Brain and brain stem MRI scan to determine the size and/or course of the oculomotor and trochlear nerves

High-resolution orbital MRI (1- to 3-mm cuts) to detect abnormalities in the size and/or course of the extraocular muscle(s) and atrophy of the superior rectus-levator complex

Treatment of Manifestations

Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings:

Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem.

Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment.

Lubrication of ocular surface (particularly cornea) may be required. In cases of severe exposure, a PROSE lens can be of significant benefit [Papakostas et al 2015].

Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery):

Correction of ptosis

Eye muscle surgery

To correct or improve a compensatory head posture

To improve alignment in primary gaze position

To improve ambulation and gross motor development in young children

Principles of surgical approach:

Orbital imaging is recommended before surgery to assess muscle size and position.

Extraocular muscles may be found at surgery to be attached in unexpected locations.

Resections or plications may be helpful in some cases to provide traction against large recessions during healing.

Surgery is likely to be technically difficult because of tightness of rectus muscles.

Recessions need to be larger – sometimes considerably larger – than indicated by standard tables, especially recessions of the inferior rectus muscles.

Dysinnervation causing esotropia in attempted upgaze may mask an underlying exotropia that will be unmasked after inferior rectus muscle weakening.

Inferior rectus muscle weakening may be enhanced by superior oblique weakening.

Profound weakening procedures (e.g., suturing muscle to orbital rim, rectus muscle myectomy) may be necessary.

Botulinum toxin may be helpful for residual misalignment in some cases.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less-preferred eye

Eye lubrication to avoid dry eyes, particularly following ptosis surgery but also after successful strabismus surgery in some cases

Surgical repositioning of the eyes and lids to help correct head position and alleviate secondary musculoskeletal complications from chronic head turn

Surveillance

CFEOM is congenital and is believed to be non-progressive.

Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia and complications of corneal exposure [Yazdani & Traboulsi 2004].

Routine ophthalmologic care is indicated, with visits every three to four months during the first years of life, and annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals not at risk for amblyopia.

In individuals with specific TUBB3 variants, surveillance for endocrine abnormalities, facial or vocal cord weakness, and interventions for developmental delays are indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, clinical ophthalmologic exam can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital fiber-type disproportion, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history and physical examination with particular attention to the following:

Weakness

Hypotonia

Failure to thrive

Scoliosis

Contractures

Comprehensive respiratory evaluation in individuals with and without respiratory symptoms including the following:

Respiratory rate

Signs of respiratory distress

History of recurrent chest infections

Ability to maintain oxygen saturation

Pulmonary function studies

Sleep study to evaluate for nocturnal hypoxia and assess the need for ventilator support

Note: Some individuals with CFTD who have nocturnal hypoxia without symptoms can develop respiratory failure without warning.

Feeding evaluation including assessment of suck and swallow and gastroesophageal reflux

Speech therapy assessment, particularly if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech are present

Cardiac evaluation for heart disease, including cor pulmonale and cardiomyopathy, particularly for those with pathogenic variants inTPM2 or MYH7 or those with an unknown genetic etiology. Evaluation should include echocardiogram and electrocardiogram.

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment

Screening for skeletal and orthopedic issues, including skeletal examination for scoliosis (after the child starts sitting), joint contractures, congenital hip dislocations, and foot deformities

Examination by a general dentist with referral for orthodontic evaluation if dental crowding becomes apparent

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

It is recommended that care be provided by a multidisciplinary team coordinated by a clinician familiar with treatment of neuromuscular conditions [North & Goebel 2003, North 2004]. Teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, orthopedist, and clinical geneticist.

Hypotonia, weakness, and joint contractures may benefit from physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or orthopedic intervention. Interventions may include exercise and stretching programs, orthotics or splinting, serial casting, or walking supports/wheelchairs [North 2004]. Regular low-impact exercise, stretching, and submaximal strength training may be helpful. These activities should be balanced with sufficient rest time to avoid exhaustion [North 2004].

Respiratory issues may benefit from breathing exercises, chest physiotherapy for handling secretions, seating assessment, immunization against influenza and other respiratory infections, antibiotics for chest infections, tracheostomy, or ventilatory support [North 2004].

Feeding and swallowing difficulties may benefit from speech therapy, diet supplementation, and feeding by gavage or gastrostomy. Gastrostomy and fundoplication should be considered if feeding issues continue beyond a few months of age [North 2004].

Referral to an orthopedist for evaluation of scoliosis and joint contractures is recommended. If scoliosis is present, serial x-rays can be used to define and monitor the degree of curve. The need for bracing or corrective (spinal fusion) surgery is based on the progression of the curve, the effect on pulmonary function, and the likelihood that surgery could affect motor function [North 2004].

Foot deformities may benefit from physical therapy, splinting/casting, or corrective surgery by an orthopedic surgeon [North 2004].

Cardiac involvement should be monitored by a cardiologist and treated as necessary [North 2004].

Orthodontic evaluation and appropriate intervention may be necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Although malignant hyperthermia has not been described in CFTD, it has been seen in other congenital myopathies, particularly RYR1-associated myopathies; therefore, precautions for malignant hyperthermia prior to anesthesia should be considered (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Preoperative assessment of pulmonary and cardiac function is recommended to avoid complications.

Prevention of scoliosis, respiratory and feeding issues, and cardiac disease may be possible with comprehensive early screening and regular monitoring as described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Contractures may be avoided by consistent joint movement or therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring for scoliosis [North 2004], particularly in childhood and adolescence

Regular pulmonary monitoring including assessment for evidence of decreased nocturnal ventilation, such as morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, and decreased appetite or school performance; sleep studies; and lung function tests, including FEV1 and FVC

After an initial cardiac evaluation, consideration of ongoing cardiac monitoring on a case-by-case basis. Monitoring is advisable in those who have been found to have pathogenic variants in MYH7 and TPM2 and/or baseline cardiac abnormalities. Other subsets of individuals with CFTD may require cardiac monitoring in the future as more data are gathered regarding the incidence of cardiac complications in these people.

Regular assessment of motor abilities to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and physical support, such as walkers or wheelchairs

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Extended immobilization following surgery can exacerbate muscle weakness and thus should be avoided [North 2004].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy has not been specifically studied in women or fetuses with CFTD. Women with congenital myopathies generally do not experience significant complications during pregnancy or delivery; however, gestation may lead to an increase in symptoms in some women with CFTD and other congenital myopathies, including exacerbation of fatigue and muscle weakness [Rudnik-Schöneborn et al 1997, Sobrido et al 2005].

The pregnancy of a fetus with a congenital myopathy is at an increased risk for complications such as polyhydramnios and reduced fetal movements and the delivery is at an increased risk for breech presentation, fetal distress, failure to progress, and/or prematurity [North & Goebel 2003, North 2004].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), evaluation should include the following:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Tests looking for evidence of infection, such as C reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), which are sensitive but non-specific markers of inflammation

Complete blood count (CBC). Anemia is common either due to anemia of chronic disease or iron deficiency anemia. Poor iron absorption is common in CGD-related colitis.

Albumin. Hypoalbuminemia is found in 70% of persons with GI involvement and in 25% of persons without GI manifestations [Marciano et al 2004].

Endoscopy and colonoscopy if signs and symptoms of colitis are present

Imaging as it pertains to specific symptoms for diagnosis and management of infection. Because CGD can affect almost every organ system different imaging modalities can be used depending on the site affected. Because of its relative ease and sensitivity, CT scan is often used; however, ultrasound and MRI can be used instead in many instances. Positron emission tomography (PET) using fluorine-18-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) uptake can help discriminate active from resolved infection. High FDG uptake is consistent with active inflammation [Güngör et al 2001].

Affected Organs / Manifestations of CGD on Imaging

Lungs / pneumonia [Godoy et al 2008]

Chest x-ray. Consolidation, reticular nodular opacities, scarring

CT

Consolidation, ground-glass opacity, tree-in-bud opacity, centrilobular or random nodules, septal thickening, air trapping, scarring

Empyema or abscess

Mediastinal or hilar adenopathy, honeycomb lung, pleural thickening in chronic cases

Contiguous spread to chest wall, associated osteomyelitis of ribs and vertebral bodies

Lymph nodes / suppurative adenitis [Towbin & Chaves 2010]

CT. Enhancing lymph node with central area of hypodensity and enhancing septations

US

Swirling debris, thickened septa, and increased color Doppler flow

Calcifications if granuloma present

Liver / abscess [Garcia-Eulate et al 2006]

Single to multiple small or large abscesses, sharply defined; variable enhancement but usually with small central area with poor enhancement

Calcifications

Musculoskeletal / osteomyelitis [Galluzzo et al 2008]

Multifocal, occurring in ribs, vertebral bodies, small bones of hands and feet

Genitourinary / cystitis [Walther et al 1992]

Inflammatory pseudotumors of the bladder; on US appear as focal wall thickening

Gastrointestinal / obstruction and colitis [Marciano et al 2004, Laskey et al 2009]

Obstruction

Esophagus: strictures, diverticula, dysmotility

Thickening of bowel wall, fistulae

Upper GI: gastric outlet obstruction with gastric dilation, delayed gastric emptying, circumferential antral narrowing, thickened gastric folds

Gastric wall thickening on US, CT, or MRI

Colitis: Bowel wall thickening, skip lesions, luminal narrowing, fistulae, cobblestone mucosal pattern

Head and neck / sinusitis [Towbin & Chaves 2010]

MRI. Fungal sinusitis hypointense on T1 and T2-weighted images, associated with bony destruction

CT. Fungal sinusitis hyperdense

Central nervous system / abscess [Towbin & Chaves 2010]

Abscesses with typical appearance on MRI with ring-enhancing lesions

Treatment of Manifestations

Serious infections may occur at any time in persons with CGD. Infections that are asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic may be identified at initial presentation. Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection. Imaging is important in detecting and understanding the severity of infections. CT or MRI should be followed closely until resolution of infections.

A definitive microbiologic diagnosis is essential to proper treatment of infections. Biopsies to identify the pathogen should be pursued prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy unless infections are life threatening. Often obtaining an appropriate sample for diagnosis requires fine needle aspiration or percutaneous drainage of an abscess.

Initially antibiotics and antifungals are often used empirically, with more selective use after the pathogen is identified. Newer azole drugs (voriconazole, posaconazole, isovuconazole) have expanded therapeutic options for fungal infections in CGD. Long courses of antimicrobials are often needed for adequate treatment. For example, those who do develop fungal infections on itraconazole prophylaxis develop them at an older age and may require longer duration of therapy.

The primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts. However, if invasive yeast infections occur, organism-specific antimicrobials are warranted.

Percutaneous drainage itself can be therapeutic, especially for liver or other intra-abdominal abscesses. Lymphadenitis and liver abscesses often require excisional surgery [Feld et al 2008]. Staphylococcal liver abscesses can be effectively treated without surgery using a combination of drainage of liquid pus (if present), intravenous antimicrobials, and moderate dose corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day tapered over 1-2 months) [Leiding et al 2012].

Colitis. Treatment of colitis in CGD can be difficult.

Corticosteroids are usually effective but have long-term complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, and increased risk of infection. The authors’ current practice is to initiate therapy for proven colitis with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day for one to two weeks followed by a slow taper to 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day over one to two months [Holland 2010].

Metronidazole to reduce bowel flora, salicylic acid derivatives, 6-mercaptopurine, and mesalamine are also useful in treatment of CGD colitis.

In CGD, the use of TNF-alpha inhibitors, specifically infliximab, a chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody to TNF alpha, is successful in closing fistulae but leads to increased frequency of severe infections with typical CGD pathogens or death. A report of infliximab in five persons with CGD found severe infections in all five and death in two. Of note, none of the five developed mycobacterial infections, as has been reported with use of infliximab in other conditions [Uzel et al 2010].

Successful bone marrow transplantation appears to cure CGD and the related colitis [Kang et al 2011].

Corticosteroid treatment of heightened inflammatory response. Simultaneous administration of antimicrobials and corticosteroids can help resolve the infections and extensive areas of inflammation that can occur with chronic colitis [Marciano et al 2004], granulomatous cystitis [Kontras et al 1971], pulmonary infections with Nocardia [Freeman et al 2011], and staphylococcal liver abscesses [Leiding et al 2012].

Successful treatment of mulch pneumonitis, the exuberant inflammatory response following inhalation of mulch or other organic matter, requires the simultaneous administration of antifungals and corticosteroids [Siddiqui et al 2007].

Aggressive treatment of the syndrome of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) in CGD with antimicrobials, IVIg, and steroids can lead to clinical improvement and remission [Parekh et al 2011]. Because the HLH-like syndrome in CGD represents a reaction to bacterial or fungal infection, these infections must be aggressively treated if patients receive immunosuppression for HLH. Although the merit of immunosuppression in the setting of infection-triggered HLH in CGD is unclear, treatment of the infection is essential.

Granulocyte infusions. The value of granulocyte infusions has not been evaluated in prospective controlled trials; however, multiple case reports suggest its utility in treating serious bacterial and fungal infections [von Planta et al 1997, Ozsahin et al 1998, Bielorai et al 2000, Ikincioğullari et al 2005]. The principle is that a small number of normal phagocytes complement the oxidative defect in CGD phagocytes by supplying diffusible hydrogen peroxide. Transfused granulocytes have been recovered from sites of infection and appear to have normal respiratory burst activity and to traffic normally.

Granulocyte infusions are generally well tolerated; however, adverse effects include fever, development of leukoagglutinins, and rarely, pulmonary leukostasis. Alloimmunization is a major concern, as many patients with histories of severe infections may also be considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Heim et al 2011]. The possibility of CMV transmission is also a cause for caution.

Males with X-Linked CGD

For males with X-linked CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome early consideration should be given to autologous blood banking (see also Establishing the Diagnosis, Special Consideration in a Male with Suspected CGD and Other Medical Issues). Persons with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome do not express the erythrocyte blood group Kell antigen (i.e., they are Kell negative). Should they require transfusion of blood products, Kell-positive blood products must be avoided in order to prevent a transfusion reaction. Kell-negative blood products are rarely available.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Antibacterial prophylaxis. No randomized prospective clinical trials of antibacterial prophylaxis in persons with CGD have been performed; however, several retrospective studies suggest that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective in preventing bacterial infections. Lifelong daily antibacterial prophylaxis with oral TMP-SMX is recommended at 5 mg/kg up to 320 mg administered in two divided doses. Note: In liquid TMP-SMX the concentration of TMP is 40 mg / 5 mL and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg / 5 mL; the therapeutic dose of TMP-SMX is determined by the TMP component.

Alternatives to TMP-SMX for patients allergic to sulfonamides include trimethoprim as a single agent, dicloxacillin, cephalosporins, and fluroquinolones.

Antifungal prophylaxis. The use of azole antifungal drugs has markedly reduced the frequency and severity of fungal infections in CGD. Lifelong antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole 5 mg/kg oral solution to a maximum of 200 mg once daily is recommended [Gallin et al 2003].

In a randomized trial, 39 patients were assigned to receive either placebo or itraconazole (100 mg/day in patients age 5-12 years; 200 mg/day in those age >13 years and weight >50 kg); only one person receiving itraconazole had a serious fungal infection compared to seven in the placebo group [Gallin et al 2003].

For those unable to tolerate itraconazole, posaconazole has been studied in the oncology setting and is likely to be effective in CGD as well [Segal et al 2005].

Of note, the primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts.

Immunomodulatory therapy. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) has become part of the prophylactic regimen in most centers in the United States; however, opinions differ on its use as primary prophylaxis and in the treatment of acute infections. The exact mechanism of IFN-gamma in CGD is not known, adding to the debate over its utility.

An international multicenter randomized prospective placebo-controlled trial showed a decrease in the rate of serious infections in the group receiving IFN-gamma (22%) versus placebo (46%) after a follow-up period of 8.9 months. This improvement was independent of age, CGD genotype, or concomitant use of other prophylactic antibiotics. Three prospective Phase IV trials showed decreased rates of infections ranging from 0.13 to 0.4 per patient year. However, one prospective study comparing treatment with TMP-SMX and itraconazole alone versus addition of IFN-gamma showed no difference in the rates of infection [Martire et al 2008].

Some practitioners use IFN-gamma only in the setting of acute infection, rather than as primary prophylaxis. The data for this are anecdotal and unimpressive. The authors typically discontinue IFN-gamma during acute infection, as its utility is unclear and the exacerbation of malaise and fever can confuse the clinical picture and alter decision making [Holland 2010].

Administration by injection, cost, and lack of familiarity with cytokine therapy all affect the use of IFN-gamma in CGD. The authors use IFN-gamma in addition to antimicrobials as prophylaxis [Holland 2010]. Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA). For BSA >0.5/m2 the dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously 3x/week; for BSA ≤0.5/m2 the dose is 1.5 μg/kg subcutaneously 3x/week. Fever, myalgias, and malaise are the most common side effects but can be alleviated with concurrent administration of acetaminophen.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is the only known cure for CGD. Historically, HSCT has been associated with high morbidity and mortality and thus reluctantly offered. However, the use of non-myeloablative conditioning regimens has greatly decreased the risk of regimen-related toxicity as well as allowing for transplantation in the setting of active infection; recent reports place transplant survival at greater than 90% [Güngör et al 2014] with roughly equal survival among patients with matched related, matched unrelated, and umbilical cord blood donors.

The issue of which individuals with CGD should undergo HSCT remains complex. While transplant-related mortality rates have fallen dramatically and successful cure has risen, issues of long-term risk, sterility, graft-versus-host disease, donor matching, expense, center experience, availability, and insurance coverage all strongly influence family and physician choices regarding transplantation. Levels of residual superoxide production have correlated well with overall survival [Kuhns et al 2010]; that is, individuals with very low superoxide production had worse long-term survival than those with higher levels of residual superoxide production, suggesting that this latter group could benefit more from transplantation. However, even within this group some patients do relatively well for long periods.

Patients with CGD may experience behavioral, emotional, and learning difficulties as a consequence of chronic disease, recurrent hospitalization, and limitations of activity. Older children and adolescents are especially likely to be non-compliant with respect to prophylaxis and risk avoidance, increasing their risk for CGD-related complications. The inflammatory bowel disease present in up to 50% of persons with X-linked CGD may result in discomfort and growth impairment, and may require colostomy or colectomy. Overall quality of life is reduced in children with CGD, whereas patients with CGD who have undergone transplant report quality of life comparable to healthy children [Cole et al 2013]. Thus, with improved outcomes HSCT presents an increasingly reasonable alternative and the possibility of a normal life.

As HSCT becomes safer, more reliable and more available it will likely be an early and initial choice for the management of CGD. Currently, many centers offer HSCT after the first life-threatening infection, but with advances in the technique, the availability of donors, especially for minority populations, and the availability of experienced centers, that equation and timing may change. Even without HSCT the majority of persons with CGD will live into adulthood. There is currently very little difference in overall survival over the first decades of life between medical and transplant management. However, the significant mortality in medical management begins to accrue after age 20 [Kuhns et al 2010]. Aggressive prophylaxis and infection management increase the likelihood of doing well.

The European Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Working Group 2011 statement [EBMT Working Group 2011] recommends allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CGD in the case of unavailability of reliable specialist medical care, non-compliance with long-term antibiotic/antifungal prophylaxis, one or more life-threatening infections, severe granulomatous disease with progressive organ dysfunction (e.g., lung restriction), steroid-dependent granulomatous disease (e.g., colitis), or ongoing therapy-refractory infection (e.g., aspergillosis).

Surveillance

Regular follow-up visits can aid in early detection and treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic infections and non-infectious complications such as colitis, pulmonary granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis [Roesler et al 2005].

Laboratory examinations include CBC, chemistries, CRP, and ESR.

Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection.

Presence of microcytic anemia and hypoalbuminemia may indicate development of colitis.

Monitor liver chemistries for transaminase and alkaline phosphatase elevation, especially drug-related hepatotoxicity.

Although imaging is also important in detection of infectious and non-infectious manifestations, no specific guidelines address the intervals at which imaging should be used. CT or MRI should be followed closely to monitor progression of disease or until resolution of infections.

Frequent follow-up visits also provide the treating clinician opportunities to encourage compliance with prophylaxis and educate the patient and family about the disease.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposures. Activities that expose the affected person to decayed organic matter (e.g., mulching, gardening, leaf raking, house demolition) are to be avoided as inhalation of fungal spores can result in fulminant pneumonitis leading to hypoxia and respiratory failure [Siddiqui et al 2007]. Therefore, the following should be avoided:

Exposure to mulch

Potting of plants or gardening

Raking leaves or mowing lawns

Swimming in stagnant water, brackish water, or ponds

BCG vaccination should be avoided (live viral vaccines are likely safe).

Transfusion considerations. Persons with CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome lack red blood cell Kell antigens and thus should not receive blood transfusions that are Kell antigen positive.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known

Routine DHR testing of peripheral blood, which will detect the CGD disease state (except for p40phox deficiency) if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The major concern during the pregnancy of a woman known to have CGD is continued use of prophylactic antimicrobials.

Trimethoprim, a folic acid antagonist, is usually avoided in pregnancy

Sulfamethoxazole is not known to increase the risk of birth defects in humans; however, it is typically administered in conjunction with trimethoprim for prophylaxis in affected non-pregnant women.

Data regarding teratogenicity of itraconazole are limited. Although case reports of birth defects in infants born to women taking itraconazole during pregnancy have been published, this observation is not supported by larger case series. Given the lack of adequate data on the use of itraconazole during pregnancy, some practitioners suggest that it should be avoided during pregnancy until such data become available.

The authors’ practice for women with CGD who are or are planning to become pregnant is to use antibacterial prophylaxis (e.g., penicillin- or cephalosporin-based therapies) for which more data on safety during pregnancy exist [Author, personal communication]. Although no antifungal prophylactic medications known to be completely safe during pregnancy are currently available, the risks and benefits of antifungal treatment must be weighed case by case. Interferon gamma is held during pregnancy and restarted after breastfeeding has ceased.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy. CGD is an attractive target for gene therapy: the disorder results from a single gene defect, neutrophil superoxide production can be reconstituted in vitro, and correction of neutrophil superoxide production need not be complete to provide complete protection, as exemplified by X-linked carriers. Although initially unsuccessful, more recent gene therapy efforts have been encouraging.

Early trials using retrovirus-based therapy were complicated by loss of engraftment. Most forms of CGD gene therapy seek to introduce a retroviral vector containing normal CYBB into mobilized CD34 stem cells. Ott et al [2006] reported successful early levels of gene-corrected oxidase-producing circulating neutrophils in two adults with X-linked CGD. While there was initial clinical benefit to both patients, over time gene silencing with loss of oxidase activity and myelodysplasia developed. Kang et al [2010] reported three individuals with X-linked CGD who underwent gene therapy: two had low-level correction of neutrophil superoxide production. One had resolution of infection with 1.1% of neutrophils regaining gp91phox expression. The lack of an intrinsic survival advantage for gene-corrected CGD cells further complicated low rates of correction. All three individuals lost corrected gene expression over the course of several months.

Hematopoietic gene therapy in general and in CGD in particular has been complicated by the development of hematologic malignancies [Ott et al 2006, Stein et al 2010]. Two adults who were treated with retrovirus-based therapy developed monosomy 7 secondary to retroviral insertional activation of transcription of the oncogene MECOM (MDS and EVI1 complex locus).

Promising results with the use of lentiviral vectors in a murine X-linked CGD model have been obtained [Chiriaco et al 2014]. Recently an international study using a lentiviral vector encoding a chimeric myeloid promoter in patients with X-linked CGD has opened. As is true for many forms of hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy, the treatment of CGD will require some chemotherapeutic bone marrow conditioning to facilitate long-term corrected cell engraftment and persistence.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc), the following evaluations are recommended:

Swallowing assessment

Electroencephalography to allow for early detection of signs indicating an increased risk for epileptic seizures and consideration of use of antiepileptic drugs

Neuropsychological assessment to identify and address possible psychosocial complications

Electromyography and nerve conduction testing to document the extent of neuromuscular disease

Physical therapy evaluation to identify and address areas of possible benefit

Clinical genetics consultation may be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Botulinum toxin may be helpful in increasing the oro-facio-lingual dystonia that interferes with eating [Schneider et al 2006].

Assistance with feeding is often necessary to prevent aspiration [Aasly et al 1999].

With progression to mutism, evaluation for computer-assisted speech systems is appropriate [Aasly et al 1999].

Mechanical protective devices may be needed for complications such as teeth grinding, head banging, and repeated falls. Use of a mouth guard has been reported to reduce psychiatric symptoms [Fontenelle & Leite 2008].

Splints can be tried for foot drop. Since the equinovarus deformity has a dystonic component, local injections of botulinum toxin have been used.

Phenytoin, clobazam, valproate and levetiracetam are reported to be effective for seizure control.

Use of psychiatric medications such as antidepressant or antipsychotic medications is based on conventional approaches. Behavioral compulsions, particularly those resulting in self-harm, should be aggressively treated with antidepressant medications that target obsessive-compulsive symptoms.

Use of dopamine antagonists/depleters such as atypical neuroleptics or tetrabenazine as for chorea or Tourette syndrome should also be offered, although affected individuals should be carefully monitored for side effects of parkinsonism and depression [Borchardt et al 2000].

Deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus pars interna may improve chorea and dystonia [Miquel et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are advised:

Prevention of falls

Keeping an object such as a handkerchief in the mouth to diminish damage to lips and tongue from involuntary biting

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of nutritional status and adaptation of diet to assure adequate caloric intake and to prevent aspiration

EEG approximately every third year

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Seizure-provoking circumstances (e.g., sleep deprivation, alcohol intake)

Anticonvulsants that may worsen involuntary movements (e.g., carbamazepine, lamotrigine)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Deep brain stimulation was initially investigated in a few affected individuals with variable success [Wihl et al 2001, Burbaud et al 2002, Ruiz et al 2009]. A recent multicenter retrospective study by Miquel et al [2013] indicates that this therapy may be effective for several symptoms.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The atypical dopamine antagonist clozapine was at least temporarily effective in a single observation [Wihl et al 2001].

The antiepileptic drug levetiracetam was effective in eliminating trunk jerks, blinking, and head nodding in a single case [Lin et al 2006].

Dopamine decreased dystonia in one individual but was ineffective in his sister [Kobal, personal communication].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Char syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

In infants and children suspected of having Char syndrome: a careful cardiac evaluation, usually including an echocardiogramNote: Evaluation in the newborn nursery may not be completely informative, as the ductus arteriosus may remain open for several days in any neonate.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The major focus for managing individuals with Char syndrome concerns the cardiovascular involvement. Management of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) after the immediate newborn period is determined by the degree of shunting from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Surgical ligation or ductal occlusion at catheterization are treatment options.

The most striking external aspects of Char syndrome, namely the dysmorphia and hand anomalies, require no special care early in life. The dysmorphic features do become important as affected individuals go through childhood and adolescence because of their stigmatizing effects. No data on the success of plastic surgical intervention for the facial features in Char syndrome are available.

Surveillance

Children with Char syndrome need pediatric attention during infancy and childhood.

Although certain medical concerns including hearing loss, visual problems, and developmental delay are relatively rare among affected children, their prevalence is greater than in the general population. Ongoing developmental assessment for affected children by a pediatrician may be beneficial so that early intervention can be provided as needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with CHARGE syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Dilated ophthalmologic examination by pediatric ophthalmologist to determine the type and extent of the coloboma and associated findings such as strabismus, refractive error, or central vision impairment (CVI); when possible, clinical testing of visual fields

Cardiac evaluation for cardiovascular anomalies

Assessment for unilateral or bilateral choanal atresia and/or stenosis by nasal endoscopy or CT scan

ENT and audiologic evaluation:

In infants, brain stem auditory evoked response (BAER) to evaluate hearing as soon as the infant is medically stable

In older children and adults, hearing evaluation as appropriate for age and developmental status

See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of types of audiologic evaluation.

CT scan of the temporal bones to evaluate for middle ear and inner ear defects

Evaluation for cleft palate, including submucous cleft palate

Assessment of cranial nerve function by physical examination for evidence of facial palsy and by swallowing studies

Evaluation for esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal (TE) fistula with posteroanterior and lateral plain chest radiographs and radiographic visualization of a rigid nasogastric tube that fails to pass from the mouth to the stomach (Contrast-enhanced studies may be necessary to identify or locate a fistula.)

Renal ultrasound examination

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of children with CHARGE syndrome requires coordinated multidisciplinary care:

Airway can be compromised from choanal atresia, TE fistula, aspiration pneumonias, tracheomalacia, or an aberrant subclavian vessel impinging on the trachea. Studies have shown that 15%-60% of individuals with CHARGE syndrome require tracheostomy [Roger et al 1999, White et al 2005].

Heart defects are managed as in any individual with a congenital heart defect.

Choanal atresia. Surgical correction by means of transnasal, transpalatal, or sublabial routes or airway bypass by tracheotomy or endotracheal intubation is usually necessary early in life. Multiple surgeries are often required to maintain the nasal airway.

Feeding/swallowing dysfunction. In infancy, feeding can be compromised by oral-motor and/or sensory deficits. A multidisciplinary approach to therapy with specialists in speech-language pathology, occupational therapy, and nutrition can help promote early oral exploration and prevent or minimize oral defensiveness. For children with a G-tube, oral stimulation needs to be maintained to reduce future oral sensitivity/aversion.

Gastroesophageal reflux can be significant enough to cause aspiration, often requiring Nissen fundoplication and G-tube insertion. Silent reflux should be considered in the evaluation of recurrent sinusitis.

Renal evaluation. Renal ultrasound examination is recommended in all children. Evaluation for urinary tract infection is recommended in cases of unexplained fever or irritability in children unable to communicate.

Endocrine evaluation. Early referral for endocrinology consultation is appropriate, especially if linear growth is falling from the normal curve in spite of adequate nutrition and normalized cardiac status. Some of these children may have growth hormone deficiency, which requires growth hormone replacement therapy.

Individuals with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be considered for hormone replacement therapy for induction of puberty and for general health reasons including prevention of osteoporosis.

Coloboma. Tinted glasses or a dark visor can be helpful for the photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas.

Parents, therapists, and teachers need to take into account visual field defects resulting from retinal coloboma and central visual defects resulting from optic nerve involvement and macular coloboma. For example, visual stimuli and sign language may need to be presented in child's lower visual field.

For eyes with visual potential, cycloplegic refraction and spectacle correction may be necessary, since substantive refractive errors of mildly or even moderately micro-ophthalmic eyes have been observed.

Retinal detachment, a potential complication of retinal coloboma, can result in total blindness; therefore, any change in vision status should be treated as a medical emergency.

Hearing loss. Hearing loss should be assumed until proven otherwise. Hearing aids and hearing habilitation (which may include sign language in addition to the auditory and speech training) should be started as soon as hearing loss is documented. Many children benefit from bone conduction aids or (especially at school) an FM system. Headbands can be used to help keep the hearing aids in place if the ear cartilage is floppy or if the tape that secures the aid to the scalp is ineffective.

PE tube placement for chronic serous otitis is common and often needs to continue until adolescence.

Cochlear implants have been successful in providing sound awareness and even speech recognition in the presence of cochlear abnormalities. Bauer et al [2002] reported successful completion of cochlear implantation and measurable benefit in five individuals with CHARGE syndrome. Of note, variations in the temporal bone anatomy can lead to technical challenges and risk to the facial nerve during implantation. In some individuals, an aberrant course of the facial nerve may be a contraindication for cochlear implant [Bauer et al 2002].

Communication. Establishing an appropriate system of communication is more difficult in the presence of both hearing loss and vision loss than in the presence of hearing loss alone. Depending on the degrees of hearing and vision loss, communication may start with touch cues, followed by object cues and proceeding to auditory/oral and/or sign language. Communication training initiated by age three years is critical to the eventual development of symbolic communication [Thelin & Fussner 2005].

Deaf-blind service referral. Children with CHARGE syndrome who have combined vision and hearing loss can be considered “deafblind,” an important designation used for qualifying for educational resources in many states. Of note, “deafblind” does not imply total hearing loss or total vision loss: most children with CHARGE syndrome have some residual vision and/or hearing but are still classified as “deafblind.”

Referral to deafblind education services (e.g., the Deafblind Project within the state of residence) should be made as early as possible after birth so that the parents and project personnel can begin to plan together. A growing body of evidence indicates that normal language development can occur if hearing habilitation is started prior to age six months for hearing-impaired children, whether or not they are visually impaired. Assistance of the Deafblind team to provide consultation to the early childhood education team is highly recommended since many educators and speech therapists have little or no experience with dual sensory loss.

Psychological/school evaluations should be performed by a team that includes specialists in deafblindness when dual sensory loss is present. If a deafblind specialist is not available when a psychologist does an evaluation, a vision educator can show the tester where to place materials and whether the lighting and contrast of the printed materials is adequate. A hearing educator can help place the child for optimal hearing and/or do sign language interpretation.

Dental procedures, when necessary, may be performed under general anesthesia.

Low muscle tone and poor balance predispose children to rapid exhaustion. Many children need adjustments to the classroom or therapy setting to allow for better truncal support. Frequent rest breaks may be needed. Many children can work for longer periods if allowed to do so in a supine position [Williams & Hartshorne 2005].

Unpublished data suggest that hippotherapy (horseback riding) can be a helpful adjunct to physical therapy to prevent scoliosis as it requires frequent shifts in truncal muscular control — as do karate and other programs that promote good balance. Myofacial release can improve posture and flexibility.

Sleep cycles are frequently disturbed even in those without significant visual impairments. Occasionally, sleep studies show obstructive apnea. If the cause is unknown, melatonin has been helpful for some children while others with severe visual impairment may need other medications to regulate sleep.

Chronic constipation usually does not respond to simple measures such as increased fluid intake. GI consultation is often indicated.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behavioral therapy combined with stress reduction is sometimes helpful alone, but treatment with medications can be a useful adjunct.

Pervasive developmental disorder. While the behaviors may mimic autism, there are differences [Hartshorne et al 2005a]. Sensory processing issues are likely implicated. Management by behavior therapy, stress reduction, and sometimes medication is indicated.

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. In many instances, establishing an appropriate method of communication and providing adequate stimulation for exploration in a safe environment are more helpful than medication.

Increased pain threshold may predispose children to behaviors that are incorrectly interpreted by others as aggressive. Understanding this is critical to devising appropriate interventional strategies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Facial palsy. Because the facial nerves are often ectopic, an MRI to determine the location of the facial nerves is appropriate before craniofacial surgery or cochlear implantation is considered.

Anesthesia. The airway problems associated with anesthesia in individuals with CHARGE syndrome can be attributed to choanal atresia, cleft lip and palate, and other upper-airway problems observed in approximately half of individuals with CHARGE syndrome. The soft cartilage and resultant floppy trachea add to potential anesthesia risk. Neurogenic incoordination of swallow and closure of the epiglottis may complicate the postoperative course, especially with repeated general anesthetics. If possible, procedures should be combined to reduce the overall use of anesthesia.

Surveillance

Regular ophthalmologic evaluations are appropriate to follow changes in acuity and risks for retinal detachment and/or cataract. Monitoring nonverbal infants and children who are unable to report subjective loss of vision can permit timely detection of retinal detachment and appropriate surgical repair where necessary.

Frequent retesting of hearing by a pediatric audiologist may be necessary to determine the exact type and extent of hearing loss and to assess the success of hearing habilitation.

Frequent clinical and radiologic dental evaluations should be performed.

Wheeler et al [2000] recommended that LH and FSH be obtained between age two and three months, or by age 13-14 years if puberty has not occurred. If there is reason to suspect hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation test may be helpful.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Prophylaxis for retinal detachment is not appropriate.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a CHCHD10-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

A structured general medical history and family history

Physical examination and neurologic examination

EMG/NCS to document the regions of involvement and indicate lower motor neuron and/or myopathic involvement

Evaluation of the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance by neuropsychological examination

Neuroimaging with MRI if not done at time of initial diagnosis.

Pulmonary function testing to detect and stage respiratory involvement

Speech and swallowing evaluation if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present to direct care to minimize risk of aspiration and to initiate augmentative communication strategies for possible loss of verbal communication

Audiologic examination, including auditory brain stem responses (ABRs) and evoked otoacoustic emissions

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to determine the adaptive devices needed to maximize function

Nutritional evaluation

Screening to detect depression and assess need for psychosocial support

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

General

Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement.

Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care-giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures.

Mitochondrial myopathy

Assistance with ambulation and posture

Surgical correction of ptosis as needed

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

(ALS). The management of CHCHD10-related ALS is identical to that of ALS due to other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 1999].

Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine.

Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan.

Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands.

Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression.

Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for CHCHD10-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Treatment follows routine practices.

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations.

The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment.

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTD often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

Spinal motor neuronopathy. The management of SMAJ is identical to that of adult-onset SMA due to other causes.

Surveillance

The following regular evaluations are indicated to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Neurologic deficits. Neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities. Assessment for signs including depression and suicidal ideation

Impaired respiratory function. Monitoring of forced vital capacity (FEV) and other aspects of respiratory function performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation

Sensorineural hearing loss. Audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be noted:

Baclofen used to treat spasticity can sometimes worsen muscle weakness.

Some drugs used to treat the behavioral manifestations of FTD may worsen dysarthria, dysphagia, and/or respiratory weakness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in patients with FTD treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.

Several trials with memantine are underway in patients with FTD, as well as a trial with oxytocin and its effect on social cognition.

Although no current clinical trials are specifically designed to target CHCHD10-related disorders, many are addressed in the broader category of ALS or FTD.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination including:

EEG, which may provide an assessment of the overall degree of epileptic encephalopathy and may lead to more focused use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs);

MRI, which is initially important to differentiate the genetic epilepsy from a lesional epilepsy and may lead to intensified conservative treatment rather than presurgical work up.

Developmental assessment

Clinical genetics and/or child neurology consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Seizures should be managed by an experienced pediatric neurologist.

At this time, no specific guidelines regarding choice of specific antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) exist, as the best AED regimen for CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorders is not yet established. Most patients remain refractory to treatment and require multiple AEDs.

Although a ketogenic diet may be a treatment option, it was not effective in three patients [Thomas et al 2015].

For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because clinical photosensitivity may result in injuries due to the consequences of induced seizures, the following are recommended:

Avoid flickering lights that may provoke seizures.

Advise patients and families that exposure to intensely flickering lights may provoke seizures including eyelid myoclonias, absence seizures, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Of note, most televisions do not transmit in the frequency range that is particularly provocative.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS), the following are recommended:

Assessment for evidence of the accelerated phase including [Filipovich 2006]:

History of unexplained, persistent, or recurrent fever

Splenomegaly

Cytopenia of at least two cell lines

Signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia

Elevated serum ferritin concentration

Elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor level

Evidence of hemophagocytosis in bone marrow and/or cerebrospinal fluid

Comprehensive neurologic examination

Screening for a history of frequent or unusual infections

Screening for clinical signs of lymphoma. The hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis associated with CHS may have this clinical appearance.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Hematologic and immunologic defects

The only treatment that cures the hematologic and immunologic defects is allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). A conditioning regimen, described in detail by Haddad et al [1995], generally includes a combination of etoposide, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide. The current standard of care is HSCT as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed and the accelerated phase has either been ruled out or is in remission.

The most favorable outcome is achieved when HSCT is performed prior to development of the accelerated phase.

If signs of the accelerated phase are present, hemophagocytosis must be brought into clinical remission before HSCT can be performed.

Guidelines for treatment of the accelerated phase, revised in 2004 [Henter et al 2007], are the same as those for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH-2004 protocol). Combination therapy consists of etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine A. Select individuals may also receive intrathecal methotrexate and prednisilone. Remission is achieved in 75% of individuals within eight weeks [Filipovich 2006]; however, relapses are common and response to treatment declines over time. Once remission occurs, prompt HSCT is recommended.

The overall five-year survival rate in 35 children with CHS who underwent HSCT was 62% [Eapen et al 2007]. Success was highest with HLA-matched siblings or unrelated donors; transplantation during the accelerated phase had a higher mortality rate. Individuals in remission following symptoms of the accelerated phase can have successful outcomes following HSCT [Eapen et al 2007].

Ocular abnormalities

Correction of refractive errors may improve visual acuity.

Sunglasses should be used to protect sensitive eyes from UV light.

Skin hypopigmentation. Skin protection varies depending on the degree of hypopigmentation. Regardless, all individuals should use sunscreen to prevent sun damage and skin cancer.

Neurologic abnormalities. Because of the progressive nature of the neurologic symptoms, older patients should engage rehabilitation specialists early in the course of the disease.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients should be protected from infectious exposures as much as is practical. Antibiotics and antiviral agents should be used promptly and aggressively to treat bacterial and viral illnesses. A study by Wolff et al [1972] did not find antibiotic prophylaxis to be beneficial; however, in situations of recurrent bacterial infections, it should be considered.

Antibiotic prophylaxis should be given prior to dental or invasive procedures Widespread use of prophylactic antibiotics prior to invasive dental procedures has been under scrutiny. However, for individuals with compromised immune systems and neutropenia who will be undergoing invasive dental procedures or procedures that cause significant bleeding, prophylaxis should be considered according to American Heart Association guidelines [Tong & Rothwell 2000].

Immunizations are generally well tolerated and should be administered.

Intravenous DDAVP (0.2-0.4 µg/kg/dose over 15 to 30 minutes) can be given 30 minutes prior to invasive procedures to help control bleeding. For serious trauma or extensive bleeding, platelet transfusion may be necessary.

Surveillance

No guidelines for surveillance of classic CHS exist. Current standard of care initiates evaluation for bone marrow transplantation as quickly as feasible after the diagnosis is confirmed.

For atypical or adolescent- or adult-onset CHS, annual screening should include the following:

Abdominal ultrasound examination to monitor for hepatosplenomegaly

CBC to evaluate for cytopenias

Evaluation for signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia

Measurement of serum ferritin concentration

Soluble interleukin-2 receptor measurement

Consideration of bone marrow biopsy and/or lumbar puncture if history or physical examination suggests CNS involvement or other manifestations of the accelerated phase

If clinical status changes, the above tests should be repeated.

For both classic and atypical CHS, annual ophthalmologic examination is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

All nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen) are to be avoided as they can exacerbate the bleeding tendency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband as early as possible. Early diagnosis may provide the opportunity to perform HSCT prior to the development of the accelerated phase.

If the family-specific pathogenic variants are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, examination of peripheral blood for the presence of giant inclusions within white blood cells can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In the limited cases of pregnancy in females with CHS reported in the literature [Price et al 1992, Weisfeld-Adams et al 2013], presence of the disease had no impact on the pregnancy, labor, or delivery. The infants were normal. The pregnancy also did not appear to affect the course of disease in the affected mothers.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with cherubism, the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiologic assessment to determine facial bone involvement

Orthodontic assessment

Ophthalmologic examination

Assessment of family history

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment protocols for cherubism are not well established since both ends of the spectrum (mild clinically unrecognized cases and severe cases with extensive bone loss) are seen. Given that cherubism is considered to be a self-limited condition that improves over time, treatment should be tailored to the individual's needs. Depending on the severity, surgery may be needed for functional and esthetic concerns.

Children with cherubism should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience for evaluation. A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team, medical geneticist, dentist, orthodontic specialist, ophthalmologist, and social worker.

Surgical interventions include curettage with or without bone grafting [Kozakiewicz et al 2001, Roginsky et al 2009]. Liposuction has also been used successfully to re-contour the jaws. Surgical interventions are likely to occur between ages five to 15 years in individuals with disfiguring enlargement of jaws or locally aggressive lesions associated with complications.

Orthodontic treatment is commonly required as the jaw distortion leads to permanent dental abnormalities including a malocclusive bite, premature loss of deciduous teeth, and widely spaced, misplaced, unerupted, or absent permanent teeth.

Ophthalmologic treatment is necessary in rare individuals in whom orbital manifestations such as lower lid retraction, proptosis, diplopia, globe displacement, and visual loss caused by optic atrophy are present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early treatment (i.e., orthodontic and surgical reconstruction of the jaw) may reduce the risk for secondary complications such as upper airway obstruction, obstructive sleep apnea, and tooth displacement.

Surveillance

Generally, long-term follow up including clinical, radiographic, dental, orthodontic, and ophthalmologic evaluations is indicated [Silva et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk relatives could be offered clinical and radiographic evaluations given that manifestations may not be evident in all affected individuals. When the disease-causing mutation is known in the proband, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate relatives at risk for the disorder. This may allow mildly affected relatives to benefit from early surveillance and intervention.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A mouse model for cherubism demonstrated that increased cytokine tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) production by myeloid cells is causative [Ueki et al 2007]. If TNF-α were found to be pathogenic in humans, anti-TNF therapies could provide new treatment options for cherubism.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Results in the two reports to date on the use of calcitonin in the treatment of cherubism have not been promising [Hart et al 2000, Lannon & Earley 2001].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a cartilage-hair hypoplasia – anauxetic dysplasia (CHH-AD) spectrum disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Testing. Blood survey for macrocytic anemia and immunodeficiency [Rider et al 2009]:

Complete blood count with differential cell count

Serum concentration of IgG, IgA, IgM, and IgG subclasses

CD3, 4, 8, 19, 16/56

Post-vaccine titers

Other immunologic parameters:

Allogeneic lymphocyte cytotoxicity (ALC)

T-cell receptor excision circles (TREC) analysis

T-cell repertoire

Proliferation response to PHA

Proliferation response to anti-CD3

Imaging. Full skeletal survey including (in AD) views of the cervical spine to identify cervical vertebral abnormalities and to assess the risk for atlantoaxial subluxation

Consultations

Orthopedic. Evaluation for complications of joint laxity, lumbar lordosis, chest deformity, scoliosis, and varus deformity of the lower extremities

Immunologic. For further assessment and treatment if above testing is abnormal or if the child has infections, and to determine the vaccination program and the approach to varicella prophylaxis

Hematologic. For further assessment and treatment if above testing is abnormal

Pulmonary. Evaluation for evidence of respiratory disease

Gastroenterologic. Evaluation for congenital megacolon if clinical observation is suggestive

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Skeletal dysplasia

Corrective osteotomies may be warranted in late childhood or adolescence for excessive varus deformity of the lower extremities [Riley et al 2015].

In persons with AD, surgery may be needed to fuse malformed cervical vertebrae in infancy and to correct or prevent the progression of kyphoscoliosis.

Orthopedic surgery may be complicated by low bone density.

Short stature. Treatment with recombinant growth hormone has not shown any sustained benefit in individuals with CHH and cannot be recommended [Obara-Moszynska et al 2013].

Immunodeficiency and infection. The treatment of infections in individuals with immunodeficiency is based on their type, location, and severity.

Immediate antiviral treatment with intravenous high-dose acyclovir must be considered at the first symptoms of varicella infection to prevent complications.

Consider prophylactic antibiotic therapy if the individual has recurrent infections or if neutropenia/severe lymphopenia is present. Consider also immunoglobulin replacement therapy if immunoglobulin or IgG subclass levels are low, or if vaccine responses are inadequate.

Individuals with bronchiectasis need proper management of infectious exacerbations and physiotherapy. Consider also long-term treatment with inhaled antibiotics or oral macrolide [Altenburg et al 2015].

Recurrent severe infections and/or the presence of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) may warrant bone marrow transplantation / hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Guggenheim et al 2006]. HSCT has resulted in normalization of T-lymphocyte numbers and function, resolution of autoimmune manifestations, and catch-up growth, probably due to reduced infections. Overall survival rates have been reported at 63% for unrelated donor transplants and as high as 80% for matched sibs. HSCT should be considered in selected individuals with CHH with recurrent infections and autoimmune manifestations or bone marrow dysplasia for whom a well-matched donor is available [Bordon et al 2010].

Anti-TNFa therapy has been used successfully in the treatment of cutaneous and visceral granulomas. However, fatal progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by JC virus has been described during treatment with anti-TNFa antibodies. HSCT resulted in disappearance of granulomas in two out of three transplanted individuals [Moshous et al 2011].

Anemia

Treatment of severe anemia secondary to depressed erythropoiesis may require repeated red cell transfusions in infancy and childhood; life-long transfusions or bone marrow transplantation are rarely needed [Williams et al 2005]. In individuals requiring repeated transfusions iron chelation is successful and well tolerated when needed [Taskinen et al 2013].

Although steroid treatment has been effective in treating anemia in some persons with CHH, the available data are not sufficient to recommend this therapy in general, especially considering the potential side effects of immune suppression and growth retardation.

Malignancy. No specific recommendations for the treatment of the observed malignancies are available. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma often has a poor prognosis with conventional cytotoxic protocols [Taskinen et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If a cervical spine abnormality and/or instability is identified, special care should be exercised when general anesthesia is administered.

Surveillance

Skeletal dysplasia

Children with CHH require annual measurement of linear growth and body proportions; comparison with published disease-specific growth curves [Mäkitie et al 1992a] is helpful.

Pubertal development should be monitored during yearly follow-up visits and hypogonadism excluded if puberty is significantly delayed.

Clinical assessment for deformities of the lower extremities and joints is appropriate. Radiographic evaluation and orthopaedic consultation is necessary if symptomatic misalignment, restricted knee or hip mobility, or symptomatic joint laxity is present.

Individuals with AD require annual clinical and radiographic monitoring of the spine.

Anemia

Observe for clinical signs of anemia starting from the time of the initial diagnosis until early adolescence.

Follow RBC, hematocrit, and hemoglobin levels in those in remission after treatment for anemia at least every six months or when clinical signs of anemia reappear.

Note: (1) No data are available on the likely timing of recurrence of anemia after successful treatment; (2) severe anemia in adolescents and adults with CHH can be the presenting symptom of malignancy and may require extensive investigations with bone marrow evaluation and imaging studies.

Immunodeficiency and infection

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to infection in children, ongoing follow up by physicians with experience in this condition is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of infection.

Particularly in the first two years of life, children with normal initial immunologic assessment should be monitored for recurrent infections, especially life-threatening varicella infections [Notarangelo et al 2008, Rider et al 2009].

Laboratory markers for immunodeficiency may fluctuate in children with CHH, thus emphasizing the need for regular yearly follow up [Kainulainen et al 2014].

Bronchiectasis should be suspected especially in subjects with frequent respiratory tract infections and combined immune deficiency; high-resolution computed tomography should be used for diagnosis [Toiviainen-Salo et al 2008].

Malignancy

Although no specific recommendations exist, it is advised that children be checked on a regular basis (once yearly) by their pediatrician or primary healthcare provider for lymphomas and other associated malignancies by careful clinical examination and routine blood tests.

Skin should be inspected for abnormal changes, lymph nodes for enlargement, and abdomen for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or other abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at a regular one- to two-year interval, as well as yearly laboratory tests including blood counts with differential, LDH, and uric acid.

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to malignancy in adults, ongoing regular follow up beyond adolescence is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of malignancy, as described above. The frequency of follow-up visits need to be determined on an individual basis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Routine immunizations with inactivated vaccines are considered safe in persons with CHH. However, immunization with live vaccines should be carefully considered in those with CHH and evidence of abnormal immunologic function, and should be avoided in those with CHH and SCID [Rider et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of relatives (i.e., sibs) at risk for CHH-AD spectrum disorders is important for early recognition and management of manifestations that can be associated with significant morbidity (e.g., infections, immunization with live vaccines, malignancies). Relatives at risk should be tested if clinical features, especially short stature, are present; completely asymptomatic individuals need not be tested.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Radiographic evaluation and RMRP sequence analysis if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No issues are known; however, experience is limited.

Therapies Under Investigation

Varicella vaccine is being investigated for children with CHH who have not had varicella. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on this and other clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with choroideremia (CHM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination including visual acuity and Goldmann visual field testing for a baseline

Electroretinogram

Funduscopic examination

Optical coherence tomography (OCT)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Retinal detachment which may occur more commonly in patients with high myopia (as seen in CHM) is treated by conventional surgical techniques by an ophthalmologist.

Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with a posterior subcapsular cataract.

UV-blocking sunglasses may have a protective role when an affected individual is outdoors.

Low vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs.

Counseling from organizations or professionals who work with the blind and visually impaired may be needed to help the affected individual cope with issues such as depression, loss of independence, fitness for driving, and anxiety over job loss.

Nutrition and ocular health have become increasingly topical:

For those individuals who do not have access to fresh fruit and leafy green vegetables, a supplement with antioxidant vitamins may be important.

No information is available on the effectiveness of vitamin A supplementation in the treatment of CHM.

A source of omega-3 very-long-chain fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid, may be beneficial, as clinical studies suggest that a regular intake of fish is important.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Rare cases of choroidal neovascularization may be treated with intravitreal bevacizumab [Palejwala et al 2014]

Surveillance

Regular ophthalmologic examination to monitor progression of CHM is recommended as affected individuals need advice regarding their levels of visual function. Goldmann visual field examinations provide practical information for both the clinician and the affected individual.

Spectral domain-OCT (SD-OCT) is useful during therapeutic trials to measure macular thickness and the presence of cystoid macular edema [Genead & Fishman 2011].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

UV exposure from sunlight reflected from water and snow should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy for individuals with CHM has been considered an achievable goal. Introduction of adenovirus containing the CHM coding region can restore in vitro protein levels and REP-1 activity in CHM-deficient lymphocytes and fibroblasts [Anand et al 2003].

Vasireddy et al [2013] reported encouraging preclinical results using induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with CHM as in vitro models as well as normal-sighted mice as in vivo models. Delivery of CHM cDNA via a recombinant adeno-associated viral vector (AAV2) did not induce cytotoxicity in either model, suggesting that a human clinical trial for this condition is possible. To date, a safety trial of AAV2-mediated gene therapy in human subjects with CHM has been completed [MacLaren et al 2014]. Despite the requirement for submacular placement of the vector through microsurgical techniques, no serious adverse events were noted.

Morgan et al [2014] provided supporting evidence that the retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor layers should be the primary targets for experimental therapies based on their high resolution retinal imaging studies.

Other preclinical studies suggest that AAV8 may also be a candidate vector for choroideremia human gene therapy trials [Black et al 2014].

Note: Gene therapy trials for CHM are currently planned or underway and are registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Genead et al [2012] studied the use of 2% topical dorzolamide ophthalmic solution to treat two CHM patients with cystoids macular edema. Clear improvements in retinal thickness were identified though changes to visual acuity, retinal sensitivity and other functional measures were not clinically significant.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LIS1-associated lissencephaly/ subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), the following are recommended:

Evaluation of:

Growth

Feeding and nutrition

Respiratory status

Development

Seizures

Clinical genetics consultation

MRI should be interpreted carefully to provide as much prognostic information as possible. Note: Although most affected individuals have severe to profound intellectual disability, a minority have less extensive lissencephaly that results in only moderate intellectual disability, and a few have limited malformations that allow near-normal development. In the latter, the lissencephaly or SBH is typically less severe and less extensive on MRI. The resolution of brain CT scan is not usually sufficient to allow this.

Treatment of Manifestations

Parents seem best able to deal with this severe disorder when accurate information regarding the prognosis is given as soon as possible after the diagnosis is recognized. For those with severe lissencephaly, it is usually appropriate to discuss limitations of care, such as "do not resuscitate" (DNR) orders, in the event of severe illnesses.

Poor feeding in newborns is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, as the feeding problems often improve during the first weeks of life. But they often worsen again with intercurrent illnesses and with advancing age and size. At least 50% of children with LIS1-related lissencephaly (but not SBH) eventually have a gastrostomy tube placed for feeding.

A large majority of children with lissencephaly have seizures, including frequent infantile spasms, which can be difficult to control. Management of seizures in children with ILS or SBH is based on the specific seizure type and frequency. In general, seizures should be treated promptly and aggressively by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently results in decline in function and health. Specifically, poor seizure control worsens feeding and increases the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed, and increases the risk for pneumonia.

Surveillance

Whenever any unusual spells or any developmental regression is noted, a child neurology consultation should be performed, and EEG considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with cold-induced sweating syndrome (CISS/Crisponi syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

Brain MRI. Usually normal, but may be done to evaluate for complicating features including a thin corpus callosum [Okur et al 2008] or small subcortical white matter lesions [Yamazaki et al 2010, Tüysüz et al 2013]

Swallowing tests and esophageal manometry. May be helpful in assessing the safety of oral feeding

EEG when seizures are observed or suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Infants require close monitoring in anticipation of episodes of laryngospasm with respiratory distress, bouts of hyperthermia (≤42º C [108° F]), seizures, and possible sudden death. Preparedness for appropriate countermeasures (e.g., supplemental oxygen, cooling blankets, antiepileptic drugs) is essential.

An apnea monitor is recommended.

Serial or continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring may be required during the first few weeks if seizures are observed. Anticonvulsants may be required.

Nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding is indicated until at least age one year to overcome precarious feeding problems in infancy.

Bracing, occupational therapy, or plastic surgery may be necessary to correct congenital finger and hand deformities.

Surgical instrumentation or prolonged

bracing may be required to correct a progressive thoracolumbar scoliosis.

Paradoxical sweating. Treatment should be reserved for adults and older children. The combined prescription of clonidine and amitriptyline can provide excellent and long-term symptom control.

Clonidine. Episodes of cold-induced sweating are associated with a prominent increase in plasma noradrenaline. Clonidine, a central presynaptic α2-adrenoreceptor agonist, induces feedback inhibition of synaptic noradrenaline release. Oral clonidine, at starting doses of 0.05 mg to 0.1 mg twice daily, effectively reduces cold-induced sweating and is usually well tolerated. If there are no contraindications, the drug is maintained at the lowest dose required for acceptable symptom control.

Before initiating a prescription of clonidine, check potential interactions with already prescribed medications.

The beneficial effects of clonidine may lessen within a few weeks of starting the drug, due to habituation.

A gradual increase in the daily dose of clonidine to tolerance (side effects: dry mouth, postural hypotension, sedation) or to a maximum of 0.1 mg four times daily may be required.

If clonidine needs to be discontinued, the prescription should be phased out over four to six days; abrupt cessation of clonidine can lead to prominent hypertension.

Amitriptyline, 10 mg orally at bedtime may be added to the prescription of clonidine when symptoms are not adequately controlled. The dose may need to be increased gradually to a maximum of 25 mg four times daily (taken together with clonidine).

Moxonidine, prescribed at a maximum oral dose of 6 μg/kg/d, was shown to provide effective symptom relief in two teenage sibs with CISS [Herholz et al 2010]. Moxonidine was well tolerated in the short term; however, long-term observations are not yet available.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes monitoring for evidence of scoliosis and its progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals should avoid heat exposure and prolonged physical activity in a hot climate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Females with CISS may conceive normally. No complications during pregnancy have been reported to date.

Treatments for cold-induced sweating (clonidine, amitriptyline, moxonidine) should be discontinued during pregnancy, as the potential for teratogenic effects on the fetus is not well studied and remains possible. The prescription of clonidine should not be discontinued abruptly; the drug should be phased out over four to six days.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a phenotype of citrin deficiency, the following are recommended:

NICCD

Assess the size of the liver and spleen.

Seek evidence of fatty liver by abdominal US, CT, or MRI.

Investigate feeding pattern.

FTTDCD

Perform detailed anthropometric examination and evaluation using age- and gender-matched growth standards.

Investigate feeding pattern.

CTLN2. Investigate carbohydrate, protein, and lipid composition of the diet.

All phenotypes. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations

NICCD. The symptoms in most children with NICCD resolve by age 12 months following supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins and use of lactose-free and MCT-enriched therapeutic formulas [Ohura et al 2003, Song et al 2010, Hayasaka et al 2012, Zhang et al 2014a].

Two sibs improved after switching from breast milk to formula, which has higher proline content [Ben-Shalom et al 2002].

Some children with NICCD improve without treatment, which could be the effect of reduction of breast milk and/or common formulas while simultaneously introducing solid supplements such as eggs and meat, which are rich in protein and lipid and therefore beneficial for citrin-deficient individuals [Song et al 2010].

The treatment with therapeutic formulas is not lifelong. Most infants with NICCD will recover clinically and biochemically by age one year, at which point protein- and lipid-enriched textured or solid supplements could be introduced. Whether continued treatment beyond a year can reduce the likelihood of the FTTDCD and CTLN2 phenotype is currently unknown.

Moreover, zinc deficiency is common in NICCD, and thus zinc supplementation should be encouraged when laboratory evidence indicates zinc deficiency, especially in individuals with marked failure to thrive.

Four infants with NICCD and severe liver dysfunction were diagnosed as having tyrosinemia of unknown cause and underwent liver transplantation at age ten to 12 months [Tamamori et al 2002, Kobayashi et al 2006].

FTTDCD. Few treatment measures have been described for this novel citrin-deficient phenotype.

A toddler with FTTDCD was fed in accordance with his own food preferences (including aversion to rice and fondness for fish); FTT improved gradually, with weight for age recovering beyond the third percentile at age three years. The dyslipidemia also improved gradually [Song et al 2009a].

In addition to dietary treatment, administration of sodium pyruvate may be effective in correcting growth restriction [Mutoh et al 2008, Saheki et al 2010]. Sodium pyruvate reduces the NADH/NAD+ ratio in the hepatocyte, a pivotal alteration for citrin deficiency development, and this could be associated with its ameliorating effect on growth restriction.

CTLN2. The most successful therapy to date has been liver transplantation [Ikeda et al 2001, Kasahara et al 2001, Yazaki et al 2004, Hirai et al 2008], which prevents episodic hyperammonemic crises, corrects the metabolic disturbances, and eliminates preference for protein-rich foods [Kobayashi & Saheki 2004]. Nearly all individuals with CTLN2 required liver transplantation in the past; however, the introduction of arginine and sodium pyruvate and medium chain triglyceride (MCT) oil administration has altered the situation. Other treatments include the following:

Administration of arginine (5-10 g/day) was reported to be effective in decreasing blood ammonia concentration.

Reducing calorie/carbohydrate intake and increasing protein intake ameliorates hypertriglyceridemia [Imamura et al 2003].

Administration of sodium pyruvate (4-9 g/day) was effective in decreasing frequency of hyperammonemic episodes and improving growth in several cases [Mutoh et al 2008; Saheki et al 2010; Yazaki et al 2010; Ohura et al, personal communication; Okano et al, personal communication].

Administration of MCT oil (Mactone oil containing 85% MCT; 45 mL/day) was associated with complete recovery with all normal laboratory findings or improved with no hyperammonemic symptoms [Hayasaka et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

To prevent hyperammonemia and improve growth, a diet rich in protein and lipids and low in carbohydrates is recommended [Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006, Dimmock et al 2007, Saheki et al 2008, Dimmock et al 2009].

High-carbohydrate meals and alcohol should be avoided.

Arginine administration may be effective in preventing hyperammonemic crises.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D deficiency and zinc deficiency are common complications in NICCD [Song et al, personal communication]. Severe infection and liver cirrhosis have also been reported to be lethal complications in some individuals with NICCD. Therefore, vitamin D and zinc supplements and active infection control are recommended in persons with NICCD.

Surveillance

To monitor for emergence of the FTTDCD phenotype in persons with citrin deficiency older than age one year, close surveillance of anthropometric indices (e.g., height, weight, and head circumference; serum lipid levels including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and LDL-cholesterol) is appropriate.

It is recommended that the following be measured every several months:

Plasma ammonia concentration (especially in the evening or 2 hours after feeding)

Plasma citrulline concentration

Serum PSTI concentration

Increases in plasma citrulline concentration and serum PSTI suggest onset of CTLN2 [Tsuboi et al 2001, Mutoh et al 2008] and should prompt initiation of treatment.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Low-protein/high-caloric (high-carbohydrate) diet. Although a low-protein/high-caloric diet helps prevent hyperammonemia in urea cycle enzyme deficiencies, it is harmful for individuals with all forms of citrin deficiency (i.e., NICCD, FTTDCD, or CTLN2) [Saheki et al 2004, Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006]. A high-carbohydrate diet may increase NADH production, disturb urea synthesis, and stimulate the citrate-malate shuttle, resulting in hyperammonemia, fatty liver, and hypertriglyceridemia [Saheki & Kobayashi 2002, Imamura et al 2003, Saheki et al 2006, Saheki et al 2007].

Infusion of sugars including glycerol, fructose, and glucose. Severe brain edema treated with glycerol-containing osmotic agents has resulted in continued deterioration and is contraindicated in those with CTLN2 [Yazaki et al 2005]. Degradation of large amounts of glycerol and fructose generates NADH in liver cytosol, which may disturb liver function [Saheki et al 2004, Yazaki et al 2005, Takahashi et al 2006].

Infusion of high-concentration glucose may also exacerbate hyperammonemia [Tamakawa et al 1994, Takahashi et al 2006].

Note: Mannitol infusion appears to be safer [Yazaki et al 2005].

Alcohol. Drinking alcohol can trigger the onset of CTLN2 because alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) generates NADH in the cytosol of the liver.

Medications. Acetaminophen and rabeprozole may trigger CTLN2 [Shiohama et al 1993, Imamura et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk asymptomatic sibs of a proband for citrin deficiency so that appropriate dietary management of infants (discontinuation of breast feeding and introduction of lactose-free and/or MCT-enriched formulas) can be instituted before symptoms occur.

Because asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals with citrin deficiency do not always show biochemical abnormalities, definitive diagnosis of at-risk relatives (e.g., sibs) would depend heavily on SLC25A13 molecular genetic findings in the proband:

If both SLC25A13 pathogenic variants in the index case have been identified, molecular genetic testing can be used reliably.

If only one SLC25A13 pathogenic variant is ascertained in the index case, it may not be feasible to definitively exclude the diagnosis in at-risk relatives who have the one identified pathogenic variant. In such cases, serial clinical and biochemical assessment will be needed over time to confirm or rule out the diagnosis.

If no SLC25A13 pathogenic variant is ascertained in the index case, molecular testing of at-risk individuals will not be helpful. In such cases, serial clinical and biochemical assessment will be needed over time to confirm or rule out the diagnosis

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with infantile malignant CLCN7-related autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full blood cell count to evaluate for leukocytosis or leukocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia with low reticulocyte count

Investigation of calcium concentrations in blood and urine to evaluate for hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism

Ultrasonography of abdomen to evaluate for hepatosplenomegaly

MRI and/or CT of the neurocranium to evaluate for narrowed neuroforamina, hydrocephalus, and brain abnormalities in neuronopathic form of osteopetrosis

Ophthalmologic examination including VEPs to evaluate for optic nerve atrophy

Otorhinolaryngologic examination to evaluate for choanal stenosis

EEG to detect pathologic changes associated with neurodegeneration; neurologic examination to evaluate development

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Due to the difference in severity, treatment strategies for ARO and ADOII differ. IAO lies between these two forms and has a variable prognosis. Therefore, treatment options must be evaluated on an individual basis.

ARO

Hypocalcemic convulsions, occurring in a substantial number of neonates as the first disease manifestation, should be treated by calcium supplementation. The management of calcium homeostasis may be difficult and recommendations are conflicting: whereas physiologic doses of calcium and vitamin D have been used to treat children with osteopetrosis who have rickets, restriction of calcium and vitamin D has been used to prevent progression of disease and hypercalcemic crisis following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Treatment needs to take into account the particular situation of the affected individual.

Bone marrow failure may require erythrocyte or platelet transfusions (irradiated products). In the case of leukocytopenia and/or hypogammaglobulinemia, which may develop in a subset of individuals, antibiotics and immunoglobulins may be given in a prophylactic or therapeutic manner.

Newly diagnosed individuals should be transferred as soon as possible to a pediatric center experienced in allogeneic stem cell transplantation in this disease.

Sensory and neurologic manifestations require the collaboration of pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, ophthalmologists, and psychologists. Surgical decompression of the optic nerve, a difficult procedure, has been performed with some success to prevent vision loss [Hwang et al 2000].

Fractures require treatment and surveillance by an experienced bone surgeon or orthopedist in collaboration with the treating pediatrician.

Dental. Without HSCT, most children do not reach the age at which secondary dentition erupts. Children undergoing early HSCT may have normal secondary dentition despite defective primary dentition [Jälevik et al 2002].

In some cases, defective tooth eruption, ankylosis, abscesses, and the formation of cysts and fistulas may require surgical intervention. Special attention is required to prevent mandibular osteomyelitis and extreme brittleness of the alveolar bone [Luzzi et al 2006].

ADOII

Orthopedic treatment is often required for fractures and arthritis. Post-surgical complications such as delayed union or non-union of fractures and infections are common (50%) because of the brittleness of the bones. Fractures near joints may require total joint arthroplasty [Strickland & Berry 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

ARO

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Since the defective osteoclasts in osteopetrosis are of hematopoietic origin, allogeneic HSCT can be curative. Most manifestations (bone sclerosis, bone marrow failure, and extramedullary hematopoiesis) can be prevented or reversed by HSCT.

Secondary neurosensory impairments caused by nerve compression may be prevented by early transplantation, but not reversed when they are already present.

Primary neurologic problems and retinal degeneration developing in the neuronopathic form of ARO, however, are independent of the bone disease and therefore cannot be improved or prevented by HSCT. Persons with ARO resulting from CLCN7 pathogenic variants who do not develop neurologic complications have been reported [Pangrazio et al 2010; A Schulz and U Kornak, unpublished results].

It is highly important but difficult to exclude individuals with the neuronopathic form from this invasive treatment. On the other hand, HSCT should be performed as soon as possible in the majority of those without primary neurologic sequelae to prevent irreversible secondary complications, including visual impairment. The evaluation of affected individuals and treatment by HSCT should therefore be performed in experienced pediatric centers after multidisciplinary evaluation to assess the severity of the disease and individual prognostic factors.

The outcome of HSCT in ARO has been analyzed in a retrospective survey of the European Society of Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and the European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) [Sobacchi et al 2013]. The five-year disease-free survival was estimated at 88% for genoidentical transplants, 80% for matched unrelated transplants, and 66% for haploidentical transplants [Sobacchi et al 2013]. In a recently published report of 193 patients transplanted in various centers by a cyclophosphamide-based regimen, the five-year probabilities of survival were 62% after HLA-matched sib transplantation and 42% after alternative donor transplantation [Orchard et al 2015]. A further improved outcome was most recently reported from three large transplant centers using a fludarabine-based conditioning regimen [Natsheh et al 2016; Schulz and Moshous, personal communication].

Note: Because TCIRG1 pathogenic variants are more often the cause of ARO than are CLCN7 pathogenic variants, the majority of HSCTs have been performed in infants with TCIRG1 rather than CLCN7 pathogenic variants. However, there appears to be no significant difference in treatment outcome between individuals with TCIRG1 and CLCN7 pathogenic variants [A Schulz et al, unpublished results].

The incidence of severe complications post-HSCT is high, particularly when alternative stem cell sources are used. Complications include rejection, delayed hematopoietic reconstitution, venous occlusive disease, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercalcemic crisis [Steward et al 2004, Corbacioglu et al 2006, Shroff et al 2012].

Cranial nerve dysfunction (visual impairment caused by optic nerve atrophy) is irreversible in most cases. In the authors' series including about 30 individuals, about two thirds of affected individuals were visually impaired after successful transplantation [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Progressive neurologic sequelae, developmental delay, and repeated seizures occur in a subset of individuals after successful HSCT [Steward 2003]. Severe neurologic manifestations other than visual impairment have been seen in about 10% of individuals in the authors' series [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Other. Conservative treatment strategies include stimulation of host osteoclasts with calcium restriction, calcitriol, steroids, parathyroid hormone, and interferon [Kocher & Kasser 2003]. Since evidence for a favorable outcome in severe osteopetrosis is limited and because side effects are severe (particularly in infants), these drugs may be administered in special situations only.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

ARO. Restricted intake of calcium and vitamin D just before, during, and following HSCT to prevent hypercalcemia is recommended.

Parents and patients should be informed about possible complications of the disease and recommendations for prevention should be given accordingly (e.g., severe CNS bleeding in patients with thrombocytopenia, pathologic fractures). Because of the heterogeneity of the disease, recommendations should be given on an individual basis.

ADOII. Good routine dental care and oral hygiene may help prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible.

Surveillance

ARO

The possible manifestations and complications of osteopetrosis require repeat investigations; however, no general recommendations are available for the extent and frequency of investigations. A blood cell count and an ophthalmologic examination should be performed once a year at a minimum in all individuals with ARO.

In individuals who have undergone HSCT, surveillance should be coordinated by the transplantation center; chimerism analysis should be performed repeatedly, as secondary graft failures have been reported. However, such individuals may be free of disease manifestation even in the case of stable mixed chimerism, if a substantial part of blood cells are donor derived (i.e., coexistence of hematopoietic cells of donor and recipient origin).

ADOII. In ADOII, skeletal manifestations do not progress and therefore no special surveillance is necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

ADOII

Activities with high fracture risk should be avoided.

Orthopedic surgery should only be performed when absolutely necessary and the surgeon should be aware of potential complications and difficulties in handling osteopetrotic bone.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CLCN7 pathogenic variant(s) in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Studies have been initiated to investigate the relation of genotype and clinical outcome after stem cell transplantation (for current information, see the European Society of Immunodeficiencies [ESID] and European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation [EBMT] websites).To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CLPB deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical examination

Complete neurologic examination, including brain MRI (if not performed at the time of diagnosis)

Developmental assessment or IQ testing (depending on the age of the individual at the time of diagnosis)

For those with significant neurologic problems:

Complete evaluation of feeding and diet to determine if tube feeding or gastrostomy is necessary

Evaluation of excessive drooling to determine if the risk of aspiration and/or dehydration is increased

Complete ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for cataracts (if not performed at the time of diagnosis)

Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is recommended to determine the need for granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) treatment.

Ultrasound examination of the kidneys for evidence of nephrocalcinosis or cysts

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietitian, and physical therapist when possible.

No specific dietary or other metabolic treatment is available.

Thorough developmental assessment is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Early intervention may include physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy.

Treatment of the neurologic manifestations is per current clinical practice based on the findings. To date no specific recommendations regarding the use of antiepileptic drugs are available.

Excessive drooling can be reduced with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of saliva glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts [SB Wortmann, personal communication].

Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) administered subcutaneously can be used to increase neutrophil counts to help reduce the frequency of infections, especially in individuals with the mild or moderate phenotype (see Clinical Description) [SB Wortmann, personal communication].

Note: Immunizations are not contraindicated and all children should be immunized as per national standards.

Surveillance

Neurologic, ophthalmologic, immunologic/hematologic, and orthopedic evaluations are based on individual findings as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria (including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

History and neurologic examination to assess for changes in gait or in bowel or bladder function and for epilepsy or movement disorder

Developmental assessment and formulation of an intervention plan

Complete musculoskeletal examination with particular attention to the chest and spine; radiographic assessment if clinically indicated

Developmental, age-appropriate hearing assessment

Dental evaluation

Physical examination of the heart and ECG, with baseline echocardiogram by age ten years

Ophthalmologic evaluation, including refraction and fundoscopy

Evaluation of appropriate family members for signs of the condition

Assessment of the family’s capacity to care for the child, especially if mother is affected intellectually

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with CLS should be provided with every opportunity to develop communication skills and to participate in activities and self-care in order to develop a degree of independence.

Awareness of SIDAs should allow early intervention to minimize the occurrence of triggering stimuli and to provide protection from falls:

Trials with different medications and efforts to optimize the dosage may improve outcome [O'Riordan et al 2006].

A trial of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., valproate, clonazepam, or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors) may be indicated [Fryssira et al 2002], although generally they are not effective.

Benzodiazapines, sometimes in increasing doses, have proved effective in some cases [Touraine et al 2002, Nakamura et al 2005].

In an individual who was not helped by a variety of medications, Havaligi et al [2007] reported a good response with sodium oxybate.

If attacks occur with great frequency, use of a wheelchair may be required to prevent falling and injury.

Risperidone may be of benefit to individuals who display destructive or self-injurious behavior [Valdovinos et al 2002].

Feeding difficulties, abnormal growth velocity, and obesity, if present, should be assessed and treated in a standard manner.

Treatment of behavioral problems is standard and requires periodic reassessment.

Treatment of kyphoscoliosis is standard but requires reassessment well into adulthood.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early recognition of spinal problems such as kyphoscoliosis and stenosis may allow prevention of progression and/or intervention to prevent long-term cardiovascular or neurologic complications. Intervention should be directed at preventing progression of kyphoscoliosis to the point of cardio-respiratory compromise, which may be life threatening.

Similarly, early recognition of some cardiac anomalies may allow prevention of secondary complications or prolongation of adequate function. Some individuals with CLS may require SBE (subacute bacterial endocarditis) prophylaxis.

Attention to vision and hearing may prevent some secondary behavioral changes. Identification and treatment of blepharitis may prevent eye rubbing and potential retinal damage.

Attention to dental hygiene and gum disease may reduce the risk of premature tooth loss.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Periodic tests of hearing and vision

Annual physical cardiac examination, with echocardiogram by age ten years. Even if normal, the latter should be repeated every five to ten years in light of uncertainty as to the incidence and range in age of onset of cardiomyopathy [Massin et al 1999, Facher et al 2004].

Monitoring of the spine for the development of progressive kyphoscoliosis. There should be a high index of suspicion for narrowing of the spinal canal with attention to change in gait and bowel/bladder habits, expression of pain, and focal neurologic changes such as clonus or abnormal tendon reflexes.

Routine dental evaluation as in the general population but with particular attention to the risk of tooth loss

Note: A table containing suggested guidelines for follow-up of individuals with CLS is provided in Hunter [2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with CLS who experience SIDAs should be protected as much as possible from being startled and/or from falls.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Significant social resources may be required to support families of women with CLS and developmental delay.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with congenital muscular dystrophy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Assessment of respiratory function with baseline pulmonary function tests, including forced vital capacity (FVC) in sitting and supine positions and blood gas exchange

Polysomnography to identify individuals with nocturnal hypoventilation, to evaluate individuals with symptoms of hypercapnea (daytime headache, restless sleep, loss of concentration), and to evaluate individuals with reduced forced vital capacity, particularly those with CMD subtypes associated with a rigid spine, axial weakness, and/or signs of diaphragmatic weakness (detected by a drop in FVC from sitting to supine). Additional indications for polysomnography include testing in the very young or those with developmental delay in whom reliable, consistent pulmonary function testing can be difficult to obtain.

Sleep-disordered breathing can be seen with FVC of less than 60%, while nocturnal hypoventilation correlates with FVC of less than 40% [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004, Shahrizaila et al 2006]. Independent of the FVC values, a very high suspicion for nocturnal hypoventilation must be maintained in those with SELENON (SEPN1)-related CMD to avoid a life-threatening respiratory failure.

Radiologic examinations if spinal deformity is observed. Assessment of spine and joint deformities by physiatrists and orthopedists

Feeding and nutritional assessment, weight and height measurement, serum vitamin D concentration and calculation of body mass index (BMI)

Assessment of strength and joint contractures by an occupational therapist and physical therapist

Assessment of cardiac function in those with a dystroglycanopathy or L-CMD, with particular awareness that cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia can occur in the absence of severe muscle disease

Evaluation for pulmonary hypertension and/or secondary right heart failure in those with significant respiratory involvement (mechanical ventilation, severe respiratory failure)

Complete eye examination in those with a dystroglycanopathy or if clinically indicated

Treatment of Manifestations

No definitive treatments exist for the congenital muscular dystrophies; however, multidisciplinary medical care improves quality of life and longevity. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMD subtype, and rate of progression.

Respiratory therapy and use of respiratory aids including assisted cough and hyperinsufflation devices, Percussionaire®, noninvasive ventilatory support, or mechanical ventilation via tracheostomy are appropriate for those with respiratory insufficiency [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises help promote mobility and prevent contractures. Mechanical assistive devices including canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs can be used as needed to help ambulation and mobility. Posture in vertical, sitting, and supine positions has to be evaluated and assisted if necessary as improved posture may positively affect chest expansion.

Surgical intervention may be needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and scoliosis. Pros and cons of surgery for hip dislocation or joint contractures need to be considered given that any functional benefit may be insignificant compared to the high risk of pain and rapid relapse. Proactive trunk bracing (plexidur Garchois brace) is used in some countries to reduce the degree of deformity and to slow the progression of scoliosis in order to delay consideration of surgical intervention until puberty [Quijano-Roy et al 2010].

Speech therapy may be indicated.

Close attention to oral hygiene is indicated.

Assistance in education (school technical aide) and social and emotional support and stimulation can improve the sense of social involvement and productivity and can reduce the sense of social isolation common in those with CMD [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Steroid treatment using dosages based upon guidelines used in the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy has been reported in the dystroglycanopathies. In those who respond, the use of steroids appears to support prolonged ambulation [Godfrey et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Stretching exercises to prevent contractures

Positive-pressure hyperinsufflation pulmonary exercises to enhance thoracic growth and reduce thoracic cage rigidity and contractures

Medications such as laxatives to prevent constipation, medication for gastroesophageal reflux (GER), and oral caloric supplements as required

Trunk bracing in those with severe axial or cervical hypotonia with spinal collapse to prevent severe spinal deformities and to allow a stable and comfortable position when sitting or standing (during use of an upright stander). Of note, when such bracing is used, pulmonary assessment is needed to monitor for evidence of secondary respiratory compromise or complications.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of respiratory function using pulmonary function testing or spirometry with measurements in sitting and supine positions to detect diaphragmatic involvement that increases the risk of nocturnal hypoventilation. When the forced vital capacity in the supine position is less than 60% of normal values, respiratory function should be monitored by pulse oximetry and/or arterial blood gases and, where available, polysomnography.

Clinical examination and x-rays as needed to monitor for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity (scoliosis, thoracic lordosis or kyphosis, lumbar hyperlordosis)

Monitoring of cardiac function every six to 12 months (by echocardiography, ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording) in those individuals with respiratory insufficiency with or without mechanical ventilation and/or CMD subtypes prone to cardiomyopathy (L-CMD, dystroglycanopathies) and cardiac rhythm disturbances (L-CMD)

Monitoring of neurologic function and EEG in those with CMD subtypes associated with seizures or if clinically indicated

Routine complete eye examinations in those with dystroglycanopathies to monitor for changes in vision and/or changes that suggest development of cataracts and/or evidence of retinal detachment

Note: In those with laminin alpha-2 deficiency the white matter changes do not require follow-up brain MRI.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic/neuropediatric examination. Assessment of strength and motor function; in children, assessment of motor, speech, and cognitive development

Respiratory care. Assessment of respiratory function with baseline pulmonary function tests including forced vital capacity in sitting and supine positions and blood gas exchange. Polysomnography to identify individuals with nocturnal hypoventilation. Symptoms of hypercapnea that should be discussed: daytime headache, restless sleep, loss of concentration, snoring, recurrent respiratory infections, and weight loss. Respiratory studies may be normal between episodes in patients who experience acute crises.

Assessment of contractures and joint deformities by physiatrists and orthopedists; radiologic examinations if spinal deformity is observed

Speech therapy evaluation if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present

For early-onset forms, assessment of feeding abilities (sucking, swallowing, gastroesophageal reflux) and growth parameters to determine the need for feeding interventions such as gavage feeding or gastrostomy insertion

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There are no recent published consensus guidelines for the management of CMS treatment.

Medical Treatment

The choice of medical treatment varies with the CMS subtype [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. Therefore, it seems reasonable to consider a first-line genetic testing to evaluate the genetic subtype. However, there may be individual clinical situations demanding an immediate therapeutic trial. Monotherapy is the usual course of treatment for congenital myasthenia; however, a combination of drugs may be necessary to optimize the therapeutic effect and to minimize side effects.

Acetylcholineesterase (AChE) inhibitors (pyridostigmine). Although the majority of individuals with CMS benefit from AChE inhibitors (pyridostigmine), some myasthenic symptoms may remain refractory to treatment even in individuals who are otherwise responsive. Certain CMS subtypes (see Table 2) including endplate (EP) AChE deficiency, slow-channel CMS (SCCMS), and DOK7-related CMS are refractory to or deteriorate with AChE inhibitors [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013].

3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP). Alternatively or in addition to AChE inhibitors, the potassium channel blocker 3,4-DAP may be used [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. This drug increases the release of ACh and prolongs the presynaptic action potential. Of note, two children with fast-channel CMS (FCCMS; caused by autosomal recessive loss-of-function variants of the genes encoding the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunits that shorten the time that the AChR channel is open) died when started on 3,4-DAP [Beeson et al 2005]. Although a relation to 3,4-DAP has not been proven, clinicians must be cautious when using 3,4-DAP in young children and in individuals with FCCMS.

Ephedrine treatment shows positive effects in different subtypes of CMS [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013, Vrinten et al 2014] and may be an alternative treatment option for CMS subtypes that are refractory to AChE inhibitors, such as COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Bestue-Cardiel et al 2005, Schara et al 2009, Lashley et al 2010, Witting & Vissing 2014]. It is well tolerated by most patients and improvement in strength can be profound.

Albuterol, an alternative to ephedrine, may have a role in the treatment of COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Liewluck et al 2011, Burke et al 2013, Lorenzoni et al 2013, Witting & Vissing 2014].

Quinidine, fluoxetine. Some individuals with genetically defined SCCMS (caused by autosomal dominant gain-of-function variants of the genes encoding the AChR subunits that prolong the time that the AChR channel is open) have been successfully treated with quinidine, a long-lived open-channel blocker of AChR [Harper & Engel 1998]. Quinidine in turn may be detrimental in individuals with AChR deficiency.

The therapeutic benefit of fluoxetine in SCCMS has been shown [Harper et al 2003, Colomer et al 2006]; however, it may induce suicidal ideation; thus, caution is strongly suggested in its use in childhood [Engel 2007].

Overall fluoxetine appears to be the accepted first-line treatment in SCCMS, whereas quinidine is the treatment of choice in children and teenagers because of the risk of psychiatric side effects associated with fluoxetine [Chaouch et al 2012a, Chaouch et al 2012b].

Non-Medical Treatment

In addition to medical therapy, a multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMS subtype, and rate of progression.

Depending on the individual clinical situation the clinical management may include the following:

Physical and occupational therapy

Speech therapy

Orthotics or a wheelchair

A percutaneous gastric tube

Ventilatory support

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Sudden respiratory insufficiency or apneic attacks provoked by fever or infections are common in individuals with pathogenic variants in CHAT or RAPSN, even if the myasthenic symptoms are mild between crises. These individuals should receive prophylactic anticholinesterase therapy. Note: Less frequently, acute respiratory events may also occur in other CMS subtypes. Parents of infants are advised to use apnea monitors and be trained in CPR.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Side effects of drugs used to treat myasthenic symptoms should be carefully monitored. If necessary, individual doses should be adjusted or treatment should be stopped. For example, quinidine has some major side effects including torsades de pointes (a potentially life-threatening arrhythmia), hypotension, cinchonism (or quininism), and hypersensitivity reactions. In individuals with CMS, adverse effects including exacerbation of weakness and development of respiratory failure may occur.

Surveillance

Routine surveillance of muscle strength and respiratory function is recommended. In some patients, especially those with COLQ and DOK7 pathogenic variants, slowly progressive respiratory impairment is seen with increasing age. Symptoms of nighttime hypoventilation should be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

A number of drugs are known to affect neuromuscular transmission and therefore exacerbate symptoms of myasthenia gravis (e.g., ciprofloxacin, chloroquine, procaine, lithium, phenytoin, beta-blockers, procainamide, and quinidine). These drugs are not absolutely contraindicated and may be used with caution in CMS. See Medications and Myasthenia Gravis (Table 2) for a more complete.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures, especially newborns or young children, who could benefit from early treatment to prevent sudden respiratory failure.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Neurologic/neuropediatric examination, electrophysiologic testing (repetitive nerve stimulation) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Data on pregnancies in CMS are limited. Seventeen pregnancies were reported in eight French patients with CMS [Servais et al 2013]. According to these data pregnancy was a frequent cause of clinical exacerbation but the vast majority of patients recovered their pre-pregnancy clinical status six months after delivery. The children’s outcome was excellent, except for one newborn who developed a severe, neonatal (autosomal dominant) slow-channel CMS. Pregnant patients should be closely followed by neurologists during the course of pregnancy. Careful respiratory and cardiac surveillance should be initiated in consultation with obstetric specialists.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a GDAP1-related hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (GDAP1-HMSN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessments regarding muscle weakness and gait and need for ankle foot orthoses, walking aids, and/or a wheelchair [Kennedy et al 2016]

Speech therapy assessment if hoarseness is present or vocal cord paresis is suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with GDAP1-HMSN are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Corrado et al 2016, McCorquodale et al 2016]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following [Mathis et al [2015]:

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles tendon shortening.

Exercise within the affected individual's capability

Note: (1) Fatigue may improve with exercise; (2) unconfirmed anecdotal observations suggest benefit from the stimulant modafinil [Carter et al 2006, Ramdharry et al 2012].

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Guillebastre et al 2011, Phillips et al 2012]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Boffeli & Tabatt 2015, Faldini et al 2015, Ferraro et al 2017]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchair for mobility because of gait instability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) [Kroenke et al 2009]

Treatment of neuropathic pain with tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin [Shy 2006, Bril et al 2011, Ribiere et al 2012, Jeong et al 2013]

Weight control to avoid obesity, which has a negative effect on gait and balance

Career and employment counseling because of persistent weakness of hands and/or feet

Individual psychotherapy, group therapy, and/or antidepressant medication for depression [Cordeiro et al 2014]

Treatment may require involvement of specialists to evaluate and manage potential complications, including the following:

Lower urinary tract involvement [Krhut et al 2014]

Obstructive sleep apnea and restless legs [Boentert et al 2014]

Pulmonary compromise and/or phrenic nerve involvement [Aboussouan et al 2007]

Vocal cord paresis

Hip dysplasia [Bamford et al 2009, Novais et al 2014]

Note: No special diet (including supplements with essential fatty acids, vitamin E, or creatine) has been shown to be beneficial [Mathis et al 2015].

Surveillance

Regular evaluations to determine:

Neurologic status and need for treatment (or change in treatment) for musculoskeletal and/or neuropathic pain;

Functional disability and need for change in physical therapy regime and/or augmentative devices for activities of daily living and mobility;

Need for change in diet to control weight;

Need to involve specialists to evaluate and treat potential complications.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Obesity because of its negative effect on gait and balance

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with HMSN (CMT) ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and knowledge about agents/circumstances to avoid.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Mathis et al [2015] discuss more speculative possible future therapies for HMSN including neurotrophic factors, targeting transport defects, enhancement of autophagy-lysosomal pathways, and neuroregeneration.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DNM2-related intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (DI-CMTB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Electrophysiologic studies to establish a baseline for further monitoring of disease progression

Complete blood count (CBC) with absolute neutrophil count (ANC) to evaluate for neutropenia

Ophthalmologic examination for cataract

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of DI-CMTB is symptomatic and involves evaluation and management by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. Due to the great phenotypic variability, disease treatment should be tailored to the individual’s needs.

Treatment may include:

Ankle/foot orthoses

Orthopedic surgery

Forearm crutches or canes; rarely, wheelchairs

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs)

Career and employment counseling

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most common secondary complications include foot contractures and acquired foot deformities, difficulty walking, and, in severe cases, inability to ambulate. Physical therapies such as stretching and exercise are recommended to prevent these secondary complications.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes regular evaluation by the multidisciplinary team to determine neurologic status and functional disability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although no systemic studies have been done concerning pregnancy in women with DI-CMTB, there are reports of an increased occurrence of abnormal fetal presentation and maternal postpartum bleeding in women with CMT in general [Hoff et al 2005]. The early miscarriage rate is not increased in women with CMT [Argov & de Visser 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1 (CMT1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

NCV to help distinguish demyelinating, axonal, and mixed forms of neuropathy

Detailed family history

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with CMT1 are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter 1997, Grandis & Shy 2005].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support; affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Ramdharry et al 2012a].

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008, Boffeli & Tabatt 2015]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability for some individuals; fewer than 5% of individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability; many remain physically active. Exercise is not detrimental to persons with CMT [Piscosquito et al 2014].

Serial night casting to help increase ankle flexibility [Rose et al 2010]

Accurate identification, as far as possible, of the cause of pain:

Musculoskeletal pain may respond to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents [Carter et al 1998].

Neuropathic pain may respond to tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin.

Career and employment counseling to address persistent weakness of hands and/or feet

Interventions designed to improve leg cramps, tremor, agility, endurance, and ankle flexibility, thereby improving quality of life; see Burns et al [2010] study of children with CMT1A.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No treatment reverses or slows the natural progression of CMT.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Surveillance

Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Rudnik-Schöneborn et al [1993] evaluated 45 pregnancies in 21 women with CMT1. Worsening of the CMT1 symptoms during or after gestation was reported in about half of pregnancies. A follow-up study of 63 pregnancies in 33 women with CMT showed no serious complications but 20% of women reported a worsening of symptoms during pregnancy [Awater et al 2012]. In a study of affected pregnant women in Norway, deliveries involved a higher occurrence of presentation anomalies, use of forceps, and operative delivery; the women also experienced increased post-partum bleeding [Hoff et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Reilly & Shy [2009], Roberts [2012], and Patel & Pleasure [2013] have reviewed research on potential new treatments of CMT.

Dyck et al [1982], Ginsberg et al [2004], and Carvalho et al [2005] have described a few individuals with CMT1 and sudden deterioration in whom treatment with steroids (prednisone) or IVIg has produced variable levels of improvement. Nerve biopsy has shown lymphocytic infiltration. One such family had a specific MPZ pathogenic variant (p.Ile99Thr) [Donaghy et al 2000].

Sahenk et al [2005] studied the effects of neurotrophin-3 (NT3) on individuals with CMT1A. This same group has shown benefit of NT3 delivered by adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene therapy in a mouse model of CMT1A [Sahenk et al 2014].

Passage et al [2004] reported benefit from ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in a mouse model of CMT1. Similar benefit was reported with a progesterone receptor antagonist in a rat model of CMT [Meyer zu Horste et al 2007]. Two high-dose (1,000-1,500 mg/day) treatment trials of ascorbic acid in CMT1A have found no beneficial effect over a period of one to two years [Verhamme et al 2009b, Pareyson et al 2011]. Lewis et al [2013] also could not find a positive treatment response to ascorbic acid vs. placebo in 110 subjects with CMT1A.

Patzkó et al [2012] provided evidence for the potential use of curcumin in the treatment of individuals with CMT1B who have pathogenic variants in MPZ.

Fledrich et al [2014] suggested neuregulin-1 as a potential treatment for CMT1A based on experiments in a rat model of the disease.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth hereditary neuropathy type 2 (CMT2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV)

Complete family history

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005, McCorquodale et al 2016].

The following may be indicated:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Treatment of sleep apnea or restless legs [Aboussouan et al 2007]

Exercise within the individual's capability. In a systematic review of all reports of exercise for CMT, Sman et al [2015] identified the following significant improvements following exercise: strength, functional activities, and physiologic adaptations. The optimal exercise modality and intensity for people with CMT as well as the long-term safety of exercise remain unclear.

Pain and depression should be treated symptomatically [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord-stretching exercises help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening.

Surveillance

Gait and condition of feet should be monitored to determine need for bracing, special shoes, or surgery.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

A German study reviewed 63 pregnancies in 33 women with CMT and found no increase in the frequency of cesarean sections, forceps deliveries, premature births, or neonatal problems [Awater et al 2012].

Argov & de Visser [2009] reviewed pregnancy issues in hereditary neuromuscular disorders including CMT.

Greenwood & Scott [2007] have described the obstetric approach to women with mild and severe forms of CMT.

A Norway study found a higher than average rate of operative deliveries among women with CMT [Hoff et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Mathis et al [2015] have reviewed the future of therapeutic options in CMT.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth hereditary neuropathy type 2A (CMT2A), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

EMG with NCV

Visual evoked potentials

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The affected individual is often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles tendon shortening

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Holmes & Hansen 1993, Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchairs for mobility because of gait instability

Exercise within the individual's capability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents [Carter et al 1998]

Treatment of neuropathic pain with tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin

Career and employment counseling because of persistent weakness of hands and/or feet

Surveillance

Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, and visual acuity is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Dyck et al [1982], Donaghy et al [2000], and Ginsberg et al [2004] have described a few individuals with CMT1 and sudden deterioration in whom treatment with steroids (prednisone) or intravenous immunoglobulin has produced variable levels of improvement. No similar report on CMT2A exists.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical/neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

Electromyography (EMG) with nerve conduction velocity (NCV)

ENT consultation with laryngoscopy, as needed to document the status of the vocal folds

Pulmonary function testing and dynamic breathing chest x-ray

Hearing assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for different types of hearing assessment.)

Skeletal x-rays to document any associated skeletal dysplasia

Clinical genetics/genetic counseling consultation

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Skeletal radiographs to document involvement of the long bones and spine, which can help determine patient needs as well as provide a baseline for comparison with future studies

Flexion/extension cervical spine films to determine if there is atlanto-axial instability secondary to odontoid hypoplasia

Pulmonary function tests and/or sleep study if the thorax is particularly narrow and/or kyphoscoliosis is progressive

Hearing assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for different types of hearing assessment.)

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005].

For treatment of findings common to all

TRPV4-associated disorders

Sensorineural hearing loss. Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the extent of hearing loss and the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of management issues.)

Pain and depression. Symptomatic treatment

For the TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders the following are indicated:

Neuropathy

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity as needed [Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches, canes/walkers for gait stability, and wheelchairs

Exercise within the individual's capability (Many individuals remain physically active.)

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006]

Vocal cord involvement

Laryngeal surgery for vocal fold paresis (arytenoidectomy and tracheostomy)

Speech therapy

Respiratory dysfunction. Respiratory therapy/support (e.g., BiPAP)

For the TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias the following treatments may be indicated:

Physical therapy/exercise to maintain as much function as possible. Daily heel cord-stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.

Orthopedic evaluation with consideration of surgical intervention (i.e., spinal fusion) when kyphoscoliosis compromises pulmonary function and/or causes pain

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression. To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, it is preferred that intervention in children occur when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation. Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI. The patient should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression (which can influence physical function). Note that chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.

Surveillance

TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders. Annual:

Neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, and sensory loss

Physical therapy examination to monitor feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery

ENT consultation with laryngoscopy

Dynamic breathing chest x-ray

Hearing assessment

TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias

Annual assessment for the development of joint pain and scoliosis

Cervical spinal films to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia before:

A child reaches school age;

Surgical procedures involving general anesthesia

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No specific data are available for TRPV4-associated neuromuscular or skeletal disorders.

In general, obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult for individuals with neuropathy, skeletal dysplasia, or both.

For neuromuscular disorders. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

For skeletal dysplasias

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no registry or data regarding the frequency or outcome of pregnancies in women with a TRPV4-related disorder; however, the following general information may be reasonable to consider.

Ideally a woman with a TRPV4-associated disorder would seek consultation from a high-risk OB/GYN or maternal-fetal-medicine specialist to evaluate her risks for pregnancy and delivery.

TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders.

Argov & de Visser [2009] reviewed pregnancy issues in hereditary neuromuscular disorders including CMTs.

About 50% of women with CMT described increased weakness during pregnancy that usually resolved post partum [Rudnik-Schoneborn et al 1993].

Operative deliveries were reported more commonly in women with CMT in Norway [Hoff et al 2005]. Greenwood & Scott [2007] described the obstetric approach to women with mild and severe forms of CMT.

A recent German study reviewed 63 pregnancies in 33 women with CMT [Awater et al 2012] and found no increase in the frequency of Cesarean section, forceps delivery, premature birth, or neonatal problems. About one third of mothers felt a worsening of CMT symptoms during pregnancy; in one fifth of mothers the changes were felt to be persistent.

TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias. In TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias, the degree of pulmonary compromise (from the short trunk and decreased lung capacity) may affect the ability to carry a pregnancy to term. Thus, it is unlikely a woman with metatropic dysplasia could carry a pregnancy.

A pregnant woman with a TRPV4-assocaited skeletal dysplasia generally undergo cæsarean section delivery because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.To establish the diagnosis and extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with GARS-associated axonal neuropathy, nerve conduction studies and EMG of arms and legs are recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment includes:

Prosthetic and adaptive devices for weak hands. Numerous devices are available for various activities of daily living.

Ankle support, toe-up braces, and ankle-foot orthotics, as necessary to improve gait.

Prevention of Secondary Complications 

Stretching exercises, finger splints, and ankle braces to prevent contractures and deformities are appropriate.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes periodic assessment by a neurologist and/or a neuromuscular disorders specialist to assess progression of weakness in the limbs and determine the need for use of prosthetic and assistive devices.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid 

Avoid neurotoxic agents (chemotherapy that may cause peripheral nerve injury).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2E/1F (CMT2E/1F), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

NCV to help distinguish demyelinating, axonal, and mixed neuropathies

Complete family history

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005].

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed.

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking.

Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Holmes & Hansen 1993, Guyton & Mann 2000].

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Exercise is encouraged within the individual's capability and many individuals remain physically active.

Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.

Pain should be treated symptomatically [Gemignani et al 2004].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Surveillance 

Monitoring of gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, surgery is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4 (CMT4), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

NCV to help determine whether the disease is axonal, demyelinating, or mixed

Detailed family history

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The affected individual is often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009, Rossor et al 2015].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% of affected individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.

Surveillance

Children's feet should be watched at regular intervals to provide for properly fitting shoes and avoid sores and skin breakdown.

It is appropriate to monitor gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risk from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No specific pregnancy management recommendations have been published. However, weight gain during pregnancy may produce additional gait disability.

Therapies Under Investigation

Ekins et al [2015] and Mathis et al [2015] have reviewed prior and ongoing treatment trials for CMT.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Career and employment may be influenced by the persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4C (CMT4C), the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination by a child neurologist to evaluate for weakness and atrophy, gait stability, sensory loss, and other associated signs. It is important to distinguish between neuropathic pain and mechanical pain.

Examination by a pediatric orthopedist to assess the amount and progression of spinal curvature and to determine the extent of foot deformities

Examination by an otolaryngologist and/or ophthalmologist if problems with hearing or vision are present

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. See Grandis & Shy [2005] for a discussion of general treatment for CMT.

Treatment of spinal deformities

Physiotherapy helps to preserve flexibility.

If the curvature can be reduced with bracing, either a plaster or a thermo-molded plastic corset can be used.

If bracing and physiotherapy together are not sufficient to correct the scoliosis, surgery can be performed at an early age, even before the end of linear growth (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Gabreëls-Festen et al 1999]. Surgical intervention requires consensus among the family, child (if possible), and attending physicians.

Treatment of foot deformities

Special shoes with good ankle support and/or ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Physiotherapy to preserve flexibility

In approximately 9% of individuals, surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Guyton & Mann 2000, Colomer et al 2006]

Treatment of pain and cramps

Neuropathic pain can be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., pregabalin, gabapentin).

Mechanical pain can generally be managed with a combination of physiotherapy and orthopedic treatment.

Cramps can be controlled with quinine. However, quinine is known to induce tinnitus and reversible high-tone hearing loss.

Other

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; some need wheelchairs.

Exercise to help the individual remain physically active according to his/her abilities is encouraged.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening.

Physical activity (e.g., swimming, bicycling, stretching) adapted to the abilities of each individual by a physiotherapist is useful to prevent contractures.

Individuals with diabetes mellitus need excellent foot care to avoid foot ulceration and necrosis.

Surveillance

Scoliosis needs to be closely followed. Monitoring four times a year is recommended.

Hand function and foot strength should be evaluated by an orthopedist every six months starting from the date of diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risks ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Consideration of motor nerve conduction velocities and nerve biopsy if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

CMT appears to be an independent risk factor for complications during pregnancy and delivery.

The symptoms of CMT can worsen during pregnancy; in particular: cramps, subjective sensitivity (e.g., paresthesias), difficulty walking, and fatigue.

In rare cases, crises occurring during pregnancy do not subside post partum.

A retrospective study in Norway between 1967 and 2002 comparing 108 births to mothers with CMT with 2.1 million births to mothers without CMT determined that mothers with CMT more frequently needed interventions during delivery [Hoff et al 2005]. Bleeding post partum was also more common in mothers with CMT.

It has been postulated that fetal presentation tends to be abnormal because of the combination of CMT in the mother and fetus [Rayl et al 1996, Hoff et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

See Grandis & Shy [2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Career and employment may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.

Anesthesia. Relatively few studies reported in the literature address risks of anesthesia in patients with CMT. No complications were observed after anesthesia in a large cohort followed in specialized consultation, but the advice of the anesthesiologist should be followed.

Although it had no adverse effects in 41 persons with CMT [Antognini 1992], use of succinylcholine for general anesthesia is usually contraindicated.

Blockers of the neuromuscular junction should be used with caution.

Local-regional anesthesia, especially epidural analgesia at child birth, has been used without problems in CMT. This use of anesthesia should be discussed on a case-by-case basis with the anesthesiologist.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4H (CMT4H), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, sensory loss, and skeletal deformities. In children with CMT, one should use the CMTPedS score defined by Burns et al [2012], a reliable, well-tolerated, valid, and sensitive global measure of disability for children with CMT from the age of 3 years [Burns et al 2012].

Although the CMT Neuropathy Score (CMTNS) and CMTNS version 2 (CMTNS2) are widely used in the diagnosis of CMT [Shy et al 2005, Murphy et al 2011], they have shown limited potential in measuring disability and disease severity in children younger than age ten years [Haberlová & Seeman 2010, Pagliano et al 2011].

The transition from the CMTPedS in childhood to the CMTNS2 in adulthood has been evaluated [Burns et al 2013]; together, the two measures provide a continuum for lifelong measurement of disability in patients with CMT.

Orthopedic consultation to evaluate skeletal deformities such as foot deformities (pes cavus) and scoliosis and to determine the need for a surgery and/or ankle/foot orthoses

Clinical genetics consultation and/or pediatric neurology consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with CMT4H are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Grandis & Shy 2005].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Physiotherapy with daily heel cord stretching exercises to help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening and physical activity adapted to the abilities of each individual to prevent contractures and help preserve flexibility

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Surgery to correct spine deformities

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchairs as needed because of gait instability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) [Carter et al 1998]

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes annual evaluation by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4J (CMT4J), the following evaluations are recommended:

Pulmonary function tests to determine whether respiratory functions are compromised

Skeletal survey to determine if any of the skeletal abnormalities typically observed in Yunis-Varón syndrome (YVS) are evident. Non-neural deficits are often severe and overshadow neurologic symptoms. Thus far, no neuromuscular involvement has been identified in persons with YVS.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific treatment reverses the manifestations of CMT4J.

Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; severely affected individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active

BIPAP for those with respiratory muscle weakness

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Ankle braces can help prevent tripping and falling or ankle injuries.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual follow up with a neurologist for overall evaluation of neurologic deficits

Annual follow up with occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) to assess fine motor and gross motor function

Annual follow up with a pulmonologist for evaluation of respiratory function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Because the segmental demyelination in patients with CMT4J is similar to that observed in acquired demyelinating neuropathies, a few patients have been treated with intravenous immunoglobin [Cottenie et al 2013]. No obvious effect has been observed.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 1 (CMTX1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss

NCV to determine axonal, demyelinating, or mixed features

Detailed family history

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists.

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed.

Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking.

Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity.

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Exercise is encouraged within the affected individual's capability, and many remain physically active.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No treatment that reverses or slows the natural process of CMT exists.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Surveillance

Regular foot examination for pressure sores or poorly fitting footwear is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CMTX5, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Pure tone audiograms, auditory brain stem response test

Evaluation of visual acuity, fundoscopic examination

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Peripheral neuropathy. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth Hereditary Neuropathy Overview, Management.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management.

Optic atrophy. Use of routine low-vision aids as needed is appropriate.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises are desirable to prevent Achilles’ tendon shortening from peripheral neuropathy, which can occur in individuals with CMTX5.

Surveillance

Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising otologists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, physiatrists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability. While profound hearing loss begins during infancy, optic neuropathy and peripheral neuropathy in CMTX5 vary in age of onset of manifestations and progression. Thus, regular ophthalmologic and neurologic exams are warranted to monitor symptom development and progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk males at birth with detailed audiometry to assure early diagnosis and treatment of hearing loss.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation could theoretically alleviate some of the symptoms of Arts syndrome by providing an oral source of purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. An adult with HPRT deficiency is reported to have benefitted neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006].

An open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome is continuing [J Christodoulou et al, unpublished data; approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia]. Oral SAM supplementation is presently set at 30 mg/kg/day. The boys appear to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however, slight deterioration in their vision has been noted.

Mildly affected carrier females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested. Whether treatment with SAM supplementation would benefit individuals with allelic disorders (PRS superactivity, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5) remains to be investigated.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Cockayne syndrome (CS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of growth

Developmental assessment

Dental evaluation

Dermatologic evaluations

Ophthalmologic evaluations (possibly including electroretinogram)

Audiologic evaluation (including audiogram)

Brain MRI

Laboratory studies to assess renal and hepatic function

Testing for diabetes mellitus and disorders of calcium metabolism

Skeletal x-rays to document the presence of skeletal dysplasia

Nerve conduction studies to document the presence of a demyelinating neuropathy

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Individualized educational program for developmental delay

Physical therapy and assistive devices to maintain ambulation in the presence of gait abnormalities

Feeding gastrostomy tube placement for failure to thrive

Medication for spasticity (baclofen) and tremor (carbidopa-levodopa) if needed

Management of hearing loss

Management of cataracts and other ophthalmologic complications

Use of sunscreens for cutaneous photosensitivity

Use of sunglasses for lens and retina protection

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Recommended measures:

Physical therapy to prevent joint contractures

Aggressive dental care to minimize dental caries

Home safety assessments to prevent falls

Surveillance

Yearly reassessment for known potential complications (e.g., hypertension; renal or hepatic dysfunction; declining vision and hearing) is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Excessive sun exposure should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In pregnant women affected with CS, the limited size of the pelvis and abdomen is the major obstacle to the growth of the fetus and the major threat to the outcome of the pregnancy. Prevention of premature labor and caesarean section under spinal anesthesia are usually needed [Lahiri & Davies 2003, Rawlinson & Webster 2003].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Growth hormone (GH) levels in individuals with Cockayne syndrome (CS) may be elevated or decreased [Park et al 1994, Hamamy et al 2005]. While individuals with CS do not appear to have an increased risk of malignancy (an effect which may be due to simultaneous transcription and cell proliferation deficiency), it is theoretically possible that GH treatment could reverse this compensatory effect and promote tumor growth. Therefore, in the absence of safety and efficacy data, GH treatment cannot be recommended in individuals with CS.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Neurologic and/or developmental examination to record developmental milestones and identify neurologic symptoms or deficits

Evaluation for occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed

Gastrointestinal evaluation for feeding difficulties or poor growth

Dietary evaluation by a nutritionist as needed

Ophthalmologic examination, including a dilated fundus examination and visual acuity

Audiology evaluation with auditory brain stem response testing and otoacoustic emission testing to assess for hearing loss

Echocardiogram to evaluate for structural cardiac defects

Renal ultrasonography to evaluate for structural kidney or genitourinary (GU) anomalies

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapies to optimize developmental outcomes

Feeding therapy, nutritional supplementation, and/or gastrostomy tube placement as needed to meet nutritional needs

Spectacles as needed to correct refractive errors and surgery as needed for strabismus and/or ptosis

Hearing aids as needed

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Therapies and interventions which can prevent secondary complications mirror the recommended treatments for an individual’s particular needs. This may include developmental therapies, appropriate cardiac, gastrointestinal, and neurologic evaluations and treatments, and ophthalmologic and audiologic surveillance.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Annual follow up with a gastroenterologist and feeding specialists as needed to monitor feeding and weight gain

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Because of the rarity of tumors in CSS, the utility of tumor surveillance has not been determined.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

As no females with CSS have been reported to reproduce, potential complications of pregnancy are unknown.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Cohen syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess visual acuity, position and size of the lens, refractive error, and severity of the retinal dystrophy

Developmental assessment

Hematologic evaluation including a white blood cell count with differential to identify neutropenia

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Ophthalmologic issues are among the most concerning for families of individuals with Cohen syndrome registered in the National Cohen Syndrome Database. Management includes the following:

Spectacle correction of refractive errors

Low vision assessment with training as needed for the visually impaired

Psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families

Early intervention and physical, occupational, and speech therapy are appropriate to address gross developmental delay, hypotonia, joint hypermobility, and motor clumsiness.

If neutropenia is documented, consideration may be given to the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). In a study reported by Kivitie-Kallio et al [1997] response to adrenaline stimulation and to hydrocortisone was subnormal in 12 of 14 individuals and in eight of 16 individuals, respectively. However, recombinant G-CSF, administered to three individuals in the study, caused granulocytosis in all three.

Recurrent infections should be treated per standard therapy.

Surveillance

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation should assess visual acuity, refractive error, cataracts in older individuals, and/or retinal dystrophy.

Annual hematologic evaluation should include complete blood count and differential to assess neutropenia. More frequent monitoring may be needed for individuals with lower ANC or more frequent infections.

Growth and weight gain should be monitored.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Caution should be used regarding medications with the potential to decrease the neutrophil count.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Anecdotal reports notwithstanding, pycnogenol, a standard French maritime pine bark extract effective in improving visual acuity in retinal vascular leakage conditions [Schönlau & Rohdewald 2001, Spadea & Balestrazzi 2001], has not proven an effective treatment for the retinal dystrophy in Cohen syndrome.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with COL4A1-related disorders, the following are recommended:

Brain MRI including T1-weighted saggital, T2-weighted axial, and FLAIR axial images

Brain angiographic CT scan

Ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopic examination and slit-lamp examination

Kidney and liver ultrasound examination or CT

Measurement of serum CK concentration

Measurement of serum creatinine concentration and estimation of the glomerular filtration rate

Evaluation for the presence of hematuria

Electrocardiogram (ECG); echocardiography and ambulatory ECG monitoring in individuals presenting with palpitations

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hypertensive individuals must be treated to reduce the global risk of stroke.

Supportive care including practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

No specific support exists for individuals with COL4A1-related disorders.

Seizures are managed using standard protocols.

Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with severe lens opacities.

Glaucoma is initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication. Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy.

Symptomatic paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmia should be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs (beta blockers).

Surgical or endovascular treatment should be discussed for asymptomatic intracranial aneurysms >10.0 mm in diameter.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Avoidance of anticoagulant exposure and activities that involve an increased risk for head trauma may decrease the risk for intracerebral hemorrhage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Surveillance

The interval at which individuals with COL4A1-related disorders should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms.

Annual clinical evaluation is reasonable.

Regular brain imaging can be proposed, especially to evaluate the size of asymptomatic cerebral aneurysms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Smoking because it increases the global risk of stroke

Hypertension because it increases the risk of stroke

Sustained head pressure during birth or postnatal physical activities that may cause head trauma [Gould et al 2006]

Anticoagulant use [Gould et al 2006]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean delivery for pregnancies in which the fetus is at risk for a COL4A1-related disorder is recommended to prevent brain vascular injury attributable to birth trauma in newborns [Gould et al 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation including brain MRI

Renal evaluation with particular attention to the presence of proteinuria

Cardiac evaluation including echocardiography with particular attention to possible hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Ophthalmologic evaluation with particular attention to possible retinopathy and optic atrophy

Audiometry with particular attention to possible sensorineural hearing loss

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Pharmacologic Treatment

Coenzyme Q10 supplementation. Individuals with primary CoQ10 deficiency may respond well to high-dose oral CoQ10 supplementation (ranging from 5 to 50 mg/kg/day). Soluble formulations are apparently more bioavailable [Desbats et al 2015a].

Treatment should be instituted as early as possible [Montini et al 2008] because it can limit disease progression and reverse some manifestations; however, established severe neurologic and/or renal damage cannot be reversed.

Individuals with the following genetic causes of primary CoQ10 deficiency apparently respond well to CoQ10 supplementation:

COQ4-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Neurologic signs responded to CoQ10 supplementation in a single individual reported to date with a heterozygous deletion encompassing COQ4 [Salviati et al 2012]; no response was observed in patients reported by Chung et al [2015].

COQ6-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Homozygotes for the pathogenic variants p.Gly255Arg or p.Ala353Asp responded [Heeringa et al 2011].

COQ8B-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. In a patient homozygous for a truncating pathogenic variant, edema resolved and proteinuria was significantly improved.

PDSS2-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. The only kindred reported responded [Rötig et al 2000].

Data for response to CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with mutation of other genes causing primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency are limited or lacking:

COQ8A-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. While most affected individuals respond poorly to CoQ10 supplementation, three individuals had a favorable response: one had objective stabilization of ataxia [Lagier-Tourenne et al 2008]; one had a dramatic and long-lasting improvement of dystonia and myoclonus after six months of treatment; and in one tremor and drawing ability improved [Mignot et al 2013].

COQ9-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. One patient with multiple-system disease characterized by intractable seizures, global developmental delay, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and renal tubular dysfunction did not respond to CoQ10 supplementation; however, this may be due to late diagnosis [Duncan et al 2009].

Ineffective treatments (or those without validated effects) for individuals with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency include the following CoQ10 derivatives:

Ubiquinol, the reduced form of CoQ10, has recently become commercially available; however, data on the therapeutic dosage and its efficacy are still lacking.

Short chain quinone analogs such as idebenone [Rötig et al 2000, López et al 2010] have been reported to cause clinical deterioration in individuals with CoQ10 deficiency [Hargreaves 2014].

Renal Disease

ACE inhibitors may be used in combination with CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with proteinuria [Heeringa et al 2011].

Renal transplantation is an option for those with end-stage renal disease [Salviati et al 2005].

Other

Treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, retinopathy, and sensorineural hearing loss is routine (see Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Early CoQ10 supplementation may prevent the onset of manifestations of primary CoQ10 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

While surveillance depends on the specific genetic defect and on the clinical manifestations (see Table 1), it should always include periodic evaluations of the following: neurologic findings, urine analysis (for proteinuria) and renal function, ophthalmologic findings, and hearing.

Note: Because cardiomyopathy to date has been found only in the most severe phenotype (i.e., neonatal onset), cardiac evaluation should be performed at the time of diagnosis, but not periodically unless cardiac involvement has been documented.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Given the importance of early CoQ10 supplementation, it is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband who has primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those sibs who would benefit from early initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known and the diagnosis has been established by biochemical findings, one can consider measuring CoQ10 levels in skin fibroblasts of at-risk sibs [Desbats et al 2015b].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Costello syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters, including head circumference

Nutritional assessment

Cardiologic evaluation with two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography, baseline electrocardiography, and Holter examination as needed. Children with HCM and arrhythmia require specialty pediatric cardiology care, which may include exercise testing in certain older cooperative individuals.

Brain MRI, including MRI of the spinal cord as needed, in order to evaluate for Chiari I malformation and sryingomyelia

Ophthalmology evaluation

Clinical assessment of spine and extremities, with particular concern for hip joint abnormalities and range of motion

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Growth. Most infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. Because of gastroesophageal reflux and irritability, Nissen fundoplication is often performed. Pyloric stenosis is treated surgically.

Anecdotally, affected children have very high caloric needs. Even after nutrition is improved through supplemental feeding, growth retardation persists.

Cardiac. Treatment of cardiac manifestations is generally the same as in the general population. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with an identified cardiac abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history [Lin et al 2011]. Ongoing studies of the natural history will continue to define management for older individuals. Arrhythmias have been well documented, but incompletely defined from a management point of view. Non-reentrant tachycardia (chaotic atrial rhythm/multifocal tachycardia) may require aggressive anti-arrhythmic drugs or ablation.

Pharmacologic and surgical treatment (myectomy) has been used to address severe cardiac hypertrophy.

Individuals with Costello syndrome and severe cardiac problems may choose to wear a Medic Alert® bracelet.

Skeletal. Ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers responds well to early bracing and occupational and/or physical therapy.

Limited extension of large joints should be addressed early through physical therapy. Surgical tendon lengthening, usually of the Achilles tendon, is often required. Hip joint abnormalities are common and may require surgical correction.

Kyphoscoliosis may require surgical correction.

Central nervous system. When seizures occur, underlying causes (including hydrocephalus, hypoglycemia, and low serum cortisone concentration) need to be considered [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004].

Cognitive. Developmental disability should be addressed by early-intervention programs and individualized learning strategies.

Speech delay and expressive language limitations should be addressed early with appropriate therapy and later with an appropriate educational plan.

Alternate means of communication should be considered if expressive language is significantly limited.

Respiratory. A high index of suspicion should be maintained for obstructive sleep apnea as the cause of sleep disturbance.

Dental. Dental abnormalities should be addressed by a pediatric dentist.

Papillomata. Papillomata usually appear in the perinasal region and less commonly in the perianal region, torso, and extremities. While they are mostly of cosmetic concern, papillomata may give rise to irritation or inflammation in hard-to-clean body regions and may be removed, as appropriate.

Recurrent facial papillomata have been successfully managed with regular dry ice removal.

Endocrinopathies. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Rarely, hypoglycemia occurs in older individuals and may present with seizures. Under these circumstances, growth hormone (GH) deficiency needs to be excluded as the underlying cause [Gripp et al 2000]. Hypoglycemic episodes unresponsive to GH therapy responded well to cortisone replacement in another individual [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004]; thus, cortisol deficiency may also be considered.

Malignant tumors. Treatment of malignant tumors follows standard protocols.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valvar pulmonic stenosis) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), available by prescription from the cardiologist or other physician caregiver. Because aortic dilation has not been studied long term, is infrequent, is typically mild-moderate in severity, and has not been associated with dissection to date, there are no data to recommend treatment; care should be individualized.

Sedation. Individuals with Costello syndrome may require relatively high doses of medication for sedation. No standardized information is available, but review of an individual's medical records documenting previously given dosages may provide guidance.

Anesthesia may pose a risk to individuals with some forms of unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or those who have a predisposition to some types of atrial tachycardia.

Surveillance

Hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Monitoring of blood glucose concentration should follow typical protocols for neonates at risk for hypoglycemia.

Cardiac. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with a cardiovascular abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history. Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we advise providers and families to receive individualized care by a pediatric cardiologist, transitioning to an adult specialist following the “best practices” for the particular defect. General guidelines [Lin et al 2011(see Figure 4)] can be pragmatically dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with close evaluation in the first two years of life depending on the severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations and appropriate risk stratification. It is beyond the scope of this review to delineate the complex decision making involved in treating HCM or atrial tachycardia.

Tumor screening consisting of abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and urine testing for catecholamine metabolites and hematuria was proposed by Gripp et al [2002]. However, a subsequent report [Gripp et al 2004] on elevated catecholamine metabolites in individuals with Costello syndrome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful.

Serial abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma was proposed every three to six months until age eight to ten years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annually beginning at age ten years to screen for bladder cancer [Gripp et al 2002].

Neither of the above screening approaches has yet been shown to be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important factor for early tumor detection continues to be parental and physician awareness of the increased cancer risk.

Bone density. Osteoporosis is common in young adults with Costello syndrome [White et al 2005]. Bone density assessment is recommended as a baseline, with follow up depending on the initial result.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The Ras/MAPK pathway has long been a drug development target because of its involvement in malignant tumors [Rauen 2007]. It is likely that drugs targeting this pathway will be considered for use in Costello syndrome and other disorders caused by germline pathogenic variants affecting pathway-related genes [Rauen et al 2008].

In a mouse model, the ACE inhibitor captopril appeared beneficial in reducing systemic hypertension and cardiomyopathy [Schuhmacher et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Growth hormone (GH) treatment. If treatment with growth hormone is contemplated, its unproven benefit and potential risks should be thoroughly discussed in view of the established risks of cardiomyopathy and malignancy in individuals with Costello syndrome and the unknown effect of growth hormone on these risks.

Unproven benefit. Individuals with Costello syndrome frequently have low GH levels:

True growth hormone deficiency requires GH replacement. Three individuals with GH deficiency showed increased growth velocity without adverse effects after three to seven years of replacement therapy, but two continued to have short stature [Stein et al 2004].

It is unclear from the literature if the use of GH is beneficial in individuals with Costello syndrome with partial growth hormone deficiency. An abnormal growth hormone response on testing and a good initial growth response have been reported [Legault et al 2001].

Cardiac hypertrophy. Whether the anabolic actions of growth hormone accelerate pre-existing cardiac hypertrophy is not known, but early descriptive studies do not suggest a clear association [Lin et al 2002, Lin et al 2011]. In rare cases, cardiomyopathy has progressed after initiation of growth hormone treatment; whether the relationship was causal or coincidental is unknown (see, e.g., Kerr et al [2003]).

Malignancy. The effect of growth hormone on tumor predisposition has not been determined. Two reports have raised the possibility of an association:

Bladder carcinoma occurred in a 16-year-old treated with growth hormone [Gripp et al 2000].

A rhabdomyosarcoma was diagnosed in a 26-month-old receiving growth hormone from age 12 months [Kerr et al 2003].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

In affected individuals who have profound and/or prolonged exposure to hypoglycemia: a complete neurologic evaluation to detect secondary neurologic damage

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Guidelines for the treatment of CPT1A deficiency can be found at newbornscreening.info and ghr.nlm.nih.gov.

When individuals present with acute hypoglycemia, sufficient amounts of intravenous fluid containing 10% dextrose should be provided as quickly as possible to correct hypoglycemia and to prevent lipolysis and subsequent mobilization of fatty acids into the mitochondria.

Because individuals presenting with profound hypoglycemia have little to no residual hepatic glycogen, treating physicians should continue the glucose infusion beyond the time that blood glucose concentration has normalized in order to provide sufficient substrate for glycogen synthesis.

A letter should be provided to affected individuals (or their parents/guardians) and involved health care providers alerting them to the potentially catastrophic metabolic crises for which these individuals are at risk and explaining the appropriate emergency treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

A high-carbohydrate diet (70% of calories) that is low in fat (<20% of calories) is generally recommended to provide a constant supply of carbohydrate energy, particularly during illness. Restriction of dietary fat intake is somewhat controversial when affected individuals are well. If the physician chooses to recommend a low-fat diet when the affected individual is well, supplementation with essential fatty acids is necessary.

Provision of approximately one third of total calories as medium-chain triglycerides is recommended during periods of illness. C6-C10 fatty acids do not require the carnitine shuttle for entry into the mitochondrion.

Frequent feeding is recommended, particularly for infants, given their limited glycogen reserves. Cornstarch feedings given overnight provide a constant source of slow-release carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycemia during sleep.

Older children should not fast for more than 12 hours and for a shorter time if evidence of a febrile or gastrointestinal illness exists.

Adults should be aware of the risks of fasting and they and their primary care physician should be aware of the risks during surgery when both metabolic stress and fasting occur.

Brief hospital admission for administration of intravenous dextrose-containing fluid should be considered in individuals with known CPT1A deficiency who are required to fast more than 12 hours because of illness or surgical or medical procedures.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of hypoglycemia reduces the risk of related neurologic damage.

Surveillance

At clinic appointments and during periods of reduced caloric intake and febrile illness that could precipitate metabolic decompensation, individuals with CPT1A deficiency should undergo liver function testing whether they are symptomatic or not. Tests should include liver enzymes, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and functional liver tests (including the blood-clotting tests PT and PTT).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged fasting should be avoided, especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness.

Potentially hepatotoxic agents such as valproate and salicylate should not be given, even though adverse effects of pharmacologic agents have not been reported in individuals with CPT1A deficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because presentation in later childhood is possible, it is appropriate to evaluate each sib of a proband, regardless of age, in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the CPT1A pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Enzyme analysis in cultured skin fibroblasts if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although data are limited, it is prudent to counsel unaffected female carriers regarding the risk for obstetric complications.

Women who have had one child with CPT1A deficiency following an uneventful pregnancy remain at risk for acute fatty liver of pregnancy in subsequent pregnancies with an affected fetus.

Pregnant females who are heterozygous for a CPT1A pathogenic variant should be monitored for acute fatty liver of pregnancy. In any pregnancies that follow identification of a child with CPT1A deficiency, liver function testing should be performed at each prenatal visit during the first two trimesters and more frequently during the third trimester when the risk for acute fatty liver of pregnancy is greatest. Management by a team comprising a maternal-fetal medicine specialist and a medical/biochemical geneticist is highly recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) deficiency, the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Strength testing

Review of dietary association of symptoms

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Current treatment for long-chain fatty-acid oxidation disorders:

Avoid known triggers.

Reduce the amount of long-chain dietary fat while covering the need for essential fatty acids.

Provide carnitine to convert potentially toxic long-chain acyl-CoAs to acylcarnitines.

Provide a large fraction of calories as carbohydrates to reduce body fat utilization and prevent hypoglycemia.

Provide approximately one third of the calories as even-chain medium chain triglycerides (MCT). Metabolism of the eight to ten carbon fatty acids in MCT oil, for example, is independent of CPT I, carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase, CPT II, very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), trifunctional protein, and long-chain hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHAD) enzyme activities.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Appropriate measures include the following:

Infusions of glucose during intercurrent infections to prevent catabolism

Note: Oral glucose cannot achieve this effect.

High-carbohydrate (70%) and low-fat (<20%) diet to provide fuel for glycolysis

Frequent meals and avoidance of extended fasting

Avoidance of prolonged exercise and other known triggers

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most important aim while treating an individual with CPT II deficiency is to prevent renal failure during an episode of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Therefore, sufficient hydration and, if necessary, dialysis must be performed immediately when renal failure is imminent.

Surveillance

Annual or more frequent monitoring to regulate medication and diet is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Extended fasting and prolonged exercise are to be avoided.

Reports of medication-induced side effects in individuals with CPT II deficiency are rare. Relying mostly on case reports, the following agents should be avoided:

Valproic acid [Kottlors et al 2001]

General anesthesia

Ibuprofen

Diazepam in high doses [Bonnefont et al 1999]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. In addition, predictive testing for at-risk asymptomatic family members may be advisable before general anesthesia. Complications of general anesthesia (including rhabdomyolysis and suxamethonium hypersensitivity in individuals with a variety of neuromuscular diseases and renal post-anesthetic failure in individuals with CPT II deficiency in particular) have been observed [Katsuya et al 1988, Wieser et al 2008].

Molecular genetic testing is appropriate if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, screening for alterations in acylcarnitines may be of use to identify other affected family members.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

While a variety of maternal complications have been observed in association with other fatty acid oxidation disorders (severe preeclampsia; acute fatty liver of pregnancy; maternal liver disease; and hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets), none of these complications has been associated with CPT II deficiency [Preece & Green 2002, Shekhawat et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Promising results have been obtained with treatment of cardiomyopathy and rhabdomyolysis in long-chain fat oxidation disorders using anaplerotic odd-chain triglycerides [Roe et al 2002]. These results were confirmed in seven individuals with CPT II deficiency, who avoided rhabdomyolysis or hospitalization while on the triheptanoin (anaplerotic) diet. Affected individuals returned to normal physical activity including strenuous sports [Roe et al 2008].

Fibrates are a class of hypolipidemic drugs that increase high-density lipoprotein levels by mRNA upregulation of many lipid-metabolism genes through interaction with the steroid/thyroid transcription factor PPARa. Studies have demonstrated that bezafibrate increases CPT2 mRNA and normalizes enzyme activity in mild forms of CPT II-deficient cultured fibroblasts and myoblasts [Bonnefont et al 2009]. In a trial including six affected individuals treated with bezafibrate, the level of fatty acid oxidation in muscle biopsies was elevated, accompanied by a significant increase in palmitoyl-L-carnitine oxidation, increased CPT2 mRNA, and increased translated protein. A reduction of episodes of rhabdomyolysis could be observed, as well as amelioration of quality of life (measured by SF-36) as shown by an increase in physical activity and a decline in muscular pain [Bonnefont et al 2009, Bonnefont et al 2010]. Another study did not show beneficial effects of bezafibrate on fatty acid oxidation and other disease manifestations; this study, however, was heavily criticized for methodologic shortcomings [Ørngreen et al 2014, Bastin et al 2015]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Carnitine supplementation is essentially a cure for the carnitine membrane transporter defect. While oral carnitine supplementation of 50 mg/kg/d is often prescribed in the treatment of other fat oxidation disorders, controlled trials of its effectiveness in CPT II deficiency are lacking. In addition, carnitine administration is controversial, given the possibility of accumulation of acyl-CoAs and consequent depletion of free CoA in the mitochondria [Yoshino et al 2003]. In acutely ill infants aggressive treatment with IV glucose and cardiac support is critical, and should be complemented with L-carnitine supplementation.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia (AD- CMD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiologic assessment

Audiologic assessment

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic examination

Otolaryngologic evaluation

Endocrinologic tests to assess bone metabolism

Dental evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Craniofacial teams, often associated with pediatric hospitals, may offer a full evaluation of a patient including psychological assessment and speech therapy.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention. Compression of a nerve canal or narrowed foramen magnum can be surgically treated.

Severe bony overgrowth of facial bones and nasal, forehead, and cranial regions can be contoured. However, surgical procedures can be technically difficult and bone regrowth is common. As severe complications have occurred, surgery is considered for conservative purposes to relieve severe symptoms caused by cranial nerve compression.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Delayed tooth eruption should be considered when planning orthodontic treatment [Chen et al 2014].

Surveillance

Because progressive thickening of craniofacial bones continues throughout life, regular neurologic evaluation, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination are required for early diagnosis and management of complications of narrowing of the cranial foramina, including the foramen magnum.

The frequency of neurologic evaluations depends on the individual's history of skeletal changes.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Early diagnosis of at-risk relatives may be beneficial for management of complications from progressive hyperostosis.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical evaluation and cranial and long bone radiographs can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Treatment with calcitriol, a stimulator of bone resorption, has not demonstrated long-term success. Calcitriol with a low-calcium diet to stimulate bone resorption by promoting osteoclast formation has been reported to improve facial paralysis but has no effect on metaphyseal deformity [Key et al 1988].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Calcitonin has been thought to be effective because of its inhibitory effect on bone turnover. However, previous case reports found calcitonin therapy to be ineffective in treating hyperplasia of craniofacial bones in persons with CMD [Fanconi et al 1988, Haverkamp et al 1996].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FGFR-related craniosynostosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment for hydrocephalus by brain CT or MRI in all cases of syndromic craniosynostosis, with close observation in those with pathogenic variants known to cause a more severe phenotype

Assessment for upper-airway obstruction or tracheal sleeve (in FGFR2-related Pfeiffer syndrome)

Assessment for exposure keratopathy

Spinal x-rays to evaluate for vertebral anomalies

Imaging of the gastrointestinal system in individuals with Pfeiffer or Apert syndrome for intestinal malrotation or esophageal atresia

Treatment of Manifestations

Craniofacial. Children with any of the FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes benefit from the multidisciplinary team approach practiced in most craniofacial clinics affiliated with major pediatric medical centers. The specialists usually include plastic surgeons, neurosurgeons, otolaryngologists, and dentists as well as audiologists, speech pathologists, developmental pediatricians, social workers, and medical geneticists. The team can usually identify and address physical and developmental problems as well as psychosocial and other issues.

Individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis usually require a series of staged surgical procedures; the number and type are tailored to the individual's needs [Posnick & Ruiz 2000, Honnebier et al 2008]. Three-dimensional skull CT can be used for morphologic mapping to help plan surgical treatment [Binaghi et al 2000]. Some individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis require a dozen or more surgeries over a lifetime. Seldom is the correction perfect, but significant cosmetic improvement is often possible. Evidence suggests that the calvarial bone needed for these surgeries is often more brittle, thinner, and less robust than cranial bone from unaffected donors [Tholpady et al 2004].

In contrast to children with nonsyndromic craniosynostosis, in whom the first surgery is usually performed between ages six months and one year, children with syndromic craniosynostosis often have their first surgery as early as age three months. The procedure is a bilateral craniotomy with a fronto-orbital advancement to expand the cranial vault. Because the procedure leaves uncovered areas of dura that fill in by age 15-18 months, it must be performed before the child is 18 months old. In a series of 2,317 individuals who underwent surgery for craniosynostosis, improved cosmetic and functional results followed early surgery; no increased operative risk was seen in infants [Lajeunie et al 2000, Renier et al 2000b].

Distraction osteogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton and long bones of the extremities may be a less invasive alternative approach to bone grafting in some individuals. In addition, the distraction procedures can expand the overlying soft tissues simultaneously. The devices used for distraction of the mandible, midface, and cranium tend to be the buried type and made of absorbable materials; cytokine administration may shorten the consolidation period. The usefulness and appropriateness of the distraction procedure must be assessed for each disorder [Matsumoto et al 2003].

In some cases, other complications including hydrocephalus, upper-airway obstruction, and exposure keratopathy of the cornea may prompt even earlier craniotomy or fronto-orbital advancement, or other interventions including ventriculo-peritoneal stunting, tracheostomy, or surgical eyelid closure.

Timing of subsequent craniofacial surgeries influences their success. Procedures done prior to the cessation of growth in the particular facial region usually have poor long-term results and require additional operations.

Individuals with Apert syndrome have the highest incidence of repeat surgery to correct forehead contour [Wong et al 2000, Thomas et al 2005].

Wilkie et al [2010] noted that children with craniosynostosis resulting from single-gene pathogenic variants were more likely to require repeat surgery compared to individuals whose craniosynostosis was caused by a chromosome abnormality.

Spine. Congenital spine anomalies can cause scoliosis and spinal injury and thus need immediate attention.

Limbs. Surgical correction of limb defects is usually not possible because the skeletal anomalies are developmental and the structures have never formed normally.

In the mitten-glove syndactyly seen in Apert syndrome, surgical separation of the digits often provides relatively little functional improvement.

With the elbow ankylosis seen in Pfeiffer syndrome types 2 and 3, some functional improvement can be gained by altering the angle at which the elbows are fixed. For example, in most affected individuals, elbow contractures are at approximately the same angle, often so that an individual cannot reach the mouth easily with the hands or clean appropriately following toileting; functional improvement can be achieved if the angle of each arm is altered so that one arm is positioned for eating and the other for toileting.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The primary treatment of craniofacial abnormalities associated with craniosynostosis is surgical reconstruction. Early treatment may reduce the risk for secondary complications (e.g., hydrocephalus, cognitive impairment).

Patients with severe proptosis often require ophthalmologic lubrication to prevent exposure keratopathy.

Surveillance

Persons with a known risk for significant complications, including hydrocephalus, should be monitored from birth throughout life at intervals and by methods appropriate for the severity of the clinical findings.

Six of 29 persons with the FGFR3 pathogenic variant p.Pro250Arg required reoperation for increased intracranial pressure, emphasizing the need for continued long-term monitoring [Thomas et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk relatives should be evaluated by clinical and radiographic criteria given that manifestations may not be readily evident in all affected individuals. When the pathogenic variant is known in the family, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate relatives for the disorder. Early diagnosis may allow mildly affected relatives to benefit from early surveillance and intervention.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To assess the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with CCDS the following investigations should be performed:

Detailed neurologic clinical evaluation for the degree of global developmental delay or intellectual disability, epilepsy, movement disorder, and behavior problems

Neuropsychological assessment of cognition and speech

Video documentation of movement disorder

EEG, if any clinical seizures

Prior to initiation of creatine monohydrate supplementation, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) for baseline assessment of kidney function

Baseline determination of cerebral creatine level by brain 1H-MRS to document creatine deficiency [Stöckler et al 1996, Schulze et al 2001]

ECG and echocardiogram for cardiac involvement

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Occupational therapy, physiotherapy and speech-language therapy for global developmental delay by physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech-language therapist

Behavior therapy for behavior problems by developmental pediatrician

Seizure management with antiepileptic drugs by epilepsy specialist

Treatment of movement disorder by movement disorder specialist

GAMT Deficiency

Treatment of GAMT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate and to decrease accumulation of neurotoxic GAA in the central nervous system by ornithine supplementation and protein- or arginine-restricted diet [Schulze et al 2001, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. Creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation decrease GAA accumulation by competitive inhibition of AGAT enzyme activity. A decrease in the level of GAA in cerebrospinal fluid was reported in two individuals with GAMT deficiency treated with creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation and with arginine restriction [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b].

Treatment is as follows:

Creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]

Supplementation of ornithine ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day. Administration of ornithine is divided into three to six daily doses [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001].

Dietary restriction of arginine to 15-25 mg/kg/day that corresponds to 0.4-0.7 g/kg/day protein intake [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001, Schulze et al 2003]

To prevent protein malnutrition, essential amino acid medical formula should be supplemented (0.5-0.8g/kg/day). Available databases (e.g., the US Department of Agriculture National Nutrient Database) can be used to determine exact arginine content of foods to allow precise calculation of daily arginine intake in individuals with GAMT deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b].

Because of the challenges involved in understanding arginine restriction, reading dietary labels, and calculating arginine intake (particularly since arginine content is not always indicated), many centers use protein restriction instead [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b].

Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency

Global developmental delay and intellectual disability improved only in 21% of the individuals. None of the individuals achieved normal development or cognitive functions on treatment [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Seizures. In 18% of individuals seizures were eliminated; in 49% seizure frequency decreased; 33% of individuals had no improvement in seizures [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Movement disorder. Improvement was seen in 60% of individuals; in 40% of individuals, there was no change in the movement disorder [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency

Normal neurodevelopmental outcome has been reported in three individuals with GAMT deficiency who were diagnosed and treated in the neonatal periodbased on a positive family history of GAMT deficiency in an older sib [Schulze et al 2006, El-Gharbawy et al 2013, Viau et al 2013].

Another asymptomatic sib treated from age eight days showed global developmental delay and hypotonia at age 11 months. The authors suggested compliance problems in this family [Dhar et al 2009].

AGAT Deficiency

Treatment of AGAT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400 to 800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses.

Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. Treatment outcome results were reported in 11 individuals with AGAT deficiency [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. If initiation of treatment was after age ten years, no improvement in cognitive function or intellectual disability was seen [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. Normal cognitive function was reported in a female whose treatment was initiated before age two years [Ndika et al 2012]. Muscle weakness was improved in all individuals treated with creatine monohydrate [Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013].

Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. An asymptomatic sib treated from age four months with creatine monohydrate supplementation therapy had normal neurodevelopment at age 18 months; in contrast, his sisters had already shown signs of developmental delay at this age [Battini et al 2006].

CRTR Deficiency

The goal of treatment is to replenish cerebral creatine levels. Treatment of both males and females with CRTR deficiency with creatine-monohydrate was not successful [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012]. Only one heterozygous female with learning disability and mildly decreased creatine concentration on brain 1H-MRS showed mild improvement on neuropsychological testing after 18 weeks of treatment with creatine-monohydrate (250-750 mg/kg/day) [Cecil et al 2001]. Additionally, combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a].

Since the enzymes for creatine biosynthesis are present in the brain [Braissant & Henry 2008], individuals with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine and L-glycine, precursors in the biosynthesis of creatine.

Treatment has included:

Creatine monohydrate 100-200 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

Arginine (hydrochloride or base) 400 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

Glycine 150 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

The authors recommend that all three of the supplements listed above be started together in new patients – especially in early childhood – to slow disease progression. The clinical effectiveness of treatment with three supplements has not been confirmed.

Treatment outcome of individuals with CRTR deficiency. To date 22 males and three females with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine with or without glycine supplementation [van de Kamp et al 2014].

In some patients improvements were reported, but in general results appeared to be discouraging and cerebral creatine was not restored [van de Kamp et al 2014].

Four males and two females with CRTR deficiency treated for 42 months with creatine, arginine, and glycine showed increased muscle mass and improved gross motor skills [Valayannopoulos et al 2012].

Nine males with CRTR deficiency showed improvement in locomotor and personal social IQ subscales [van de Kamp et al 2012].

Combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

For patients undergoing treatment:

Determination of cerebral creatine level by in vivo 1H-MRS should be performed:

For individuals with GAMT and AGAT deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels during creatine supplementation therapy;

For individuals with CRTR deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels for the assessment of treatment outcome [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010b, van de Kamp et al 2012].

For GAMT deficiency: growth and nutritional status (plasma GAA levels, amino acids, ammonia, protein, albumin, pre-albumin levels) should be monitored every three to six months.

For CRTR deficiency: plasma GAA levels and plasma amino acids should be monitored every three to six months as high-dose arginine and glycine supplementation can result in increased GAA levels.

Repeat GFR annually for assessment of kidney function while on creatine supplementation therapy to detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy [Barisic et al 2002].

Perform neuropsychological assessment of cognitive functions and speech.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate neonates at-risk for GAMT deficiency or AGAT deficiency to allow for early diagnosis and treatment.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Biochemical genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Transport of dodecyl creatine ester incorporated into lipid nanocapsules (LNCs) was investigated using an in vitro cell-based blood-brain barrier model. It has been shown that these LNCs can cross the blood-brain barrier and enter brain endothelial cells. In human fibroblasts with deficient SLC6A8 protein function, all or part of the dodecyl creatine ester was released from the LNCs and biotransformed to creatine [Trotier-Faurion et al 2015].

A brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mouse was successfully treated with the cyclocreatine, which is a creatine analog. Brain cyclocreatine and cyclocreatine phosphate were detected on cyclocreatine treatment in the brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mice at nine weeks of cyclocreatine treatment compared to the creatine and placebo treatment in the same mice. Cyclocreatine-treated brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mice showed improvements in cognitive abilities using novel object recognition and spatial learning and memory tests. Thus, cyclocreatine appears promising as a potential therapy for CRTR deficiency. Clinical trials are underway to prove its use in individuals with CRTR deficiency.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with congenital stromal corneal dystrophy, ophthalmologic evaluation that includes the following is recommended:

Assessment of visual acuity

Assessment of refractive error

Slit lamp examination

Measurement of corneal thickness using pachymetry

Measurement of intraocular pressure

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Spectacles or contact lenses for correction of refractive errors

Management of strabismus

Penetrating keratoplasty. Most grafts remain clear after penetrating keratoplasty. Penetrating keratoplasty in children before the age of ten years has been performed successfully. However, only children with a risk for deep amblyopia should be considered for penetrating keratoplasty before age six or seven years.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patching to prevent amblyopia in children with strabismus is appropriate.

Surveillance

Visual acuity and routine ophthalmologic examination should be performed at least every year in children. Regular surveillance in adults is not necessary unless they have undergone penetrating keratoplasty. Affected individuals should be informed about penetrating keratoplasty and advised to contact their eye doctor in case of reduced visual acuity or increased glare.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In families with known CSCD, at-risk children should be seen by an ophthalmologist within a few months after birth to determine if they have the condition. Alternatively, if the DCN pathogenic variant in the family has been identified, molecular genetic testing of at-risk children can be pursued.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination

Electroretinography

Family history

Dark adaptation (optional)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Coincident high myopia or hyperopia can be managed with glasses or contact lenses.

In some cases, conventional strabismus surgery may be required to improve binocularity or head posture.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Occasionally, a boy with X-linked CSNB may adopt a cosmetically unacceptable or functionally awkward head posture to dampen the degree of nystagmus in a particular position of gaze (the so-called "null point"). In some instances the position of gaze for the null point may be shifted to a better functional range by carefully planned strabismus surgery.

Surveillance

Regular (yearly) eye examinations are recommended with refraction at a young age to monitor for the development of myopia.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Reduced visual acuity and difficulties seeing at night may preclude driving a car or restrict the class of driving license.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

For infants identified with high myopia, unusual head posture or nystagmus and a family history of CSNB, ophthalmic examination and molecular genetic testing may confirm the diagnosis of CSNB, obviating the need for neuroimaging or clinical electrophysiologic testing under sedation or general anesthesia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with citrullinemia type I (CTLN1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of: concentration of plasma ammonia, amino acids, and electrolytes; blood gases; urinary organic acids; and urinary orotic acid

Assessment of intracranial pressure and overall neurologic status

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

As soon as a diagnosis of CTLN1 is made, acute (if needed) and chronic management should be initiated per established treatment guidelines [Batshaw et al 2001, Summar 2001, Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001]. See ACMG-ACT Sheet, ACMG Algorithm.

Acute Management of Hyperammonemia

Hallmarks of therapy include rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia concentration, reversal of catabolism, and avoidance and/or treatment of increased intracranial pressure [Häberle et al 2012].

Rapidly decreasing plasma ammonia concentration. When hyperammonemia is diagnosed or suspected, all protein intake should be withheld for a maximum of 24-48 hours. This time frame allows for the plasma ammonia concentration to be lowered via nitrogen scavenger therapy and/or dialysis and avoids an essential amino acid deficiency that would promote a catabolic state:

Pharmacologic nitrogen scavenger therapy (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate and arginine) should be given intravenously as soon as hyperammonemia is diagnosed in an individual known to have CTLN1. (For information pertaining to the mechanism of action of this treatment, see Scavenger Therapy.)

Priming infusion (to be given continuously over 90 minutes):

Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2

Sustaining infusion (to be given continuously over 24 hours):

Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2

Note: Repeat boluses are not recommended unless the individual is receiving dialysis (see following).

Dialysis is the most effective means of reducing plasma ammonia rapidly. Failure to control ammonia with scavenger therapy requires the emergency use of dialysis.

Hemodialysis is the preferred method of dialysis and exceeds both peritoneal dialysis and hemofiltration in the rate of ammonia clearance.

Scavenger therapy should be continued while dialysis is being performed.

Note: Exchange transfusions have no place in hyperammonemic treatment.

Reversal of catabolism. An anabolic state should be promoted through the provision of IV glucose (and insulin in the event of hyperglycemia) and intralipids.

Complete protein restriction should be limited to 24-48 hours to avoid a catabolic state.

In small infants, 40 kcal/100 mL given as D10W can be significant in averting catabolism. As soon as possible, osmolar load permitting, the individual should receive total parenteral nutrition (TPN) providing 0.25 g/kg/day of protein and 50 kcal/kg/day, advancing (as plasma ammonia concentration allows) to 1.0-1.5 g/kg/day of protein and 100-120 kcal/kg/day. Standard TPN solutions of dextrose, aminosol, and intralipid are used.

Control of intracranial pressure. It is critical to monitor fluid balance, intake and output, and body weight.

The affected individual should be maintained on the dry side of fluid balance: approximately 85 mL/kg of body weight per day in infants and appropriate corresponding fluid restriction in children and adults.

Increased intracranial pressure is manifested by tension in the fontanel, acute enlargement of the liver, edema, and worsening neurologic signs including fisting, scissoring, ankle clonus, and coma. Cerebral edema and ischemia may be documented by MRI.

Chronic Management

Chronic therapy for those with CTLN1 consists of lifelong protein restriction, medications (nitrogen scavenger therapy and carnitine), and possible liver transplantation based on the degree of metabolic control achieved with dietary modification and medication therapy.

Protein restriction. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist.

Nitrogen scavenger therapy

When the affected individual is able to tolerate solid food, the oral medication sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®, Ammonaps®), at a dose of 450-600 mg/kg/day divided into three doses, and arginine-free base of 400 and 700 mg/kg/day are begun. As children grow, doses change to 9.9-13 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day of arginine. For details of management, the reader is referred to Brusilow & Horwich [2001] and Häberle et al [2012].

Glycerol phenylbutyrate (Ravicti®) is a more palatable option. The initial dosage for phenylbutyrate-naïve patients is 4.5-11.2 mL/m2/day (5-12.4 g/m2/day). If the individual is transitioning from sodium phenylbutyrate to glycerol phenylbutyrate, the daily dose of glycerol phenylbutyrate (mL) = daily dose of sodium phenylbutyrate (g) x 0.86.

Success of therapy is defined by a plasma ammonia concentration lower than100 µmol/L and near-normal plasma glutamine concentration. Plasma arginine concentration may be up to 250% above upper normal limit for age.

Treatment with L-carnitine has been advocated as auxiliary treatment to prevent systemic hypocarnitinemia, which may result from therapy with acylating agents.

Liver transplantation for urea cycle disorders is the only known curative therapy [Morioka et al 2005]. Transplantation eliminates the need for dietary protein restriction but does not reverse any neurologic sequelae that affected individuals may have at the time of transplant.

Liver transplantation should ideally be performed in affected individuals who are younger than age one year (prior to the development of any neurocognitive impairment) but older than age three months and/or above 5 kg body weight, to decrease complications and improve survival rates [Häberle et al 2012].

Liver transplantation of four individuals with CTLN1 between the ages of six and 64 months showed better developmental outcomes when the transplant was performed at earlier ages [Kim et al 2013].

Survival rates in those who underwent liver transplantation prior to age two years was between 90% and 95% five years post transplant [Bourdeaux et al 2007, Perito et al 2014].

Note: Although liver transplantation cures the ASS enzyme deficiency, arginine is extrahepatically synthesized and remains low post-transplantation, requiring ongoing supplementation.

Living related-donor liver transplantation

A successful living related-donor liver transplantation (240 g) from mother to six-year-old daughter has been reported. The allopurinol challenge test was normalized in this child, who previously had very brittle control with four to six hyperammonemic episodes per year [Ito et al 2003].

A living related-donor liver transplantation from mother to son resulted in continued elevation in plasma concentration of citrulline (200-400 µmol/L). The mother, a heterozygote, had 28% residual ASS1 enzyme activity [Ando et al 2003].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prevention of hyperammonemia is achieved through lifelong protein restriction, nitrogen scavenger therapy, and possible liver transplantation based on metabolic control (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Intercurrent infections (particularly some viral exanthems) may induce a catabolic state. Affected individuals must be observed carefully during such episodes and medical attention sought to prevent hyperammonemia.

Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided.

Surveillance

Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic nutritionist and clinical biochemical geneticist is required. Monitoring should include:

Evaluation of early warning signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes including mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, and ankle clonus;

Plasma ammonia and amino acid analysis to identify hyperammonemia and deficiency of essential amino acids and impending hyperammonemia, respectively. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration [Brusilow & Horwich 2001].

Monitoring should occur frequently in neonates and infants, based on disease severity.

As affected individuals become older (teenage years and adulthood), clinical and biochemical monitoring can be extended to every six months to annually depending on clinical stability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the long-term prognosis for individuals with citrullinemia type I depends on initial and peak plasma ammonia concentration, it is important that at-risk sibs be identified as soon as possible.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; in utero diagnosis (which permits appropriate oral therapy beginning with first feeds), if possible, is preferred.

Measurement of plasma concentrations of ammonia and citrulline on day one of life. Elevation of either above acceptable levels (ammonia >100 µmol/L or plasma citrulline >~100 µmol/L) is sufficient evidence to initiate treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because women with onset of severe symptoms during pregnancy or in the postpartum period have been reported, scrupulous attention needs to be paid to diet and medication during these periods.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy has been suggested; success has not been achieved to date.

Phase I and Phase II clinical trials to assess the safety and efficacy of human hepatocyte transplantation as either an alternative to liver transplantation or as a temporizing measure for individuals with CTLN1awaiting transplantation has recently finished.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Ketoacids of essential amino acids were an early form of auxiliary waste nitrogen disposal enhancement, now replaced by the agents described in Treatment of Manifestations.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cystinosis, the following evaluations are recommended.

In individuals who are initially diagnosed at any age:

Height and weight, plotted on age-appropriate growth charts

Renal tubular and glomerular function, especially serum concentrations of creatinine, phosphate, bicarbonate, and potassium; and urine concentrations of creatinine, phosphate, bicarbonate, potassium, glucose, and protein. Quantitative measurement of urine amino acid loss helps to identify the severity of renal Fanconi syndrome [Charnas et al 1991].

Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) or creatinine clearance test

Thyroid function studies

Lipid panel

Renal ultrasound examination for evaluation of nephrocalcinosis

Ophthalmologic evaluation, including slit lamp examination of the cornea to assess corneal involvement, ERG to assess retinal involvement, and fundoscopic examination for possible intracranial hypertension

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

In individuals who are initially diagnosed at an older age:

In pre- and postpubertal males, measurement of serum concentration of testosterone, FSH, and LH

Glucose tolerance test to assess for diabetes mellitus if symptoms are present

Baseline ophthalmology evaluation, including a fundoscopic examination

Evaluation of the extent of metabolic bone disease causing skeletal deformities by performing skeletal radiographs and DEXA scan

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

It is recommended that a multidisciplinary team that includes nephrologists, metabolic disease specialists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, gastroenterologists, nutritionists, and psychologists manage individuals with cystinosis.

Renal Fanconi syndrome

Replacement of tubular losses of electrolytes, bicarbonate, minerals, and other small molecular weight nutrients

For children, free access to water and bathroom privileges and supplementation with citrate to alkalinize the blood

Phosphate replacement to prevent and treat rickets; vitamin D supplementation to assist the gastrointestinal absorption of phosphate and calcium

Early treatment of skeletal deformities with the help of orthopedic specialists

Careful attention to fluid and nutrient replacement is required during episodes of dehydration. (Obligatory urinary losses amount to 2-6 L electrolyte-rich water per day.)

Renal glomerular disease

Reduction of cellular cystine concentration through treatment with the cystine-depleting agent cysteamine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Renal transplantation. Renal replacement is usually indicated when the creatinine clearance falls below 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and azotemia and hypertension rapidly progress. The time frame for appropriate renal replacement is the point at which the reciprocal serum creatinine value plotted against age reaches approximately 0.1. Symptoms often determine the exact time of transplantation.

Ophthalmologic problems are treated symptomatically and with cystine-depleting agents:

The photophobia, resulting from corneal crystal accumulation, can be ameliorated by sun avoidance, dark glasses, and lubrication with over-the-counter eye drops (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Corneal transplantation is very rarely required for intractable pain resulting from recurrent corneal ulcerations.

Retinal involvement is irreversible.

Growth for children with cystinosis requires good nutrition, adequate phosphate supplementation, and robust intracellular cystine depletion (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations):

Nutrition must be adequate for growth.

Growth hormone therapy has proven beneficial for children with cystinosis in providing catch-up growth and bringing them into the normal percentiles for height [Gahl et al 2001, Wühl et al 2001, Gahl et al 2002].

Early and diligent treatment with supplements and oral cysteamine can obviate the need for growth hormone [Kleta et al 2004a].

Other

Oral L-thyroxine replacement for hypothyroidism

Insulin for diabetes mellitus

Testosterone to induce secondary sexual characteristics in males with primary hypogonadism

Specific exercises for the muscle deterioration and swallowing difficulties of older individuals with cystinosis. Hand tendon transfer has been partially successful in improving strength.

Speech therapy and physical therapy

Standard treatment for benign intracranial hypertension. Other central nervous system complications are irreversible.

Feeding via gastrostomy for those with dysphagia, poor nutrition, and risk of aspiration (Figure 2b)

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Cystine depletion therapy with cysteamine bitartrate (Cystagon®) has revolutionized the management and prognosis of people with nephropathic cystinosis. Cysteamine is now the worldwide treatment of choice for cystinosis. This free thiol can deplete cystinotic cells of more than 90% of their cystine content [Kleta & Gahl 2004]. Wilmer et al [2011] found that cysteamine also increased intracellular glutathione levels and restored the glutathione redox status of cystinotic cells.

Cysteamine therapy should be considered for all affected individuals, regardless of age and transplantation status [Gahl et al 2007]. With early, diligent treatment many individuals with cystinosis have survived into their twenties without the need for renal transplantation [Gahl et al 2002].

Regular and diligent cysteamine therapy prevents or delays end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [Markello et al 1993] and hypothyroidism, enhances growth, and depletes muscle parenchyma of cystine [Gahl et al 2002].

It is critical to initiate cysteamine therapy immediately after diagnosis to allow for kidney growth and acquisition, rather than loss, of renal function [Kleta et al 2004a].

Cystagon® is taken orally every six hours at 60 to 90 mg of free base per kg per day (1.3 to 1.95 g/m2/day). The recommended adult dose is 500 mg free base every six hours; however, for both children and adults, the dose is titrated to reduce, if possible, leukocyte cystine concentration (measured 5-6 hours after a dose) to below 1.0 nmol half-cystine/mg protein [Belldina et al 2003, Kleta & Gahl 2004, Kleta 2006].

Procysbi® (cysteamine bitartrate) is a delayed-release capsule intended for affected individuals age six years and older. Procysbi® is taken every 12 hours. Blood testing showed Procysbi® was noninferior to Cystagon® in controlling cystine levels [Langman et al 2012].

Side effects of cysteamine treatment include nausea and vomiting, in part because of its unpleasant odor and taste [Schneider 2004]. Cysteamine increases gastrin synthesis and gastric acid production. Omeprazole may be of benefit for oral cysteamine treatment [Dohil et al 2003].

With long-term cystine-depleting therapy most late complications of cystinosis can be avoided.

Despite diligent oral cysteamine therapy, cysteamine hydrochloride eye drops or CYSTARAN™ (cysteamine ophthalmic solution) 0.44% are required to achieve sufficient tissue concentration to dissolve corneal crystals [Gahl et al 2000]. Cysteamine eye drops are given ten to 12 times per day as a 0.55% solution with benzalkonium chloride 0.01% as a preservative [Tsilou et al 2007]. With good compliance photophobia is relieved within weeks (Figure 1b, 1c) [Kaiser-Kupfer et al 1987, Gahl et al 2000]. Systemic cysteamine treatment ameliorates or postpones retinal deterioration [Tsilou et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Affected individuals who have undergone a renal transplantation should be monitored for the signs of immunodeficiency and infection.

Carnitine supplementation may improve muscle strength in pre-transplant individuals.

Treatment with proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole, relieves cysteamine-induced gastric acid hypersecretion and improves gastrointestinal symptoms [Osefo et al 2009].

Surveillance

Clinical and laboratory examinations should be performed in individuals with nephropathic cystinosis according to disease severity and may include renal, endocrine, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and cardiac examinations [Kleta et al 2005]:

Evaluation by a nephrologist every three to six months depending on the severity of renal impairment

Renal function tests, electrolytes, and thyroid function tests at least every three to six months in those who are stable

Serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and intact parathyroid hormone; plain bone radiographs as well as DEXA scans to detect osteopenia and bone fragility predisposing to fractures, starting as soon as diagnosis is made and continued throughout the course of the disease

Ophthalmologic evaluation with fundoscopic examination to screen for increased intracranial pressure every one to two years for those being treated appropriately

Fasting blood glucose concentration throughout the course of the disease and testosterone concentration (in males) every two to three years, starting before puberty

In advanced disease (i.e., poorly treated adults) and in late stages of disease, perform every two to three years:

Chest CT for detection of coronary and other vascular calcification

ECG

Brain CT or MRI for evaluation of cerebral atrophy or calcifications

Evaluation for the presence of progressive muscle weakness and swallowing difficulties using electromyography (EMG), oral sensorimotor examination, and modified barium swallowing studies with videofluoroscopy

Pulmonary function tests

Neurologic and neurocognitive evaluations including visual-motor integration, visual memory, planning, sustained attention, and motor speed beginning at age seven to eight years [Besouw et al 2010a]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Dehydration, which compromises remaining renal function

Sun exposure, which can exacerbate photophobia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk (e.g., newborn sibs of a proband) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment to prevent life-threatening complications of cystinosis.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Biochemical testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies in women with cystinosis are at increased risk for premature delivery and must be monitored closely [Ramappa & Pyatt 2010]. For women who are post-transplantation, the abdominal renal allograft creates mechanical issues. For women who have not undergone transplantation, fluid and electrolyte status require careful management.

Therapies Under Investigation

Bone marrow-derived stem cell transplantation in mice improved chronic kidney disease [Yeagy et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Development of a newborn screening test for cystinosis will potentially allow broader therapeutic success [Nesterova & Gahl 2008]. Two methods have been proposed: tandem mass spectrometry for the determination of derivative seven-carbon (C7) sugars in dried blood spots (DBS), which detects homozygosity for the CTNS 57-kb deletion, and molecular genetic testing for the most common CTNS pathogenic variants [Wamelink et al 2011].

Therapies proven to be ineffective include dietary restriction of sulfur-containing amino acids, supplementation with ascorbic acid, and the use of dithiothreitol.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

EMG and nerve conduction velocity in order to evaluate for peripheral neuropathy

Cardiologic evaluation including EKG and echocardiogram

Laboratory investigations of lipids including measurement of plasma cholestanol level (if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation)

Evaluation for osteoporosis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). Long-term treatment with CDCA (750 mg/day in adults) normalizes bile acid synthesis (leading to disappearance of abnormal metabolites from serum, bile, and urine), normalizes plasma and CSF concentration of cholestanol by suppressing cholestanol biosynthesis, and improves neurophysiologic findings [Mondelli et al 1992, Mondelli et al 2001] and other clinical manifestations including osteoporosis [Federico et al 1993]. For recent reports see: Bonnot et al [2010], Ginanneschi et al [2013], Martini et al [2013], and Yahalom et al [2013].

Treatment with CDCA has been reported to lead to the following [Mondelli et al 2001]:

Normalization of nerve conduction velocities and subsequent stabilization

Slow and continuous improvement in motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and sensory evoked potentials (SEPs)

Overall stabilization of clinical manifestations without significant improvement of neurologic deficits.

In peripheral nerves CDCA treatment did not influence the number of axons activated by maximum electrical stimulation but instead it increased the conduction of the still-excitable fibers. This suggests that CDCA treatment promotes myelin synthesis in nerve fibers with residual unaffected axons.

The effect of therapy may therefore depend largely on the extent of irreversible structural damage to axons.

CDCA treatment may be more useful when started early. In a case in which treatment onset was at birth the development of disease appears to be delayed [Authors, personal data; Luyckx et al 2014].

Inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase alone or in combination with CDCA are also effective in decreasing cholestanol concentration and improving clinical signs [Peynet et al 1991, Verrips et al 1999b]. However, because of clinical evidence that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may induce muscle damage and even rhabdomyolysis, caution is required in the use of these drugs [Federico & Dotti 1994].

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis has been proposed as a possible treatment; results are controversial [Mimura et al 1993, Berginer & Salen 1994, Dotti et al 2004].

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) treatment may improve muscle weakness.

Liver transplantation, although never performed in individuals with CTX, remains a possibility.

Eyes. Cataract extraction is typically required in at least one eye by age 50 years.

Symptomatic treatments for epilepsy, spasticity, and parkinsonism have been utilized. Parkinsonism is poorly responsive to levodopa, whereas an antihistamine drug, diphenylpyraline hydrochloride, had an excellent effect in three individuals [Ohno et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Early treatment with CDCA in presymptomatic individuals appears to prevent clinical manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation improve osteoporosis.

Surveillance

Recommended annual surveillance includes the following:

Neurologic and neuropsychologic evaluation

Cholestanol plasma concentration

Brain MRI

Echocardiography

Measurement of total body density (TBD)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Caution in the use of statins has been suggested [Federico & Dotti 2001].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CYP27A1 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, biochemical testing of at-risk individuals can be pursued.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid should not be interrupted during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Therapies with statins and LDL apheresis have been reported [Dotti et al 2004]. Cholic acid was used to treat two affected siblings from infancy with resulting improvement in symptoms [Pierre et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Therapies with ursodeoxicolic acid, lovastatin, and cholestyramine have been reported to be ineffective [Tint et al 1989, Batta et al 2004].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ortolani sign for detection of hip dislocation. Hip ultrasound examination as needed based on clinical findings.

Pelvic x-ray (1x only) to identify hip dysplasia in the event that hip dislocation has not been treated properly.

Assessment for inguinal hernias

Ophthalmologic examination, including refraction (for myopia), slit-lamp examination, fundus examination. Note: Slit-lamp examination allows diagnosis of corneal dysplasia, which was present in one individual.

Baseline neurodevelopmental evaluation

Brain MRI

EEG if seizures are suspected

Echocardiogram to look for evidence of floppy valves or more severe valvular dysplasia that can often be observed in a connective tissue disorder

Evaluation for a bleeding disorder linked to coagulation factor deficiencies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Repair of inguinal hernia(s)

Routine management of hip dislocation

Routine management of refractive errors

Early education services and developmental therapies with later special education supports

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs): valproate. Because treatment with valproate is often unsuccessful, carbamazepine can serve as a second-line drug and levetiracetam as a third-line drug; or a combination of AEDs can be used.

Psychological help as needed for self-image issues

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treat for bleeding disorder linked to coagulation factor deficiency to prevent anemia.

Surveillance

Perform annual ophthalmologic examination, including refraction for evidence of myopia (which can be progressive) and fundus examination to inspect Bruch’s membrane.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to test older and younger sibs for presence of the ATP6V0A2 pathogenic variants found in the proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), the following evaluations are recommended:

Resting ECG

Holter monitoring, as arrhythmias develop when heart rate increases

Exercise stress test both for diagnosis and monitoring of therapy

Echocardiogram and/or MRI to evaluate for structural defects

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of CPVT is summarized in a specific consensus document from the Heart Rhythm Association (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) [Priori et al 2013b] (full text) and summarized in the recent version of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on ventricular arrhythmias [Priori et al 2015] (full text).

Beta-blockers are the first therapeutic choice (class I indication) of proven efficacy for about 60% of individuals with CPVT [Leenhardt et al 1995, Priori et al 2002]. The proposed mechanism of action in an individual with CPVT is inhibition of adrenergic-dependent triggered activity. This effect can be due to both heart rate reduction and direct effect on calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Chronic treatment with full-dose beta-blocking agents prevents recurrence of syncope in the majority of affected individuals.

The reproducible induction of arrhythmia during exercise allows effective dose titration and monitoring. Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day divided into two doses per day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day divided into 3-4 doses per day). Nadolol is reported to be more effective than selective beta blockers [Leren et al 2016]. However, selective beta-blockers can be used in individuals with asthma or other respiratory conditions. Importantly, the dose of beta-blockers should always be individualized with exercise stress testing. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006] (see Surveillance).

Flecainide. Clinical [van der Werf et al 2011] and experimental [Liu et al 2011] data show that to improve arrhythmia control, flecainide (100-300 mg/day) can be given along with beta-blockers to persons who have recurrence of syncope or complex arrhythmias during exercise (class IIa). Although controlled clinical trials are lacking, the evidence for effectiveness of flecainide is sufficient to indicate the use of this drug whenever beta-blockers are not sufficient to control arrhythmias. Beta-blockers and flecainide are also indicated for affected individuals who have experienced a previous aborted sudden death to reduce the probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) shocks (class IIb). The antiarrhythmic effects of flecainide appear to be independent from the specific CPVT genetic subtype [Watanabe et al 2013].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation in addition to beta-blockers with or without flecainide is recommended in individuals with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience cardiac arrest, recurrent syncope or polymorphic/bidirectional VT despite optimal therapy. Furthermore, in those individuals in whom the highest tolerated dose of beta-blockers fails to adequately control arrhythmias [Priori et al 2002, Sumitomo et al 2003], an ICD can be considered for primary prevention of cardiac arrest/sudden death [Zipes et al 2006]. Whenever possible, pharmacologic therapy should be maintained/optimized even in individuals with an ICD in order to reduce the probability of ICD firing.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) may be considered in those with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience recurrent syncope, polymorphic/bidirectional VT, or several appropriate ICD shocks while on beta-blocker and flecainide and in those who are intolerant of or with contraindication to beta-blocker therapy (class IIb). However, LCSD is not without side effects, including palpebral ptosis, elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, and lack of sweating from the left arm and face. Recurrences of cardiac events have been also reported in those with LCSD. Therefore, pharmacologic therapy should always be optimized prior to considering LCSD.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Beta-blockers are indicated for primary prevention in all clinically affected individuals (see Treatment of Manifestations) and in individuals with pathogenic variants in the genes associated with CPVT who have a negative exercise stress test (class IIa). Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day). For symptomatic individuals with CPVT, the maximum tolerated dosage should be maintained. Flecainide can be added for primary prevention of cardiac arrest when beta-blockers alone cannot control the onset of arrhythmias during exercise stress test.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications are mainly related to therapy.

Beta-blockers could worsen allergic asthma. Therefore, the cardiac-specific beta-blocker, metoprolol, could be indicated in some individuals with CPVT who have a history of asthma. The dose of metoprolol is based on the need of the affected individual (≤3 mg/kg). Note: It is important to keep in mind that metoprolol and newer beta-blockers (e.g., bisorpolol) may not have the same efficacy as nadolol or propranolol; the reasons for this are under investigation.

For persons with an ICD, anticoagulation to prevent formation of thrombi may be necessary (particularly in children who require looping of the right ventricular catheter).

Surveillance

Regular follow-up visits to the cardiologist every six to twelve months (depending on the severity of clinical manifestations) are required in order to monitor therapy efficacy. These visits should include the following:

Resting ECG

Exercise stress test, performed at the maximal age-predicted heart rate. For individuals on beta-blocker therapy (in whom maximal heart rate cannot be reached), the test should be performed at the highest tolerated workload.

Holter monitoring

Echo and MRI at least every two years

The limit for any allowed physical activity can be defined on the basis of exercise stress test done in the hospital setting; the use of commercially available heart rate monitoring devices for sports participation can be helpful in keeping the heart rate in a safe range during physical activity but should not be considered as an alternative to medical follow-up visits.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Competitive sports and other strenuous exercise are always contraindicated. All individuals showing exercise-induced arrhythmias should avoid physical activity, with the exception of light training for those individuals showing good suppression of arrhythmias on exercise stress testing while on therapy. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006]. The risk for arrhythmias during sports in individuals who have pathogenic variants in genes associated with CPVT but no clinical phenotype (no exercise-induced arrhythmias) is not known; thus it may be safest for these individuals to refrain from intense physical activities.

Digitalis favors the onset of cardiac arrhythmias due to delayed afterdepolarization (DAD) and triggered activity; therefore, digitalis should be avoided in all individuals with CPVT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because treatment and surveillance are available to reduce morbidity and mortality, first-degree relatives should be offered clinical work up and molecular genetic testing if the family-specific pathogenic allelic variant(s) are known. Indeed, the availability of effective preventive therapies can reduce the number of fatal arrhythmic events if individuals with pathogenic variants are diagnosed early.

If the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) are not known, all first-degree relatives of an affected individual should be evaluated with resting ECG, Holter monitoring, and – most importantly – exercise stress testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Beta-blockers (preferentially nadolol or propranolol) should be administered throughout pregnancy in affected women.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ELANE-related neutropenia, the following are recommended:

Dental examination for gingival and periodontal disease

Evaluation (particularly of those with severe congenital neutropenia) by an otolaryngologist and pulmonologist for chronic sinopulmonary inflammation and deep abscesses

Evaluation of individuals with severe congenital neutropenia for evidence of myelodysplasia or leukemia

Treatment of Manifestations

Conventional management includes prompt treatment of fevers and infections with antibiotics.

Individuals with abdominal pain require careful evaluation for the potentially lethal complications of peritonitis and bacteremia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is effective in elevating blood neutrophil counts in both congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia. G-CSF treatment ameliorates the symptoms and problems of infections in almost all affected individuals. (Although both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used to treat ELANE-related neutropenia, G-CSF is much more effective and associated with fewer adverse effects than GM-CSF.)

In cyclic neutropenia, G-CSF shortens the periods of neutropenia as well as the length of the neutropenic cycle. Treatment is known to be effective at least as early as age six months to one year. Studies indicate that treatment is effective with no adverse effects on growth, development, or pregnancy outcome with follow-up to age 18 years [Dale et al 2003; Dale, unpublished observations].

Treatment of cyclic neutropenia requires daily or alternate-day injections of G-CSF, normally in a dose of approximately 2 µg/kg/day. Individuals with congenital neutropenia often require higher doses (e.g., 5-10 µg/kg/day).

Common side effects of G-CSF include bone pain and headache, splenomegaly, and osteoporosis. Vasculitis, rashes, arthralgias, and glomerulonephritis have been infrequently reported [Dale et al 2003].

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)

For affected individuals with a well-matched donor, HSCT may be the preferred treatment option [Choi & Levine 2010, Oshima et al 2010].

HSCT is the only alternative therapy for individuals with congenital neutropenia who are refractory to high-dose G-CSF or who undergo malignant transformation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Good dental hygiene with regular hygiene visits (several times per year) and careful brushing and flossing are recommended.

Surveillance

For those individuals with congenital neutropenia not undergoing HSCT, surveillance for evidence of malignant transformation to MDS/AML is critical to allow early therapeutic intervention. Observation should include the following:

General evaluations by parents and medical personnel several times a year

Blood counts several times a year

Annual bone marrow cytogenetic studies because of the frequent association of monosomy 7 and malignant transformation

Note: Although sequencing of the receptor for G-CSF (G-CSF-R) from peripheral blood may also provide evidence of evolution to MDS/AML [Ancliff et al 2003a], its clinical utility is not yet clearly established [Freedman & Alter 2002, Cassinat et al 2004, Beekman & Touw 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of at-risk relatives can help identify those with mild or moderately severe disease who may benefit from treatment. If the family-specific ELANE pathogenic variant is known, molecular genetic testing can be used; otherwise serial ANCs can be evaluated.

Note: Complete blood counts (CBCs) obtained weekly for a month until an ANC lower than 0.2 x 109/L is documented in more than one sample confirms the diagnosis. A similar series of counts not showing neutropenia rules out this diagnosis.

Treatment of these individuals with G-CSF or any other modality should be based on medical history and the severity of symptoms. It is not yet clear if there are specific risks (i.e., osteoporosis, myelodysplasia, or leukemia) associated with administering G-CSF to such individuals, but conservative management is recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management 

Pregnancies in women with severe chronic neutropenia are at substantial risk for miscarriage.

A review of the records of 88 women (183 pregnancies) with congenital, cyclic, idiopathic or autoimmune neutropenia compared outcomes in those on G-CSF therapy during pregnancy with those not on G-CSF therapy during pregnancy [Boxer et al 2010]. In general the health of all the infants was equivalent for the two groups. Other findings included:

Reduced risk of fetal loss in the women treated during pregnancy.

Eleven complications (one premature rupture of membranes, two life-threatening infections, two minor infections, and six premature labors) in 55 women (123 pregnancies) not treated with G-CSF during pregnancy.

No life-threatening infections, no premature labors, five minor infections, and one patient who developed severe thrombocytopenia in 41 women (60 pregnancies) treated with G-CSF during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Unrelated cord blood transplantation for neutropenia is being investigated; outcome appears to depend on the closeness of the match [Mino et al 2004, Nakazawa et al 2004, Ferry et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditionsTo determine the extent of functional disturbance in an individual diagnosed with dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) deficiency, the following are indicated:

Assessment of standing time (length of time that the affected individual is able to stand)

Medical history

Consultation with a clinical geneticist or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

For the most part, treatment for DBH deficiency is supportive and directed at relieving orthostatic symptoms.

The treatment of choice is administration of L-threo-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine (or droxidopa, marketed in the USA as Northera™). Droxidopa is converted directly to NE by L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, thereby bypassing DBH (Figure 1).

Administration of 100 to 500 mg droxidopa orally twice or three times daily increases blood pressure and concomitantly restores plasma NE to the normal range; however, urinary NE excretion exceeds normal levels.

Although NE becomes detectable, plasma epinephrine concentration still remains below a detectable level.

Droxidopa administration restores DOPA to within the normal range and reduces DA somewhat, but plasma concentration of DA and its metabolites remains somewhat elevated [Biaggioni & Robertson 1987].

This favorable alteration in catecholamines alleviates the orthostatic hypotension and restores function to a near-normal level. An affected female completed a marathon approximately five years after her diagnosis, while taking 1200 mg of droxidopa daily [Garland et al 2005b].

Individuals with DBH deficiency respond somewhat to standard therapeutic approaches for autonomic failure but not nearly as well as they respond to droxidopa.

Fludrocortisone, at dosages of 0.1-0.3 mg daily, has been used with some benefit, but marked orthostatic hypotension still occurs.

Indomethacin (50 mg 3x/day) has been of limited benefit in raising blood pressure.

Metyrosine, a tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor, raises blood pressure and reduces urinary DA concentration in individuals with DBH deficiency. However, the dose normally used for pheochromocytoma has too much of a pressor effect and has some side effects, including sedation.

Ptosis can be corrected by surgery.

Sinus problems should be treated as needed.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Droxidopa can improve the orthostatic hypotension and symptoms, but these recur if treatment is stopped.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The effect of droxidopa on renal function is unknown.

Surveillance

Renal function should be assessed by BUN and plasma creatinine at a minimum of every two years and more often if a loss of function is evident. Plasma magnesium and potassium should also be assessed.

Individuals on droxidopa should be encouraged to report any adverse events to their physician.

Affected individuals should be queried at least yearly about continued efficacy of droxidopa against orthostatic hypotension and symptoms. Adjustment of dosage may be required.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Untreated individuals with DBH deficiency should avoid hot environments, strenuous exercise, standing still, and dehydration.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

At least two affected women have successfully given birth [Scurrah et al 2002] following uncomplicated deliveries. Based on these experiences, it is recommended that affected pregnant women have their blood pressure monitored regularly throughout the pregnancy and delivery so that the droxidopa dose can be modified as needed. One or two extra doses of droxidopa should be available to be taken as needed at the time of delivery. Dose adjustment may also be required post partum. The effects of maternal droxidopa therapy on the developing fetus have not been studied in humans; however, studies on pregnant animals do not suggest an increased risk for malformations in offspring.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a dystrophinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical therapy assessment

Developmental evaluation before entering elementary school for the purpose of designing an individualized educational plan, as necessary

At the time of diagnosis or by age six years, evaluation for cardiomyopathy by electrocardiography, cardiac echocardiography, and/or MRI [Towbin 2003, Bushby et al 2010b]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate management of males with DMD/BMD can prolong survival and improve quality of life.

Dilated cardiomyopathy. Recommendations are based on an American Academy of Pediatrics policy statement and various additional publications [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005, Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012].

A retrospective observational study found that ventricular remodeling may occur in males with DMD and BMD with early diagnosis and treatment of cardiomyopathy [Jefferies et al 2005]. Among 69 affected boys with a first echocardiogram indicating dilated cardiomyopathy (e.g., LVEP <55% or left ventricular dilation), 27 with DMD and four with BMD were started on an ACE inhibitor at a mean age of 15 years. If echocardiography at three months showed no improvement, a beta blocker (carvedilol or metoprolol) was added. When these 31 individuals had repeat echocardiography at a mean of 3.3 years later, left ventricular size and function had normalized in 19 (66%), improved in eight (26%), and stabilized in two (8%). Mean LVEF increased from 36% to 53%. Measurement of reduced sphericity indicated improved ventricular geometry.

Whether this therapy reverses the cardiomyopathy or only masks the manifestations of a progressive process is not clear; however, a more recent study [Duboc et al 2005] lends support to the hypothesis that early introduction of afterload reduction therapy may lead to improved preservation of myocardial function and reduced mortality [Colan 2005, Duboc et al 2007]. Further studies are underway to create evidence-based recommendations for the prevention and treatment of cardiomyopathy in men with DMD/BMD.

The authors' institution commonly treats children with DMD or BMD early with an ACE inhibitor and/or beta blocker. When used in combination, these appear to lead to initial improvement of left ventricular function; however, ACE inhibitors are also used without beta blockers. The impact of combined prophylactic treatment is currently under investigation in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial. The optimal time to start treatment in DMD is unknown, but most cardiologists will initiate treatment when the LVEF drops below 55% and fractional shortening is less than 28% [Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012]. Angiotensin II-receptor blockers (ARBs) such as losartan are similarly effective and can be used in cases of poor tolerability of ACE inhibitors [Allen et al 2013]. In cases of overt heart failure, other heart failure therapies including diuretics and digoxin are used as needed. Cardiac transplantation is offered to persons with severe dilated cardiomyopathy and BMD with limited or no clinical evidence of skeletal muscle disease.

Scoliosis treatment as needed is appropriate.

Corticosteroid Therapy

Studies have shown that corticosteroids improve the strength and function of individuals with DMD.

Prednisone. It is hypothesized that prednisone/prednisolone has a stabilizing effect on membranes and perhaps an anti-inflammatory effect:

In a randomized double-blind six-month trial, prednisone administered at a dose of either 0.75 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day increased strength and reduced the rate of decline in males with DMD [Mendell et al 1989].

In two successive six-month trials of prednisone therapy, improvement began within ten days of starting the treatment, required a single dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day of prednisone for maximal improvement, reached a plateau after three months, and was sustained for as long as three years in those children maintained on doses of 0.5 and 0.6 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991].

One open-label study suggested that therapy with prednisone could prolong ambulation by two years. Side effects include weight gain (>20% of baseline) (in 40%), hypertension, behavioral changes, growth retardation, cushingoid appearance (in 50%), and cataracts [Mendell et al 1989, Griggs et al 1993].

Follow-up studies showed that a dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day was more beneficial than a dose of 0.3 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991]. However, a subsequent study proved the effectiveness of lower doses of prednisolone (0.35 mg/kg/day) in both DMD and BMD. One of the authors noted sustained effectiveness with doses initiated at 0.75 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose: 40 mg) and gradually reduced (usually because of advancing age and weight gain) to as low as 0.4 mg/kg/day. At lower doses of 0.3 mg/kg/day, the improvement is less robust [Darras, personal communication].

Alternate-day dosing and intermittent dosing (e.g., 10 days “on,” 10 or 20 days “off”) are also used.

A study showed reduced incidence of side effects by high-dose (5 mg/kg), twice-weekly dosing [Connolly et al 2002].

A randomized, cross-over, controlled trial of intermittent prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) therapy (prednisone or placebo) during the first ten days of each month for six months showed that prednisone slowed deterioration of muscle function in individuals with DMD [Beenakker et al 2005]; side effects did not negatively affect quality of life.

Similar conclusions regarding the effect and side-effect profile of prednisone treatment for DMD were reached by a Cochrane systematic review [Manzur et al 2004, Manzur et al 2008] and also by the 124th European Neuromuscular Centre workshop on the treatment of DMD [Bushby et al 2004].

High-dose weekly prednisone, 5 mg/kg, given each Friday and Saturday (total 10 mg/kg/week) can be considered as an alternative to daily treatment in males on a daily regimen with excessive weight gain and behavioral issues [Bushby et al 2010a].

Whether the improvement seen in individuals with DMD treated with prednisone is the result of an immunosuppressive effect remains unclear, as individuals treated with azathioprine did not have a beneficial effect.

Deflazacort, a synthetic derivative of prednisolone used in Europe but not currently available in all countries (e.g. U.S.A.), is thought to have fewer side effects than prednisone, particularly with regard to weight gain [Angelini 2007]. A larger study comparing deflazacort to prednisone, carried out in Europe, showed that the two medications were similarly or equally effective in slowing the decline of muscle strength in DMD. Another European multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial of deflazacort versus prednisone in DMD showed equal efficacy in improving motor function and functional performance [Bonifati et al 2000]. A more recent study of deflazacort treatment showed efficacy in preserving pulmonary function as well as gross motor function [Biggar et al 2006].

In a comparison of two different protocols of deflazacort treatment in DMD, a 0.9-mg/kg/day dose was more effective than a dose of 0.6 mg/kg/day for the first 20 days of the month and no deflazacort for the remainder of the month [Biggar et al 2004]; 30% of children on the highest dose developed asymptomatic cataracts that required no treatment. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 studies showed that deflazacort improved strength and motor function more than placebo; whether it has a benefit over prednisone on similar outcomes remains unclear [Campbell & Jacob 2003]. Despite the lack of conclusive evidence for superiority of deflazacort over prednisone in the area of effectiveness [Moxley et al 2005], some experts believe that the more favorable side-effect profile (particularly with regard to weight gain) associated with deflazacort makes it a better choice than daily treatment with prednisone.

Initiation and length of treatment. Data regarding the optimal age to begin treatment with corticosteroids or the optimal duration of such treatment are insufficient. It has been proposed that individuals with DMD begin treatment with low-dose prednisone as soon as the diagnosis is made (age 2-5 years) [Merlini et al 2003]; however, large-scale controlled trials to study the efficacy and safety of corticosteroid therapy in early DMD have yet to be conducted. A large, NIH-funded multicenter blind randomized trial (FOR DMD) comparing the efficacy, tolerability, and side effects of three regimens (prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day, prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day switching between ten days on and ten days off treatment, and deflazacort 0.9 mg/kg/day) is currently being conducted in young (4–7 year old) steroid-naïve children with DMD. Thus, at this point corticosteroid therapy remains the treatment of choice for affected individuals between ages five and 15 years. Corticosteroid therapy is not recommended in children under age two years [Bushby et al 2010a].

Published guidelines. The following recommendations for corticosteroid therapy are in accordance with the national practice parameters developed by the American Academy of Neurology and the Child Neurology Society [Moxley et al 2005] (full text).

Boys with DMD who are older than age five years should be offered treatment with prednisone (0.75/mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 40 mg) as soon as plateauing or decline in motor skills is noted. Prior to the initiation of therapy, the potential benefits and risks of corticosteroid treatment should be carefully discussed with each individual.

To assess benefits of corticosteroid therapy, the following parameters are useful: timed muscle function tests, pulmonary function tests, and age at loss of independent ambulation.

To assess risks of corticosteroid therapy, maintain awareness of the potential corticosteroid therapy side effects (e.g., weight gain, cushingoid appearance, short stature, decrease in linear growth, acne, excessive hair growth, gastrointestinal symptoms, behavioral changes). There is also an increased frequency of vertebral and long bone fractures with prolonged corticosteroid use [King et al 2007].

The optimal maintenance dose of prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) should be continued if side effects are not severe. Significant but less robust improvement can be seen with gradual tapering of prednisone to as low as 0.3 mg/kg/day.

If excessive weight gain occurs (>20% over estimated normal weight for height over a 12-month period), the prednisone dose should be decreased to 0.5 mg/kg/day. If excessive weight gain continues, the dose should be further decreased to 0.3 mg/kg/day after three to four months.

Deflazacort (0.9 mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 36-39 mg) can also be used to treat DMD. Side effects of asymptomatic cataracts and weight gain should be monitored.

BMD. Information about the efficacy of prednisone in treating individuals with BMD is limited. Many clinicians continue treatment with glucocorticoids after loss of ambulation for the purpose of maintaining upper limb strength, delaying the progressive decline of respiratory and cardiac function, and decreasing the risk of scoliosis. Retrospective data suggest that the progression of scoliosis can be reduced by long-term daily corticosteroid treatment; however, an increased risk for vertebral and lower-limb fractures has been documented [King et al 2007]. Men on steroid therapy were less likely to require spinal surgery [Dooley et al 2010b].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiorespiratory

Evaluation by pulmonary and cardiac specialists before surgeries [Finder et al 2004]

Administration of pneumococcal vaccine and influenza vaccination annually [Finder et al 2004]

Nutritional. Assessment if:

Planning to commence steroids [Davidson & Truby 2009]

Dysphagia is present

Patient is chronically constipated

Major surgery has been planned

Patient is malnourished

Muscular

Physical therapy to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Exercise

All ambulatory boys with DMD or those in early non-ambulatory phase should participate in regular gentle exercise to avoid contractures and disuse atrophy.

Exercise can consist of a combination of swimming pool and recreation-based activities. Swimming can be continued in non-ambulatory patients under close supervision, if medically safe.

If patients complain of muscle pain during or after exercise, the activity should be reduced and monitoring for myoglobinuria should be carried out. Myoglobinuria within 24 hours after exercise indicates overexertion leading to rhabdomyolysis.

Bone health

Assessments [Bushby et al 2010b, Darras 2011]:

Blood

Measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphorus, and activity of alkaline phosphatase

25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) level in springtime or biannually

Magnesium and parathyroid hormone levels may be considered

Urine (calcium, sodium, creatinine)

Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning

At baseline (age ≥3 years) or at start of corticosteroid therapy

Repeated annually in those at risk (history of fractures, chronic corticosteroid therapy) and those with DEXA Z score <-2

Spine radiograph

If back pain is present

To exclude vertebral compression fracture

To assess degree of kyphoscoliosis if present on physical examination

Bone age if growth failure occurs (height for age < 5th percentile or if linear growth is faltering) in persons on or off corticosteroids

Interventions:

Exposure to sunshine and a balanced diet rich in vitamin D and calcium to improve bone density and reduce the risk of fractures. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with a dietician.

Vitamin D supplementation should be initiated if the vitamin D serum concentration is <20 ng/mL [Bachrach 2005, Biggar et al 2005, Quinlivan et al 2005] and should be considered in all children if levels cannot be maintained [Bushby et al 2010b]. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with an endocrinologist and in accordance with country-specific pediatric guidelines.

Intravenous bisphosphonates; recommended in persons with symptomatic vertebral fracture(s), but a bone health expert should be consulted.

Use of oral biphosphonates for prophylaxis or treatment remains controversial.

Surveillance

Cardiac. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for optimal cardiac care in persons with DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] (full text) and consensus guidelines published in 2010 [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) include the following:

DMD

Complete cardiac evaluation at least every two years, beginning at the time of diagnosis or by the age of six until the age of ten years or at the onset of cardiac symptoms if they occur earlier

Note: At minimum, the evaluation should include an electrocardiogram and a noninvasive cardiac imaging study such as echocardiography or cardiac MRI.

At approximately age ten years, or at the onset of cardiac signs and symptoms, annual complete cardiac evaluation

Note: Most individuals with DMD demonstrating cardiac signs and symptoms are relatively late in their course.

If evaluation reveals ventricular dysfunction, the 2010 consensus guidelines recommend initiation of pharmacologic therapy and surveillance at least every six months

BMD. Complete cardiac evaluations beginning at approximately age ten years or at the onset of signs and symptoms. Evaluations should continue at least every two years.

The AAP recommendations for optimal cardiac care of female carriers for DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] include the following:

Education about the risk of developing cardiomyopathy and about the signs and symptoms of heart failure

Complete cardiac evaluation by a cardiac specialist with experience in the treatment of heart failure and/or neuromuscular disorders, with the initial evaluation to take place in late adolescence or early adulthood, or earlier at the appearance of cardiac signs and symptoms

Starting at age 25 to 30 years, screening with a complete cardiac evaluation at least every five years

Treatment of cardiac disease similar to that for boys with DMD or BMD

Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function testing before confinement to a wheelchair (usually age ~9-10 years)

Evaluation by a pediatric pulmonologist twice yearly after ANY of the following [Finder et al 2004]:

Confinement to a wheelchair

Reduction in vital capacity below 80% predicted

Age 12 years

The 2010 consensus guidelines [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) make detailed recommendations regarding pulmonary care, including:

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device;

Manual and mechanically assisted cough techniques;

Indications for nocturnal and then daytime noninvasive ventilation as well as for tracheostomy.

Orthopedic

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures and scoliosis in those with DMD and BMD

Evaluation for surgical interventions as needed

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with DMD/BMD should avoid botulinum toxin injections.

Although it is recommended that triggering agents like succinylcholine and inhalational anesthetics be avoided in patients with DMD or BMD because of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia or malignant hyperthermia-like reactions (rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, hyperkalemia), it should be noted that an extensive literature search did not find an increased risk of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in people with DMD or BMD when compared with the general population [Gurnaney et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Heterozygous females need to be identified for the purpose of cardiac surveillance (see Surveillance). Therefore, genetic counseling and molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variant is known) should be offered to females who are the sisters or maternal female relatives of an affected male and to females who are a first-degree relative of a known or possible carrier female.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management for Heterozygous Females

Symptomatic heterozygous women should undergo an evaluation for dilated cardiomyopathy ideally prior to conceiving a pregnancy or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. Asymptomatic heterozygous women should consider undergoing a cardiac evaluation prior to conception or when a pregnancy is recognized. Those with evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy should be treated and/or monitored by a cardiologist and a high-risk obstetrician.

Therapies Under Investigation

Aminoglycosides. Up to 15% of individuals with DMD exhibit the pathogenic variant known as a premature stop codon. Suppression of stop codons has been demonstrated with aminoglycoside treatment of cultured cells; the treatment creates misreading of RNA and thereby allows alternative amino acids to be inserted at the site of the mutated stop codon. In the mdx mouse, in vivo gentamicin therapy resulted in dystrophin expression at 10%-20% of that detected in normal muscle [Barton-Davis et al 1999], a level that provided some degree of functional protection against contraction-induced damage.

Aminoglycoside therapy has been suggested as an alternative to gene therapy; however, it is applicable only for individuals with premature stop codons.

In a preliminary study in which gentamicin (7.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to four individuals for two weeks, full-length dystrophin did not appear in the muscles of the treated individuals [Wagner et al 2001].

Some authors, unable to reproduce the results previously published for the mouse model of DMD, have called for more preclinical investigation of this potential therapy [Dunant et al 2003].

In an in vitro study dystrophin expression was detected in myotubes of males with DMD using gentamicin; however, the treatment was more effective in persons with the nonsense variant TGA than TAA or TAG [Kimura et al 2005].

In a clinical study of 12 people with DMD whose pathogenic variants resulted in premature stop codons, no statistically significant benefit on clinical outcome measures of efficacy was shown after weekly or biweekly gentamicin infusions for six months [Malik et al 2010].

Ataluren (PTC124) is a new, orally administered non-antibiotic drug that appears to promote ribosomal read-through of nonsense (stop) variants.

Preclinical efficacy studies in mdx mice have yielded encouraging results [Barton et al 2005, Welch et al 2007].

A Phase I multiple-dose safety trial is ongoing [Hirawat et al 2005].

In a Phase IIb, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 174 ambulatory males with DMD/BMD were given placebo or low- or high-dose ataluren for 48 weeks. The high-dose ataluren and placebo groups failed to show statistically significant change in the six-minute walk distance [Finkel et al 2010]. Patients treated with low-dose ataluren (10-10-20 mg/kg/day) had an approximately 29-meter change in the six-minute walk distance, close to the 30-meter change deemed clinically significant and higher than that for the placebo group.

Additional studies with low-dose ataluren (10 mg/kg in the morning, 10 mg/kg at noon, and 20 mg/kg in the evening) are currently in progress.

Morpholino antisense oligonucleotides mediate exon skipping [Aartsma-Rus et al 2006a] and have improved the mdx mouse model of DMD [Wilton & Fletcher 2005, Alter et al 2006, Wilton & Fletcher 2010].

In preliminary human studies, the intramuscular injection of antisense oligonucleotides that bind to exon 51 and induce its skipping during messenger RNA splicing proved to be safe and led to local dystrophin synthesis within the injected muscles [van Deutekom et al 2007, Kinali et al 2009].

Systemic weekly subcutaneous administration of an oligonucleotide targeting exon 51 (PRO051) induced dystrophin expression in ten of 12 patients with DMD. Furthermore, a 12-week extension study showed improvement in the six-minute walk test in eight of 12 patients [Goemans et al 2011].

In a double-blind randomized controlled trial of exon skipping using an oligonucleotide targeting exon 51 (eteplirsen), high and low dose treatment cohorts were compared to placebo for 24 weeks, after which all people with DMD were on treatment [Mendell et al 2013]. Boys who did not lose ambulation experienced a 67.3 meter benefit on a 6-minute walk test compared to affected individuals given placebo with subsequent delayed treatment. In addition to ambulation stability, eteplirsen restored dystrophin in the individuals treated with 30 mg/kg/day and 50 mg/kg/day, as well as in the affected people on placebo who were treated subsequently. A Phase III multicenter study is currently in progress.

Oxandrolone, an anabolic (androgenic) steroid with a powerful anabolic effect on skeletal muscle myosin synthesis [Balagopal et al 2006], was shown in a pilot study to have effects similar to prednisone, with fewer side effects [Fenichel et al 1997]. A randomized prospective controlled trial showed that oxandrolone did not produce a significant change in the average manual muscle strength score of males with DMD compared with placebo; however, the mean change in quantitative muscle strength was significant [Fenichel et al 2001]. The investigators conducting this study felt that oxandrolone may be useful before initiating therapy with corticosteroids because it is safe in the short term, accelerates linear growth, and may be beneficial in slowing the progression of weakness. However, the long-term effects of oxandrolone in the treatment of DMD have not been studied, thus its use has not been adapted widely.

Gene therapy. Experimental gene therapies are currently under investigation [Gregorevic & Chamberlain 2003, Tidball & Spencer 2003, van Deutekom & van Ommen 2003, Nowak & Davies 2004].

Gregorevic et al [2004] and Gregorevic et al [2006] reported systemic administration of rAAV6 vectors resulting in successful delivery of DMD to affected muscles of dystrophin-deficient mdx mice (a mouse model for DMD), which led to preservation of muscle function and extension of life span.

Despite progress in the field, cellular immunity issues may be an obstacle to successful dystrophin gene therapy for DMD. One study showed evidence of dystrophin-specific T cells in four of six treated patients, with two of them harboring immunity to dystrophin even before vector treatment [Mendell et al 2010]. It is plausible that truncated dystrophin protein from revertant dystrophin fibers primes the cellular immune system [Arechavala-Gomeza et al 2010, Moore & Flotte 2010].

Stem cell therapy is under investigation but remains experimental [Gussoni et al 1997, Gussoni et al 1999, Gussoni et al 2002, Skuk et al 2004]. Isolation and transplantation of muscle satellite cells yielded promising results in mouse experiments [Blau 2008, Cerletti et al 2008]. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy also seems promising for muscle regeneration in DMD [Markert et al 2009].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Immunosuppression with azathioprine is not beneficial.

Myoblast transfer has been inefficient.

Creatine monohydrate has been studied as potential treatment in muscular dystrophies and neuromuscular disorders [Tarnopolsky & Martin 1999, Walter et al 2000, Louis et al 2003]. In a randomized, controlled, cross-over trial, 30 boys with DMD were given creatine (~0.1 g/kg/day) for four months and placebo for four months [Tarnopolsky et al 2004]. Treatment with creatine resulted in improved grip strength of the dominant hand and increased fat-free mass when compared to placebo; however, no functional improvement was noted. In another controlled study, no statistically significant benefit over placebo was found in 50 boys randomized to receive either creatine 5 g/day, glutamine 0.6 g/kg per day, or placebo [Escolar et al 2005]. The primary outcome measure was the modified manual muscle testing score. Given the lack of significant benefit, treatment with creatine monohydrate cannot be recommended routinely for treatment of DMD. It should be noted that creatine was well tolerated in these studies with no evidence of renal dysfunction; despite that, good hydration is recommended in patients taking creatine.

Cyclosporin was reported to improve clinical function in children with DMD who received the medication for eight weeks. Nevertheless, because of the rare reports of cyclosporin-induced myopathy in individuals receiving the medication for other reasons, the use of cyclosporin in treating DMD remains controversial.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (trichostatin A, valproic acid, phenylbutyrate) have improved the mdx mouse by inducing the expression of the myostatin inhibitor follistatin [Minetti et al 2006]. Human trials are needed to determine the efficacy of these agents.

Myostatin inhibitors or blockers result in increased muscle mass and strength, decreased serum creatine kinase concentration, and improved muscle histology in the mdx mouse [Bogdanovich et al 2002]. However, a Phase I/II trial of MYO-029, an antibody against myostatin, in adults with muscular dystrophy failed to show any improvements in muscle strength or function [Wagner et al 2008]. The study was not powered to look for efficacy. Additional studies are in progress.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LMNA-related DCM, the following evaluations are recommended.

Comprehensive cardiovascular evaluation

Evaluation for conduction system disease and arrhythmia:

Personal and family history of presyncope, syncope, resuscitated sudden cardiac death, palpitations, and other symptoms of arrhythmia

Follow up of abnormalities with additional testing as indicated (e.g., 24-hour monitoring or event monitors)

Referral to a cardiologist or electrophysiologist for any indication of symptomatic disease

Indicated in some patients: invasive electrophysiologic evaluation for conduction system disease

Evaluation for left ventricular dysfunction and DCM:

Family history for cardiomyopathy of any type, personal history of shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, chest pain

Assessment of left ventricular function (most commonly by two-dimensional echocardiography) to determine left ventricular dimension and function. Alternatively, MRI provides similar data, and radionuclide ventriculography provides a measure of the ejection fraction.

Measurement of serum CK concentration to evaluate for skeletal myopathy

In some affected individuals elevated serum CK concentrations with or without a skeletal muscle myopathy similar to Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy or limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is observed.

If CK levels are elevated, an evaluation for skeletal muscle weakness, including neuromuscular evaluation, may be necessary.

History and physical examination for signs and symptoms of skeletal myopathy. If there is evidence of myopathy, refer to a neuromuscular disease specialist for evaluation.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

For the general approach to managing DCM, see Dilated Cardiomyopathy Overview, Management.

The Pasotti et al [2008] report (see Clinical Description) provides the most longitudinal data on LMNA-related DCM: 94 individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant were followed for a median of 57 months (range: 36-107 months). In the report of Brodt et al, the progression from first observed conduction system disease to the onset of ventricular dysfunction in a subset of 64 individuals with LMNA variants was a median of seven years [Brodt et al 2013]. Additional reports of large prospective longitudinal natural history studies of LMNA-related DCM are not yet available.

The Heart Failure Society of America and Heart Rhythm Society (in conjunction with the European Heart Rhythm Association) have commissioned guideline documents for the management of genetic cardiomyopathies that included specific mention of LMNA-related DCM [Hershberger et al 2009, Ackerman et al 2011]. Elements of the guidelines include the following:

Because of the complexity of treatment interventions in LMNA-related DCM in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, referral to centers with special expertise in cardiovascular genetic medicine should be considered.

Consider therapy based on cardiac phenotype (i.e., DCM or arrhythmia).

With an established arrhythmia or known risk of arrhythmia, consider ICD implantation before the ejection fraction falls below 35%. Note that this recommendation was developed in the Heart Failure Society guidelines in large part because of the risk for lethal arrhythmias in persons with an LMNA pathogenic variant who have systolic function well above a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%, the usual measure of systolic dysfunction below which ICDs are indicated in most US guidelines.

The management of LMNA-related DCM is focused on treatment of conduction system disease, arrhythmia, and DCM.

Cardiac conduction system disease and arrhythmias

Chronic atrial fibrillation unresponsive to cardioversion is treated with anticoagulants and agents for ventricular rate control.

Other symptomatic supraventricular arrhythmias are treated with pharmacologic agents, and at times are augmented with electrophysiologic intervention (e.g., atrial or atrioventricular node ablations).

Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias or asymptomatic but significant heart block is treated with an implantable electronic pacemaker. However, when a device is to be implanted, use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) rather than an electronic pacemaker has been advocated and should be strongly considered, as the risk of mortality from sudden cardiac death usually accompanies supraventricular arrhythmias and conduction system disease. Sudden cardiac death presumably results from lethal tachyarrhythmias despite the presence of a pacemaker to treat bradyarrhythmias [van Berlo et al 2005, Meune et al 2006], and for this reason use of an ICD has been advocated for LMNA-related cardiomyopathy with significant conduction system disease and/or arrhythmia regardless of the left ventricular ejection fraction [Hershberger et al 2009].

Symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and resuscitated sudden cardiac death are treated with an ICD and drug therapy as needed.

When DCM is present and the left ventricular ejection fraction is less than 35%, an ICD should be implanted following the usual guidelines [Yancy et al 2013].

LMNA-related DCM

Treatment of symptomatic DCM, including heart failure, is pharmacologic with ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, diuretics, and other conventional approaches, as summarized in Yancy et al [2013] (full text).

With progressive deterioration in left ventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction <30%) while still in sinus rhythm, some experts recommend full anticoagulation to prevent the development of left ventricular mural thrombus and embolic events including stroke.

Cardiac transplantation or other advanced therapies should be considered with progressive DCM, advancing heart failure, and otherwise refractory disease in persons receiving comprehensive cardiovascular care from experts in the field [Yancy et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Whether conventional medical therapy (e.g., ACE inhibitors, beta blockers) is able to ameliorate or prevent DCM or heart failure in LMNA-related DCM has not been formally tested and is therefore unknown.

Implantable cardiac defibrillators or pacemakers are highly effective in preventing sudden cardiac death.

Surveillance

Screening and identification of DCM before the onset of symptoms enables the initiation of medical therapy that may delay disease progression.

Individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant who are found to have any ECG abnormality should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation for disease progression at least annually [Brodt et al 2013]. This should include, minimally, an ECG, 24- or 48-hour rhythm monitoring, and measurement of ventricular function.

Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic LMNA variant should undergo cardiovascular evaluation (medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every one to two years and/or whenever new symptoms arise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs (e.g., beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, others) that exacerbate heart block, if present, should be avoided in LMNA-related DCM unless an electronic pacemaker is in place.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When the LMNA pathogenic variant has been identified in a family, molecular genetic testing can be offered to relatives at risk in order to facilitate prompt diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment in those in whom the LMNA pathogenic variant has been detected.

If molecular genetic testing is not possible, the first-degree relatives of a proband with LMNA-related DCM should be evaluated annually by medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG to determine if any have detectable DCM and/or conduction system disease.

Note: Because the age of onset is variable and penetrance is reduced, a normal baseline echocardiogram and ECG in a first-degree relative who has not undergone molecular genetic testing does not rule out LMNA-related DCM in that individual, and the recommendations set forth in Surveillance should be followed.

Any abnormal cardiovascular test results in a relative of a proband with a known LMNA pathogenic variant should be followed up with a full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for any acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease). Results on screening tests that do not meet criteria for DCM but do show some abnormality (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal function; decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle) may reflect variable expression of LMNA-related DCM in that relative. Targeted genetic testing to clarify the diagnosis as well as close surveillance (e.g., cardiovascular testing every 1-2 years) for progression of cardiovascular disease is recommended for such individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is contraindicated in women with DCM because of the significantly increased mortality with pregnancy in DCM. Women with DCM who become pregnant should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician. At-risk women with unknown genetic status should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation and be offered genetic counseling prior to pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the individual clinical manifestation of a DCX-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic/neuropediatric evaluation, including EEG and cerebral MRI

Developmental assessment including assessment of motor skills, cognition, and speech

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Feeding and swallowing assessment in individuals lacking head control or the ability to sit without support

Treatment of Manifestations

Epileptic seizures require antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Individual treatment strategies should be developed depending on the type and frequency of seizures, EEG results, and responsiveness.

In addition, appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life for individuals with classic lissencephaly.

Feeding problems in newborns may require special strategies including placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube to deal with weak or uncoordinated sucking.

Physical therapy helps to maintain and promote mobility and prevent contractures. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required.

Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor skills and oral motor control.

A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Adequate antiepileptic treatment is important to reduce the number of seizures, which may be associated with irreversible and life-threatening complications.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of seizure activity by regular neurologic examination and EEG

In the event of new neurologic findings or neurologic deterioration, evaluation for seizures

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference as well as assessment of psychomotor development as a part of regular health maintenance evaluations

Monitoring of orthopedic complications including foot deformity and scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Episodically, callosotomy (surgical disconnection of the cerebral hemispheres by cutting through the corpus callosum) had been reported to improve drop attacks in persons with SBH [Landy et al 1993]. In contrast individuals with focal seizures appear not to benefit from focal resection of epileptogenic tissue [Bernasconi et al 2001].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy (DDON) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Affected males

Neurologic evaluation for dystonia and ataxia

Screening developmental assessment in children for early intervention and special educational planning

Formal audiologic assessment

Speech and language evaluation for assessment of speech therapy requirements

Ophthalmologic evaluation, including ERG

In adults, evaluation for dementia and/or psychiatric disturbance

Clinical genetics consultation

Carrier females

Audiologic assessment

Neurologic evaluation for focal dystonia

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Educational. Educational programs appropriate to the developmental and sensory deficits, including training in tactile sign language, should be provided.

Audiologic. Hearing aids have been used in affected males with only variable success [Tranebjaerg et al 1995], probably because of the central location of the auditory damage. The use of cochlear implantation (CI), reported in one instance, had a dubious outcome in a four year-old boy with immunodeficiency and DDON syndrome caused by a de novo deletion of exon 1 of TIMM8A and deletion of exons 17-19 of BTK [Brookes et al 2008].

Dystonia. Dystonia and associated neck pain and spasticity improved over a two-year period in two individuals treated with GABA β-agonists [Kreisel et al 2004]. In contrast, symptoms did not seem to improve with treatment with levodopa, carbamazepine, or trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride [Ujike et al 2001].

Favorable short-term outcome as assessed by the Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale from pallidal deep brain stimulation has been reported in two cases of DDON. However, longer-term benefit in additional patients has not yet been reported [Romito et al 2011, Cif et al 2012].

Ophthalmologic. Spectacle correction is appropriate where indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Agammaglobulinemia (see X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia). Management focuses on prevention of bacterial infections with the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Long-term follow-up to monitor the highly variable rate of progression and degree of involvement of different organ systems

Regular neurologic evaluations to follow the progression of dystonia and consider pharmacologic treatment

Annual developmental and speech/language assessment in childhood, with appropriate adaptation of educational programming

Annual audiologic assessment

Regular assessment for dementia and/or psychiatric manifestations, with initiation of appropriate care or treatment

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Live viral vaccines should be avoided if agammaglobulinemia is present.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion, the following are recommended:

Routine clinical examination, including dysmorphology examination and broad review of all organ systems

Measurement of height and weight

Evaluate for hypertension and diabetes in patients who are overweight or obese

Developmental assessment with cognitive and behavioral testing,including neuropsychological testing by a clinical psychologist

Consultation with a neurologist (with possible EEG and MRI) if history suggests possible seizures

Consideration of brain MRI for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, oropharyngeal dysfunction, or other manifestations of brain stem dysfunction

Diagnostic radiograph of the spine to evaluate for vertebral anomalies/scoliosis

Consideration of evaluation and echocardiogram by a cardiologist if a heart murmur is detected

Audiologic testing

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Manifestations of the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion are variable, and treatment should be targeted to the specific findings identified.

Early diagnosis and provision of therapies facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists (sue.g.,a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist) is recommended based on specific symptoms or signs.

Neurodevelopmental disabilities including ASD. Interventions may include speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. Because of the high incidence of expressive language delays, speech therapy and augmentative and assistive means of communication should be considered early.

Guidelines for management of individuals with ASD are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers et al 2007] (full text).

Seizures. Choice of antiepileptic medication is guided by patient age, seizure type, EEG and imaging findings, side effect profiles, and response to treatment. No specific antiepileptic medications have been identified to be most effective.

Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is responsive to low doses of carbamazepine and phenytoin.

Obesity and overweight. It is important to initiate weight management and nutrition counseling in young children before excessive weight gain begins. Control food intake with normal portion sizes and limitation of food intake between meals. Maintain an active lifestyle. Increased calories are specifically ingested in the absence of hunger and suggest that close supervision of portion size and meal times can be beneficial.

Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia. Brain and spine MRI are indicated for new or progressive symptoms suggestive of a Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia, including sleep apnea, dysarthria, dysphagia, gait disturbance, and scoliosis.

Surveillance

Routine developmental surveillance and screening are recommended because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism. See the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines on surveillance and screening to identify patients with developmental disorders in general [Council on Children with Disabilities 2006] and autism in particular [Johnson et al 2007] and recommendations for management of children with ASD [Myers et al 2007] (Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Surveillance should include the following:

Monitoring of height, weight, and BMI

Monitoring for abnormal movements, staring spells, or other events of concern for possible seizures

Monitoring for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, and other symptoms of brain stem or spinal cord dysfunction that could indicate Chiari malformations/cerebellar ectopia, and neurologic consultation and brain MRI if indicated

Clinical screening for scoliosis until the age of skeletal maturity

Annual evaluation and monitoring of hearing in first three years of life

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations and facilitate long-term monitoring for emerging medical or mental health concerns

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Some medications used to treat behavioral problems (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine) may lead to excessive weight gain. When possible, use medications that are not associated with weight gain.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 1p36 deletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurements of growth parameters and plotting on standard growth charts Note: No growth charts are available specifically for 1p36 deletion syndrome.

Physical and neurologic examination

Evaluation of cognitive, language, and motor development and social skills

Examination of the heart (auscultation, electrocardiogram, echocardiography) in infancy

Waking/sleeping video-EEG-polygraphic studies (mainly in infancy) to detect infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia

Evaluation for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux with referral to a dysphagia team

Ophthalmology consultation in infancy or at diagnosis even in the absence of overt anomalies

Physical examination for skeletal anomalies (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry); if anomalies are present, referral for orthopedic and physical therapy evaluation

Comprehensive otolaryngologic evaluation and audiologic screening (brain stem auditory evoked responses) as early as possible to allow appropriate interventions

Renal function testing and renal ultrasonography in infancy to detect structural renal anomalies

Periodic thyroid function screening

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Up to 25% of persons with 1p36 deletion syndrome develop infantile spasms associated with a hypsarrhythmic EEG; the spasms are responsive to ACTH.

In most individuals, all seizure types are well controlled by standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), provided that the first-choice drug is started as early as possible.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices, e.g., the "Haberman feeder," can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with an unrepaired cleft palate. Gavage feeding is recommended for those with poorly coordinated swallow. Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner. In one study, a few individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome were managed with gastrostomy [Heilstedt et al 2003b].

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair. "Non-compaction" cardiomyopathy responds well to the standard pharmacotherapy (e.g., furosemide, captopril, digoxin) [Battaglia et al 2008].

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner. Visual inattentiveness, reported in up to 64% of individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome, can be treated with an appropriate rehabilitation program [Bolognini et al 2005, Battaglia et al 2008].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Other. Structural anomalies (e.g., gastrointestinal, renal) should be addressed in a standard manner. Hypothyroidism is treated in a standard manner.

Surveillance

Systematic follow-up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Battaglia et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete medical history to include evidence of any congenital malformations, seizure disorder, or behavioral problems

Complete physical and dysmorphology examination

Determination of head circumference, height, weight, and other anthropometric measurements

Specialty evaluation of obesity or failure to thrive

Multidisciplinary developmental and neurologic evaluation to assess motor and cognitive skills as well as autism, autism spectrum behaviors, and other behavioral issues

Echocardiogram to evaluate for congenital cardiac anomaly

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for possible Wilms tumor, renal malformation, or other renal problems

Ophthalmology evaluation for strabismus and/or refractive errors

Audiologic assessment for possible hearing loss

Brain imaging studies (MRI, CT scan) in individuals with abnormal neurologic findings

EEG for evaluation of seizures and treatment monitoring

X-ray to evaluate for the presence of scoliosis and skeletal anomalies examination. While the clinical implications of osteopenia have not been studied in the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, clinicians should be aware that this is a common finding. x-rays should be performed at diagnosis and should be repeated as warranted by clinical examination. The youngest individual with osteopenia in the authors' series is age three years.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Depending on the age and presenting concerns of the individual with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, care from specialists in the following areas is often necessary: medical genetics, speech pathology, occupational and physical therapy, child development, neurology, cardiology, gastroenterology, nutrition/feeding in cases of failure to thrive, ophthalmology, and audiology.

Medical care may be coordinated by a medical geneticist or other health care professional skilled at managing patients with complex needs.

Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program. Most school-age children benefit from an individualized educational program (IEP) with input from a multi-specialty group of physical, occupational, and speech therapists with pediatric assessment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

At this time, it is not known why many individuals with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome are obese. To the extent that it is feasible, the authors recommend an active lifestyle and good dietary habits to help avoid development of obesity.

Surveillance

Jones et al [2011] suggested that individuals with 2q deletions sparing 2q37.1 likely have a less than 5% risk of developing Wilms tumor; therefore, they do not recommend surveillance for the development of Wilms tumor in these individuals. Wilms tumor screening can be considered for individuals with deletions including 2q37.1, although screening intervals are not delineated. Wilms tumor screening protocols in individuals with WAGR syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome include abdominal ultrasounds every three months until mid-childhood [Beckwith 1998]. The practitioner caring for an infant or young child with a 2q37 deletion is encouraged to monitor the literature for updates.

When the 2q37 microdeletion is identified in early childhood, screening for the development of renal cysts at age four years and again at puberty is suggested [Falk & Casas 2007].

The following are also appropriate:

Ongoing routine pediatric care

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information about the syndrome

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric evaluation to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is reasonable to perform genetic testing of any young child at risk, so that Wilms tumor surveillance can be considered in those with a deletion that includes 2q37.1.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Dent disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of renal function (measured or estimated GFR; urine protein excretion)

Assessment for nephrocalcinosis and kidney stones by imaging studies

For those with evidence of renal stones or nephrocalcinosis: urine studies for kidney stone risk factors (including calcium and citrate excretion)

Assessment of risk for bone disease (serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase)

Note: Elevated alkaline phosphatase has been reported in all individuals with clinical rickets [Wrong et al 1994].

For those with evidence of bone disease and/or growth delay: more complete assessment of bone health (i.e., serum vitamin D concentration and parathyroid hormone [PTH] level; x-rays of long bones for evidence of osteomalacia)

In children, evaluation of stature using standard growth charts

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No guidelines have been established for treatment of Dent disease. The primary goals of treatment are to decrease hypercalciuria, prevent kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis, and delay the progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD).

Interventions aimed at decreasing hypercalciuria and preventing kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis have not been tested in randomized controlled trials. Thiazide diuretics in doses greater than 0.4 mg/kg/day have decreased urinary calcium excretion by more than 40% in boys with Dent disease [Raja et al 2002, Blanchard et al 2008]. However, frequent side effects included hypokalemia, volume depletion, and cramping. Careful dosing and close monitoring for these side effects are necessary.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) have been used in children with proteinuria to prevent or delay further loss of kidney function; however, their effectiveness has not been clear. Note: Treatment with ACE inhibitors or ARB may be somewhat beneficial, at least in those with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) on kidney biopsy, as angiotensin blockade is not thought to significantly affect LMW proteinuria.

Although a high citrate diet has been shown to slow progression of CKD in clcn5 knockout mice [Cebotaru et al 2005] and has been used in the treatment of Dent disease, no human trials have proven its effectiveness. Note: Citrate is commonly used in Lowe syndrome to treat the metabolic acidosis resulting from renal tubular acidosis.

If males with Dent disease progress to ESRD, renal replacement therapy becomes necessary. Hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and renal transplantation are appropriate options. Because Dent disease manifestations are largely localized in the kidney, the disease will not recur.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Bone disease has not been a prominent component of Dent disease in recent case series. When present it has been reported to respond to vitamin D supplementation and phosphorus repletion in those with elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels [Wrong et al 1994].

Limited reports suggest that growth failure can be successfully treated with human growth hormone without adversely affecting kidney function [Sheffer-Babila et al 2008].

Surveillance

Renal function measured as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) should be monitored at least annually together with the parameters used to stage chronic kidney disease (i.e., blood pressure, hematocrit/hemoglobin, urinary calcium excretion, and serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations).

More frequent visits and monitoring for complications of chronic kidney disease (i.e., hypertension, anemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism) as well as consideration of intensified treatment of cardiovascular risk factors may be indicated if GFR falls below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD Stage 3B).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposure to potential renal toxins (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and intravenous contrast agents) should be avoided, especially if renal function is below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD stage 3B).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate male relatives at risk for Dent disease 1 (caused by mutation of CLCN5) or Dent disease 2 (caused by mutation of OCRL) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, measurement of urinary excretion of low molecular-weight proteins (e.g., alpha 1 microglobulin, retinol binding protein) is a sensitive and specific test.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DEPDC5-related epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed clinical history to establish seizure type and frequency

Routine EEG

High-resolution brain MRI to evaluate for focal cortical dysplasia or other cortical malformation

Cognitive and behavioral assessment when problems are suspected based on focused medical history

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The response to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) is variable. While some individuals respond well to first-line AEDs, others are more refractory to treatment. In four families with ADNFLE with a heterozygous DEPDC5 pathogenic variant, seven of nine individuals were drug resistant [Picard et al 2014], whereas in previous studies of individuals with ADNFLE, only one third of individuals were drug resistant.

There is currently no evidence that seizures respond better to one particular AED.

Attention should be paid to possible (long-term) side effects of AEDs. As in all patients with epilepsy, the goal should be to use as few AEDs as possible, in the lowest efficacious dose.

In patients with focal cortical dysplasia, the possibility of epilepsy surgery should be explored early in the disease course. In one study, four of five unrelated individuals who underwent epilepsy surgery with resection of the focal cortical dysplasia had a favorable postoperative outcome [Baulac et al 2015]. Several of these individuals were part of a larger family in which most family members had a history of focal epilepsy without FCD.

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Surveillance

Serial EEGs are appropriate when seizure frequency increases or when seizures of new symptomatology occur.

Repeat brain MRI with a higher resolution technique is recommended in individuals with treatment-resistant seizures whose first brain MRI was normal.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Since loss-of-function variants in DEPDC5 are thought to lead to increased activation of the mTORC1 pathway, mTORC1 inhibitors including rapamycin (or everolimus) have been proposed as a potential targeted treatment option. So far, the clinical use of mTORC1 inhibitors has only been studied in the more severe mTORopathy tuberous sclerosis, caused by pathogenic variants in TSC1 or TSC2. Further studies are needed to determine whether (subsets of) patients with DEPDC5 could benefit from treatment with this class of drugs.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia (LAMM syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

ENT evaluation with CT/MRI of the temporal bones to evaluate inner ear anomalies that may influence habilitation options (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Audiology evaluation

Dental evaluation

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for kidney anomalies, including unilateral stenosis of the uretero-pelvic junction

Ophthalmology evaluation for strabismus and hypermetropia

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Ideally, the team evaluating and treating a deaf individual should include an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required.

Enrollment in appropriate early intervention programs and educational programs for the hearing-impaired

An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, brain stem implants, and cochlear implantation:

Consideration of vibrotactile hearing devices or brain stem implants for individuals with complete labyrinth aplasia [Riazuddin et al 2011]

Evaluation for cochlear implantation in those individuals with a cochleovestibular nerve and a cochlear remnant. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children over age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss.

Routine ophthalmologic management of strabismus, if present

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae: Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies.

In contrast, early auditory intervention (whether through amplification or cochlear implantation) is effective (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). However, the presence of severe inner ear anomalies and Michel aplasia in individuals with LAMM syndrome limits auditory habilitation options.

Delayed gross development (presumably the result of impaired balance and profound deafness) increases the risk for accidents and trauma.

The risk for accidents can be addressed in part by use of visual or vibrotactile alarm systems in homes and schools.

The risk for pedestrian injury can be reduced by choosing routes with visual displays of crosswalks.

Anticipatory education of parents, health providers, and educational programs about hazards can help address the risk for falls [Gaebler-Spira & Thornton 2002, Chakravarthy et al 2007].

Surveillance

Yearly evaluations by the multi-disciplinary team mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, individuals with LAMM syndrome and a residual cochlea should be counseled appropriately.

Because of the high risk for disorientation when submerged in water, swimming needs to be undertaken with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Since some individuals with LAMM syndrome can have normal-appearing ears, an audiology evaluation is recommended for sibs at 25% risk to allow early diagnosis and treatment of hearing impairment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with deafness and myopia (DFNMYP) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Audiology evaluation for sensorineural hearing loss and auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder

Ophthalmology evaluation for myopia and other ocular comorbidities

Evaluation by early intervention/educational programs for the hearing impaired including baseline speech and language assessment in children

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment includes the following:

Implementation of hearing habilitation devices including hearing aids and vibrotactile hearing tools as needed

Consideration of cochlear implantation (CI) in individuals with severe-to-profound sensorineural hearing loss and auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. Although no CI has been reported among individuals with deafness and myopia syndrome, favorable outcome of CI has been reported in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder [Breneman et al 2012].

Enrollment in early intervention programs and educational programs for the hearing impaired to maximize long-term speech and language outcomes

Routine correction of refractive error

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

ENT and audiology evaluations at least yearly

Regular speech and language evaluation to monitor language development

Regular ophthalmology evaluations to monitor for potential complications from high myopia including cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal detachment

Yearly evaluations by a clinical geneticist familiar with hereditary forms of deafness

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with hearing loss should avoid the following:

Known environmental factors for hearing loss (e.g., loud noises)

Ototoxic medications

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt treatment of hearing loss and myopia. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the SLITRK6 pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Clinical audiology and ophthalmology evaluations if a molecular diagnosis has not been established.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of hearing loss and needs in an individual diagnosed with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss, the following are recommended:

Audiometry, including bone conduction testing

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

When hearing loss is mild to moderate, fitting of hearing aids to provide improved amplification is warranted.

When the hearing loss becomes severe to profound, cochlear implants (CIs) can be considered. In individuals with preserved or relatively good low-frequency hearing and severe-to-profound high-frequency loss, a short electrode may be considered. Short electrodes boost the high frequencies while preserving residual low-frequency hearing.

For school-age children or adolescents, special assistance for the hearing impaired may be warranted and, where available, should be offered.

Surveillance

Audiograms should be obtained on an annual basis to follow progression of hearing loss.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The rate of progression of high-frequency hearing loss can be reduced by encouraging individuals with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss to avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace and during recreation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Determining in infancy or early childhood whether a relative of a person with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss has inherited the KCNQ4 deafness-related variant allows for early support and management of the child and the family.

Evaluations may include:

Molecular genetic testing if the deafness-related KCNQ4 variant in the family is known.

Audiometry and sequence analysis of KCNQ4, or a multi-gene panel [Kothiyal et al 2010, Shearer et al 2010, Shearer & Smith 2015] that includes KCNQ4 if the deafness-related variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.To establish the extent of involvement and needs in an individual diagnosed with nonsyndromic hearing loss, DFNA3, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete assessment of auditory acuity using age-appropriate tests including ABR testing, auditory steady-state response (ASSR) testing, and/or pure tone audiometry (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Early diagnosis, habilitation with hearing aids or cochlear implantation, and educational programming will diminish the likelihood of long-term speech or educational delay.

The following are indicated:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration of cochlear implantation, an effective habilitation option for persons with preserved residual hearing [Gantz et al 2016]

Recognition that unlike with many clinical conditions, management and treatment of mild-to-profound deafness fall largely within the purview of the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for more detailed discussion of management issues.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Semiannual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important is avoidance of repeated exposure to loud noises.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If a GJB2 or GJB6 pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs shortly after birth so that appropriate early support and management can be provided to the child and family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be human trials for this condition.To establish the extent of involvement and needs in an individual diagnosed with nonsyndromic hearing loss and deafness caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in GJB2 (DFNB1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete assessment of auditory acuity using age-appropriate tests such as ABR testing, auditory steady-state response (ASSR) testing, and pure tone audiometry

Ophthalmologic evaluation for refractive errors

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration of cochlear implantation (CI), an excellent habilitation option for persons with profound deafness

Recognition that, unlike with many clinical conditions, the management and treatment of severe-to-profound congenital deafness falls largely within the purview of the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

Also see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for more detailed discussion of management issues.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important among these for persons with DFNB1 and mild-to-moderate hearing loss is avoidance of repeated overexposure to loud noises.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If both GJB2 pathogenic variants have been identified in the proband, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs shortly after birth so that appropriate early support and management can be provided to the child and family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with OTOF-related deafness, the following evaluations are recommended (see Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview):

Assessment of auditory acuity (ABR emission testing, pure tone audiometry)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

See Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview for details.

Hearing habilitation

for those with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss

Hearing aids should be fitted as soon as possible.

Cochlear implantation (CI) should be considered as soon as possible. Case reports have shown good outcomes of CI in individuals with OTOF-related deafness [Rouillon et al 2006, Wu et al 2011] and reviewed in Eppsteiner et al [2012].

Note: In the first one or two years of life, OTOF-related deafness can appear to be an auditory neuropathy based on electrophysiologic testing; however, with time electrophysiologic testing becomes more consistent with a cochlear defect. Distinguishing between an auditory neuropathy and a cochlear defect is important as cochlear implants may be of marginal value in persons with auditory neuropathy such as that observed in deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy (DDON) [Brookes et al 2008] as well as individuals with deafness caused by pathogenic variants in spiral ganglion-expressed genes [Eppsteiner et al 2012].

Educational programs designed for individuals with hearing impairment are appropriate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

For individuals with TS-NSAN:

Prevent febrile episodes.

Avoid the level of exercise and/or ambient conditions that would cause body temperature to rise.

Treat febrile episodes as quickly as possible to return body temperature to normal.

Educate individuals and their caregivers that the onset of hearing loss may be the first sign of a pyretic/infectious event requiring treatment [Starr et al 1998]. Appropriate precautions including avoidance of potentially dangerous or noisy situations should be encouraged.

Surveillance

For individuals with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss:

Examine semiannually or annually by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment.

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months to determine whether hearing loss is progressive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with TS-NSAN. Avoid excessive body temperatures when possible. Follow-up studies have not demonstrated the success of preventative measures as an effective long-term treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband shortly after birth by molecular genetic testing of the OTOF deafness-related variants found in the proband so that appropriate early support and management can be provided to the child and family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with DFNX1 nonsyndromic hearing loss and deafness, the following evaluations are recommended:

Pure tone audiograms, auditory brain stem response testing

Assessment of the vestibular function

Analysis of the family history to identify obligate carrier females and other males who may be affected

Treatment of Manifestations

Sensorineural hearing loss

Cochlear implantation in affected males can improve auditory and oral communication skills.

See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview.

Surveillance

Hearing loss in DFNX1 is prelingual or postlingual and progressive, regular audiologic evaluation is recommended to assess hearing status and progression of hearing loss.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk males at birth with detailed audiometry to assure early diagnosis and treatment of hearing loss.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DGUOK deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended.

For both neonatal multisystem diseases and isolated hepatic disease

Evaluation of hepatic status by a physician familiar with the care of children with liver failure. Initial testing should include measurement of serum concentrations of ALT, AST, GGT, bilirubin, albumin, and coagulation profile.

Hepatic sonography and AFP to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma. AFP is a sensitive, but not specific, marker used to differentiate hepatocellular carcinoma from nonmalignant liver disease. Although the value of a highly elevated serum concentration of AFP in the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma in DGUOK deficiency is not known, the possibility of hepatocellular carcinoma should be considered in individuals with a solid tumor detected by abdominal ultrasound examination and a highly increased serum AFP concentration [Freisinger et al 2006].

Nutritional assessment by a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic failure

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Additional evaluation for neonatal multisystem diseases

Measurement of plasma lactate and fasting blood sugar

Comprehensive neurologic examination and developmental/cognitive assessment. Neuroimaging may be considered.

Additional evaluation for isolated hepatic disease. Urine analysis and evaluation for urine amino acids to evaluate for renal involvement

Treatment of Manifestations

Management requires a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, child development, nutrition, and clinical genetics.

Management of Neurologic Manifestations in Neonatal Multisystem Disease

Hypotonia may be significant. Therefore, ongoing monitoring of gross motor development and skills with the intervention of appropriate therapies is appropriate in these children.

Management of Liver Involvement in both Neonatal Multisystem Disease and Isolated Hepatic Disease

Management of liver disease should be guided by the results of initial evaluation in consultation with a hepatologist.

Children with cholestatic liver disease or renal disease are at significant risk of nutritional insufficiency; therefore, a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic and renal dysfunctions should be involved in their care:

Formulas with an enriched medium-chain-triglyceride content may provide better nutritional support for infants with cholestasis than formulas with predominantly long-chain triglycerides [Feranchak & Sokol 2007].

Cornstarch may reduce symptomatic hypoglycemia in individuals with isolated hepatic disease.

Fractional meals and enteral nutrition during the night can result in good nutritional control [Dimmock et al 2008b].

Affected individuals often develop life-threatening liver failure, but the benefits of liver transplantation are disputable because of the frequent severe neurologic involvement due to the underlying mitochondrial disease. A total of 14 individuals with DGUOK deficiency were reported to have undergone liver transplantation.

The one-year survival rate was 64%.

Five of the 14 survived longer than five years.

Eight of the 14 died within two years of transplantation from severe pulmonary hypertension (3/8), neurologic degeneration (2/8), procedure-related complications (2/8), and early postoperative multi-organ failure (1/8).

Although survival after liver transplantation for DGUOK deficiency is lower than survival after liver transplantation for other indications, a significant proportion of affected individuals survived more than five years despite initial neurologic abnormalities. Nevertheless, a decision to perform liver transplantation for individuals with DGUOK deficiency remains difficult because neurologic manifestations may occur and/or worsen after liver transplantation despite their absence before transplantation [Grabhorn et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Nutritional deficiencies such as essential fatty acid deficiency and fat-soluble vitamin deficiency need to be prevented. Specific management requires a dietician experienced in the management of individuals with liver disease. Affected individuals need to be supplemented with fat-soluble vitamins and essential fatty acids [Feranchak & Sokol 2007].

Because they have not been associated with clinical decompensation in persons with DGUOK deficiency, routine immunizations (including influenza vaccine) are recommended at this time for all individuals with DGUOK deficiency and their household contacts.

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition.

Neonatal multisystem disease:

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Developmental and neurologic assessment

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Isolated hepatic disease

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Evidence of renal disease (proteinuria and aminoaciduria)

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), the following are recommended:

Evaluation by a hematologist

Evaluation by a clinical geneticist for congenital malformations and to obtain a detailed family history

Ophthalmology evaluation for glaucoma and cataract for individuals on steroid therapy

Orthopedic evaluation for individuals with clinical findings suggestive of Klippel-Feil anomaly or Sprengel deformity

Orthopedic evaluation for individuals with upper limb and/or thumb anomalies

Ultrasound examination of the kidney and urinary tract

Evaluation by a nephrologist and a urologist, as appropriate

Evaluation by a cardiologist including echocardiography

Developmental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

Eventually, 40% of individuals are steroid dependent, 40% are transfusion dependent, and 20% go into remission [Chen et al 2005, Vlachos et al 2008].

Corticosteroid administration. Corticosteroids can initially improve the red blood count in approximately 80% of affected individuals.

The recommended corticosteroid is prednisone with a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day given orally once a day in the morning, beginning after age twelve months. An increase in hemoglobin concentration is usually seen in two to four weeks.

Corticosteroids may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose. Monitoring of blood counts is needed to ensure that the red cell hemoglobin concentration remains at 80-100 g/L, the minimum required for transfusion independence.

The corticosteroid maintenance dose varies and can be extremely low in some individuals. The recommended maximum maintenance dose is ≤0.5 mg/kg/day or ≤1 mg/kg every other day.

If after approximately one month the recommended steroid dose does not sustain the red cell hemoglobin concentration in an acceptable range, the corticosteroids should be tapered and discontinued.

Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006].

Red blood cell transfusion. If the individual is resistant to corticosteroid therapy, chronic transfusion with packed red blood cells is necessary. The goal of transfusion therapy is a red cell hemoglobin concentration of 80-100 g/L, which is usually adequate for maintaining growth and development [Vlachos et al 2008, Vlachos & Muir 2010].

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for DBA. Persons with DBA who are transfusion dependent or develop other cytopenias are often treated with HSCT.

In one study of 61 persons with DBA who underwent bone marrow transplantation (BMT), the majority (67%) received their bone marrow grafts from an HLA-matched related donor. The three-year probability of overall survival was 64% (range 50%-74%). Transplantation from an HLA-identical sib donor was associated with better survival [Roy et al 2005].

The Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Registry of North America describes 36 individuals who underwent HSCT: 21 HLA-matched sib stem cell transplants and 15 alternative donor stem cell transplants. Survival greater than five years from SCT for allogeneic sib transplants was 72.7% ±10.7% versus survival greater than five years from alternative donor transplants of 17.1% ±11.9% [Lipton et al 2006, Vlachos et al 2008]. Survival was the best (92.3%) for children younger than age ten years transplanted using an HLA-matched sib.

Note: (1) It is recommended that the affected individual, sibs, and parents undergo HLA typing at the time of diagnosis of DBA to identify the most suitable bone marrow donor in the event that HSCT would be required. (2) Because penetrance of DBA is incomplete, it is possible that a relative considered as a bone marrow donor could have a pathogenic variant but not manifest findings of DBA. (3) Relatives with a pathogenic variant, regardless of their clinical status, are not suitable bone marrow donors, because their donated bone marrow may fail or not engraft in the recipient.

Cancer treatment. Treatment of malignancies should be coordinated by an oncologist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Transfusion iron overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals. The following methods are used both to assess for evidence of transfusion iron overload and to evaluate the effectiveness of iron chelation therapy:

Measurement of iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen, which accurately determines total body iron accumulation

MRI for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a measurement of hepatic iron concentration

Note: (1) Although the latter two methods of total iron measurement are noninvasive, they are available at only a limited number of centers and should be correlated with the “gold standard” liver biopsy [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. (2) Routine measurement of serum ferritin concentration is not reliable in detecting iron overload because the serum ferritin concentration does not always correlate with total body iron accumulation.

Iron chelation therapy is usually started after ten to 12 transfusions (170-200 mL/kg of packed red blood cells), when serum ferritin concentration reaches 1000-1500 µg/L, or when hepatic iron concentration reaches 6-7 mg/g of dry weight liver tissue.

Deferasirox is recommended in individuals age two years or older. It is administered once daily in an oral dose of 20-30 mg/kg/day. Side effects are usually mild and include rash, nausea, creatinine elevation, and rarely proteinuria and transaminase elevation. Patient satisfaction with deferasirox is greater than with desferrioxamine, mostly because of ease of administration [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Porter et al 2008, Vlachos et al 2008].

Desferrioxamine is administered four to seven nights a week in an eight- to 12-hour subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. The recommended initial dose is 40 mg/kg/day; the maximum dose is 50-60 mg/kg/day. The dose and frequency of infusion may be modified using the serum ferritin concentration or the hepatic iron concentration as a guide [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. Side effects include ocular and auditory toxicity and growth retardation. Compliance rate is hampered by the demanding administration route and schedule.

Note: Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in individuals with DBA [Vlachos et al 2008] because its side effects include neutropenia [Henter & Karlen 2007].

Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006].

One of the critical side effects of corticosteroids is growth retardation. If growth is severely impaired, corticosteroids should be stopped and replaced by a short-term red blood cell transfusion regimen [Vlachos et al 2008].

Surveillance

The following are indicated:

Complete blood counts several times a year

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity periodically and if evidence of another cytopenia or failure of current treatment is noted

Monitoring of blood pressure in individuals who are steroid dependent

Monitoring of growth individuals who are steroid dependent and in those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Evaluation by an endocrinologist; recommended for individuals who are steroid dependent and those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Cancer surveillance includes the following:

In individuals with DBA who are otherwise healthy, every four to six months: an interim history, physical examination, and measurement of blood count

If red blood-cell, white blood-cell, or platelet counts fall rapidly, bone marrow aspirate with biopsy and cytogenetic studies (including karyotype and FISH analysis) to look for acquired abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7, and 8 that are associated with certain cancers [Vlachos et al 2008]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in persons with DBA because its side effects include neutropenia [Vlachos et al 2008].

Individuals with DBA, especially those on corticosteroid treatment, should take reasonable precautions to avoid infections, as steroid-dependent individuals are more prone to complications resulting from immune system dysfunction.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual to allow early diagnosis and appropriate monitoring for bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, and related cancers.

Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Consideration of other testing (e.g., mean corpuscular volume, eADA, and/or fetal hemoglobin concentration) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known – especially of relatives being considered as bone marrow donors [Vlachos et al 2008].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Management of pregnancy in marrow failure disorders requires obstetricians with expertise in high-risk pregnancies and hematologists with experience with marrow failure syndromes [Alter et al 1999].

During pregnancy the maternal hemoglobin level must be monitored.

Use of low-dose aspirin up to 37 weeks’ gestation may help prevent vasculo-placental complications in women with a history of a previous problematic pregnancy [Faivre et al 2006].

A study that surveyed 64 pregnancies in women with DBA found a high incidence of complications in both mothers and children. Risks include the following [Faivre et al 2006]:

Intrauterine growth retardation

Preeclampsia

Retroplacental hematoma

In utero fetal death

Preterm delivery

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with diastrophic dysplasia (DTD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Cervical films (antero-posterior, lateral, and in flexion-extension)

Complete skeletal survey

Orthopedic referral

Physical therapy consultation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In children, the principle is to maintain joint positioning and mobility as much as possible by physical means (physiotherapy and casting, e.g., for clubfeet); however, tightness of joint capsules and ligaments in diastrophic dysplasia makes correction by casting or other physical means difficult.

Surgical correction of clubfoot is indicated when the foot deformity makes ambulation impossible; however, surgery needs to be undertaken with caution as deformities tend to recur. Simple tenotomy does not suffice, and more extensive plasty of tarsal bones may be needed [Weiner et al 2008].

The rate of spontaneous correction of cervical kyphosis is rather high, and cervical spine surgery in infancy may be restricted to individuals with clinical or neurophysiologic evidence of spinal cord impingement.

Indications for surgical correction of scoliosis have not been established nor have criteria to define a successful surgical outcome [Matsuyama et al 1999, Remes et al 2001]. It should be noted that surgical series are inevitably biased toward more severely affected individuals. Although surgery before puberty may be helpful for those who have developed severe spinal deformity with respiratory compromise or neurologic signs, surgical correction of scoliosis is best postponed until after puberty in the majority of individuals with diastrophic dysplasia [Jalanko et al 2009]. The key issue seems to be the early identification of those individuals at risk for rapid increase in scoliotic curvature.

Total arthroplasty of hips and knees decreased pain and increased mobility in a group of adult Finnish individuals with premature degenerative arthrosis [Helenius et al 2003a, Helenius et al 2003b]. The authors concluded that arthroplasty is indicated in "relatively young adults" with DTD.

A conservative approach to the treatment of cystic ear swelling is recommended [Cushing et al 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Physical therapy may prevent early joint contractures.

Surveillance

Annual monitoring of spinal curvature to prevent neurologic complications and joint contractures is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints and thus should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although not specific to DTD, women with severe kyphoscoliosis may experience complications related to thoracic compression in later stages of pregnancy and need to be monitored closely. Kyphoscoliosis can also complicate the use of spinal anaesthetics and consultation with an anaesthesiologist prior to delivery would be advisable.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dyskeratosis congenita (DC), it is important to note that the clinical spectrum of DC is broad and signs and symptoms develop at various ages and rates. Suggested studies to consider include:

Dermatologic. Thorough skin and nail examination

Growth and development evaluation

Ophthalmic. Thorough examination for complications related to lacrimal duct stenosis, abnormal eyelash growth, and retinal disorders including exudative retinopathy

Dental. Baseline evaluation for oral hygiene, leukoplakia, and oral squamous cell cancer

Otolaryngology. Baseline evaluation for leukoplakia and squamous cell head/neck cancer

Gastrointestinal and hepatic. History of potential swallowing difficulties and/or enteropathy; baseline liver function tests

Genitourinary. For males, assessment for urethral stenosis

Musculoskeletal. Consideration of baseline bone mineral density scan; history of any joint problems

Neurologic. If early-onset neurologic findings (e.g., ataxia) or many of the complications listed above are present, consideration of brain MRI to evaluate for cerebellar hypoplasia or intracranial calcifications

Hematologic

Evaluation by a hematologist to determine if signs of bone marrow failure are present. Evaluation may include complete blood count and bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.

Consideration of HLA typing of the affected individual, unaffected sibs, and parents in anticipation of possible need for hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function tests (PFTs) including carbon monoxide diffusion capacity

Consideration of bubble echocardiography to evaluate for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations

Evaluation by a pulmonologist if the individual is symptomatic or PFTs are abnormal

Increased risk of cancer

Evaluation by an otolaryngologist and dentist as soon as the individual is able to cooperate with the examination

Gynecologic examination for females starting by age 16 years or when sexually active

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The specific treatment for DC-related complications must be tailored to the individual. The recommendations in this section were first discussed at a DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and subsequently at a meeting of experts convened to review the publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015] Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials. Affected individuals may have few or many of the complications associated with DC. Comprehensive coordinated care among specialties is required.

Bone marrow failure (BMF). Following the model of the Fanconi anemia consensus guidelines [Eiler et al 2008] and updated on the DC treatment guidelines [Savage & Cook 2015], treatment of BMF is recommended if the hemoglobin is consistently below 8 g/dL, platelets lower than 30,000/mm3, and neutrophils below 1000/mm3. If a matched-related donor is available, hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) should be the first consideration for treatment for hematologic problems such as BMF or leukemia regardless of age.

HCT from an unrelated donor can be considered, although a trial of androgen therapy (e.g., oxymetholone or danazol) may be considered first [Khincha et al 2014].

Persons with DC may be more sensitive to androgens than individuals with Fanconi anemia, and the dose must be adjusted to reduce side effects such as impaired liver function, virilization, or behavioral problems (e.g., aggression, mood swings). The suggested starting dose of oxymetholone is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day, half the dose used in Fanconi anemia. It may take two to three months at a constant dose to see a hematologic response.

Side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, need to be monitored carefully. Baseline and follow-up liver ultrasound examinations should be performed for individuals receiving androgen therapy because of the possibility of liver adenomas and carcinomas, which have been reported in Fanconi anemia and in persons using androgens for benign hematologic diseases or for non-hematologic disorders [Velazquez & Alter 2004].

Hematopoietic growth factors may be useful in BMF. However, splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and splenic rupture have been reported in two individuals with DC receiving androgens and G-CSF [Giri et al 2007]. G-CSF with erythropoietin has occasionally been useful but perhaps should also not be used in combination with androgens [Khincha et al 2014].

HCT is the only curative treatment for severe BMF or leukemia in DC. It should be performed at centers experienced in treating DC. Reported problems include graft failure, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), sepsis, pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, and veno-occlusive disease [Berthou et al 1991, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007] that is caused in part by underlying pulmonary and liver disease [Yabe et al 1997, Dror et al 2003, Brazzola et al 2005, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007, Ostronoff et al 2007]. As a result, long-term survival of persons with DC following HCT has been poor. Reduced-intensity preparative regimens being studied in a few institutions may improve long-term outcomes [Dietz et al 2011, Nishio et al 2011, Vuong et al 2010, Gadalla et al 2013, Algeri et al 2015].

The range of clinical phenotypes seen in DC and the possibility of non-manifesting or very mildly affected heterozygotes within families may complicate the selection of related HCT donors [Fogarty et al 2003, Denny et al 2008]. Potential related HCT donors should be tested either for the pathogenic variant present in the proband or, if the pathogenic variant is not known, for telomere length.

Cancer. Specific treatment should be tailored to the type of cancer.

Affected individuals undergoing chemotherapy for cancer may be at increased risk for prolonged cytopenias as a result of underlying BMF. This risk has not been quantitated; studies are ongoing.

Individuals with DC may be at increased risk for therapy-related pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Pulmonary function tests and liver function should be monitored carefully.

Long-term data on the effects of cancer radiotherapy in DC are not available. Affected individuals may be at increased risk for radiotherapy-related complications based on observations in persons undergoing radiotherapy in HCT [Author, personal observation].

Although the risk of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is high in DC, many persons have abnormal cytogenetic clones and/or morphologic changes consistent with abnormal myelopoiesis but may not have severe cytopenias.

Pulmonary fibrosis. The options for therapy in persons with DC and pulmonary fibrosis are primarily supportive care. Lung transplantation may be considered in severe cases, although long-term outcomes have not been studied (see Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with DC should not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.

Surveillance

The recommendations in this section were discussed at the first DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and updated in 2014 at a consensus conference that led to publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015]. Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials.

Bone marrow failure

Consider repeating a complete blood count (CBC) once a year if CBCs are normal. CBCs should be obtained more frequently at the discretion of the treating hematologist.

Consider annual bone marrow aspirate and biopsy that includes morphologic examination and cytogenetic studies.

Individuals on androgen therapy for bone marrow failure

Check liver function tests prior to starting and then every three months.

Perform liver ultrasound examination semiannually for adenomas.

Check cholesterol and triglycerides prior to starting and every six months.

Cancer surveillance. Most solid tumors develop after the first decade (median age of onset: 28 years).

Monthly self-examination for oral, head, and neck cancer

Annual cancer screening by an otolaryngologist

Annual gynecologic examination

Annual skin cancer screening by a dermatologist

Pulmonary fibrosis. Perform annual pulmonary function tests starting either at diagnosis or at an age when the individual is able to appropriately perform the test (typically age ~8 years).

Oral and dental surveillance

Schedule routine screening and dental hygiene visits every six months.

Maintain good oral hygiene.

The individual’s dentist should be made aware of the increased risk of head and neck squamous cell cancers and perform a thorough examination at each visit.

Oral leukoplakia should be monitored carefully and suspicious lesions should be biopsied.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Blood transfusions

Transfusions of red cells or platelets should be avoided or minimized for those who are candidates for HCT.

To minimize the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors if HCT is being considered.

All blood products should be leukodepleted and irradiated.

Radiation. It is prudent to minimize exposure to therapeutic radiation since data on radiation side effects are limited.

Androgens and growth factors. The combination of androgens and G-CSF was associated with splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and rupture in two individuals; thus, the combination should be avoided [Giri et al 2007].

Cancer prevention. Given the increased susceptibility of individuals with DC to developing leukemias and other malignancies, individuals with DC are advised to avoid toxic agents that have been implicated in tumorigenesis, including smoking.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Telomere length testing;

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Individuals with DC who become pregnant may develop pancytopenia or existing cytopenias may worsen. They should be followed closely by a perinatologist.

Therapies Under Investigation

Studies of the effectiveness of danazol, a modified testosterone, are underway in DC and the related telomere biology disorders. Danazol may have fewer side effects than oxymetholone. The response and optimal dosing in DC is not yet defined.

Studies to improve the clinical and molecular characterization of DC are underway at the National Cancer Institute (marrowfailure.cancer.gov).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

In the acute setting, measurement/evaluation of:

Blood acid-base status

Plasma/serum concentration of lactate, glucose, and ammonia

Plasma amino acids

Plasma total and free carnitine

Urine organic acids

Liver function and transaminases (ALT/AST)

Liver size via physical examination and/or ultrasonography

Cardiac size via echocardiography

Clinical genetics consultation

After metabolic stability has been achieved:

Clinical assessment of physical growth and development status

Formal ophthalmologic evaluation if concern for vision loss

Brain MRI if clinical concern for Leigh-like syndrome or other structural brain damage

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Consensus recommendations for the management of DLD deficiency do not currently exist. Theoretical difficulties exist for the management of these patients based on the various metabolic pathways affected by the three affected enzyme complexes. In practice, these difficulties have been experienced and make empiric treatment recommendations challenging.

DLD pathogenic variants cause variable deficiency in three enzymatic pathways. The treatment for individual enzyme complex deficiencies warrants consideration:

Branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex. Management consists primarily of dietary leucine restriction, BCAA-free medical foods, judicious supplementation with isoleucine and valine, and frequent clinical and biochemical monitoring (see MSUD).

α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (αKGDH) complex. Due to the rarity of this isolated deficiency, limited information is available for the management of these patients.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex. Due to defective carbohydrate oxidation, ketogenic diets have become part of regular management in these patients. Additionally, dichloroacetate (DCA) and thiamine supplementation are frequently tried [Patel et al 2012].

Early-Onset Neurologic Presentation

Review of treatment strategies. The multiple strategies that have been attempted in children with an early-onset neurologic presentation do not appear to significantly alter the natural history of disease. Even with treatment, children often die in the neonatal/infantile period or experience various degrees of chronic neurologic impairment if they survive the initial episode. The individual treatment strategies typically address deficiency of one abnormal enzymatic complex.

Protein/BCAA-restriction. Based on decreased BCKDH activity, restriction of protein to recommended dietary allowances (RDA) has been attempted with questionable results. Three of the six reported patients experienced laboratory and/or clinical improvement with the use of protein restriction alone or in combination with medication therapy [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Grafakou et al 2003].

Ketogenic/high-fat diet. Ketogenic/high-fat diets are frequently employed in PDH deficiency [Patel et al 2012] and as a result have been attempted in DLD deficiency. A total of seven patients reported to date have been tried on a ketogenic/high-fat diet:

Five had no clinical or biochemical benefit. Of note, two of the five experienced clinical worsening with an increase in acidosis and hypoglycemia [Robinson et al 1981, Craigen 1996].

Two improved clinically. One was treated with lipid infusions (instead of high-dextrose infusions) during acute episodes [Hong et al 1997, Cerna et al 2001].

Carbohydrate tolerance. Patients with PDH deficiency classically present with lactate elevations due to defective carbohydrate oxidation. Although dextrose infusions may theoretically cause further lactate elevations during acute episodes, provision of dextrose-containing IV fluids is essential for the majority of acutely decompensated patients. Only one patient experienced worsening acidosis with increased dextrose concentrations in the TPN [Cerna et al 2001]. Not surprisingly, this patient is one of the two who benefitted from a ketogenic/high-fat diet.

Dichloroacetate (DCA). Through its ability to stimulate PDH activity by inhibiting PDH kinase, DCA has long been used to safely treat patients with congenital lactic acidosis, mitochondrial disorders, and PDH deficiency [Stacpoole et al 2008, Patel et al 2012]. A total of five patients have been tried on DCA with four experiencing at least transient decreases in lactic acid elevations [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Cerna et al 2001].

Additional therapies used with limited success include:

Thiamine

Coenzyme Q10

Lipoic acid

Riboflavin

Biotin

Empiric recommendations

for acute management (based on the above review)

Goals of therapy should be the correction of metabolic acidosis, promotion of an anabolic/metabolically stable state, maintenance of normoglycemia, and treatment of precipitating factors that may be present. This is typically achieved by the following:

Metabolic acidosis should be treated with sodium bicarbonate if bicarbonate is ≤14 mEq/L and/or blood pH <7.2.

Promotion of an anabolic state:

Maintain serum glucose concentration in the normal range. D10 (half or full-normal saline) with age-appropriate electrolytes should be started at maintenance rate and adjusted based on the presence or absence of increased intracranial pressure or hypoglycemia.

Elevation of plasma leucine and increased intracranial pressure are a potential complication of DLD deficiency. Similar to the management of classic MSUD link, overhydration and quickly infused boluses of fluids should be avoided if possible.

If provision of dextrose-containing fluids worsens metabolic acidosis, consider decreasing the infusion rate and providing the majority of calories in the form of intralipid.

Intralipids can be added to provide additional calories with cautious monitoring for acidemia.

Protein should initially be withheld for a maximum of 24 hours to avoid worsening of catabolism. Protein should then be reintroduced gradually.

Branched-chain amino acids should be introduced slowly and followed closely with frequent plasma amino acid evaluations.

Goal levels/ratios should be similar to those listed in MSUD.

Levocarnitine (IV or PO) 50 - 100 mg/kg/d divided three times per day should be given during the acute period.

Dichloroacetate (DCA) can be considered and continued if lactate decreases with its introduction.

Any precipitating factors (infection, fasting, medications) should be treated/discontinued as soon as possible.

If lactic acidosis/encephalopathy persists, dialysis can be considered as it has been successful in DLD deficiency and classic MSUD [Schaefer et al 1999, Quinonez et al 2013].

Hepatic Presentation

Management of patients with the primarily hepatic presentation typically involves supportive therapy during times of acute liver injury or failure, including the following:

Nutritional support in the form of dextrose-containing IV fluids (6-8 mg/kg/min) with age-appropriate electrolytes and/or frequent feedings [Elpeleg et al 1990, Shaag et al 1999, Brassier et al 2013]

Correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate

Correction of any coagulopathy with fresh frozen plasma

Consideration of DCA treatment for lactic acidosis during acute episodes and for chronic management [Aptowitzer et al 1997, Shaag et al 1999]

Use of dialysis to treat persistent lactic acidosis and encephalopathy (successfully in one patient) [Elpeleg et al 1990]

Avoidance of liver-toxic medications

Episodes of catabolic stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgical procedures, pregnancy) require the assistance/care of a biochemical geneticist.

Limited data exist for chronic management of individuals with the primarily hepatic presentation. Between episodes, patients typically return to baseline and do not require treatment beyond the avoidance of fasting, catabolic stressors, and liver-toxic medications.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No compelling evidence exists for the prevention of acute episodes, despite multiple attempted dietary strategies and medications. The frequency of acute episodes decreases with age in most patients with DLD deficiency.

Although no specific therapy exists to prevent the neurologic dysfunction and/or the hepatic manifestations of DLD deficiency, avoidance of precipitating factors is recommended. As such, empiric recommendations include the following:

Provide protein intake at or around RDA and titrate based on growth and plasma amino acid values. See MSUD for the recommended intake and target levels of leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

Supplement with levocarnitine if deficient.

Avoid fasting, catabolic states, and extremes of dietary intake until dietary tolerance/stressors are identified.

Avoid liver-toxic medications.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided.

Dichloroacetate (DCA) has been associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy; thus, patients receiving this medication require close monitoring [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].

Surveillance

A patient’s primary care physician and biochemical geneticist should follow growth and development regularly. Developmental delays should be identified and treated as early as possible.

Plasma amino acid levels should be regularly followed to guide dietary management by the biochemical geneticist in conjunction with a qualified metabolic nutritionist.

Complications of DLD deficiency including hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, and CNS changes require regular surveillance if present.

Patients receiving dichloroacetate (DCA) need to be monitored for the development of peripheral neuropathy [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Fasting

Catabolic stressors

Liver-toxic medications

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the DLD pathogenic variants in an affected relative are known, at-risk sibs should undergo molecular genetic testing as soon as possible after birth so that those who have inherited both pathogenic variants can receive appropriate treatment and avoid risk factors that may precipitate an acute event. In some instances, families choose to perform prenatal testing so that treatment can begin shortly after birth for those who have inherited both pathogenic variants.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with neonatal diabetes mellitus as a result of pathogenic variants in ABCC8 or KCNJ11, a complete neurologic evaluation should be performed.

To establish the extent of disease in an individual with suspected or confirmed pathogenic variants in PDX1, imaging of the pancreas and evaluation of pancreatic exocrine function (stool elastase, serum concentrations of fat-soluble vitamins) should be performed.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor should be obtained early in the evaluation of PNDM.

Treatment of Manifestations

Initial treatment. Rehydration and intravenous insulin infusion should be started promptly after diagnosis, particularly in infants with ketoacidosis.

Long-term medical management. An appropriate regimen of subcutaneous insulin administration should be established when the infant is stable and tolerating oral feedings. Few data on the most appropriate insulin preparations for young infants are available.

Intermediate-acting insulin preparations (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) tend to have a shorter duration of action in infants, possibly because of smaller dose size or higher subcutaneous blood flow.

The longer-acting preparations with no significant peak-of-action effect such as Lantus® (glargine) or Levemir® (detemir) may work better in small infants.

In individuals with very low insulin requirements, diluted insulin (5 or 10 U/mL) may be more appropriate if used with caution.

Some centers recommend the use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for young infants [Polak & Cave 2007] as a safer, more physiologic, and more accurate way of administering insulin.

Caution:

In general, rapid-acting (lispro and aspart) and short-acting (regular) preparations (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) should be avoided as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events.

Extreme caution should be observed when using a diluted insulin preparation in order to avoid dose errors.

Identification of a KCNJ11 or ABCC8 pathogenic variant is important for clinical management since most individuals with these pathogenic variants can be treated with oral sulfonylureas. Children with pathogenic variants in KCNJ11 or ABCC8 can be transitioned to therapy with oral sulfonylureas; high doses are usually required (0.4-1.0 mg/kg/day of glibenclamide). Transfer protocols are available at www.diabetesgenes.org. Treatment with sulfonylureas is associated with improved glycemic control [Hattersley & Ashcroft 2005, Pearson et al 2006, Thurber et al 2015, Babiker et al 2016].

Long-term insulin therapy is required for all other causes of PNDM, although mild beneficial effect of oral sulfonylureas in persons with GCK pathogenic variants has been reported [Turkkahraman et al 2008, Hussain 2010].

High caloric intake should be maintained to achieve weight gain.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is required in persons with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Aggressive treatment and frequent monitoring of blood glucose concentrations is essential to avoid acute complications such as diabetic ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia.

Long-term complications of diabetes mellitus can be significantly reduced by maintaining blood glucose concentrations in the appropriate range. The American Diabetes Association recommends the following glycemic goals across all pediatric age-groups [American Diabetes Association 2016a]:

Glycemic targets for children younger than age six years:

90-130 mg/dL before meals

90-150 mg/dL at bedtime/overnight

Hemoglobin A1c value < 7.5%

Surveillance

Lifelong monitoring (≥4x/day) of blood glucose concentrations is indicated to achieve the goals of therapy.

Children with PNDM, particularly those with a pathogenic variant in KCNJ11 or ABCC8, should undergo periodic developmental evaluations.

Yearly screening for chronic complications associated with diabetes mellitus should be started after age ten years and should include the following:

Urinalysis for microalbuminuria

Ophthalmologic examination to screen for retinopathy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In general, rapid-acting insulin preparations (lispro and aspart) as well as short-acting (regular) insulin preparations should be avoided (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events in young children.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The management of pregnant women with PNDM should conform to the guidelines for treatment of other forms of diabetes during gestation [American Diabetes Association 2016b]. Glycemic control during gestation is not only important to prevent complications in the mother, but also to prevent fetal overgrowth (due to fetal hyperinsulinemia triggered by the excess of maternal glucose crossing the placenta) and associated complications. Referral to a maternal-fetal medicine specialist should be considered. In addition, high resolution ultrasonography and fetal echocardiography should be offered during pregnancy to screen for congenital anomalies in the fetus.

Until recently, insulin was the mainstay of therapy of diabetes during pregnancy; however, emerging data support the safety and efficacy of glyburide in the treatment of diabetes during pregnancy [Moretti et al 2008]. Thus, in women with PNDM treated with glyburide before pregnancy, it is reasonable to continue this treatment if appropriate glycemic control can be achieved.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (6q24-TNDM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Birth weight, length, and head circumference and any subsequent growth parameters

General dysmorphology examination, preferably by a clinical geneticist including evaluation of tongue size and umbilicus

Neurologic examination and developmental assessment

Investigation of the anatomy of the pancreas by ultrasound examination or MRI

Echocardiogram and ultrasound examination of the liver and kidneys to help identify those infants likely to have 6q24-TNDM caused by mutation of ZFP57

Brain MRI scan if evidence of developmental delay or hypotonia

Serum glucose concentration

C peptide measurement

Pancreatic beta cell autoantibody measurements

Liver function and thyroid function tests

A pediatric endocrinology consultation for follow up of diabetes

Clinical genetics consultation

Patients with hypomethylation at imprinted loci (HIL) should be evaluated for hypotonia and other neurologic features including epilepsy, congenital heart disease, deafness, renal malformations, and pseudohypoparathyroidism with measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphate and parathyroid hormone testing.

Treatment of Manifestations

Rehydration and IV insulin on a sliding scale are usually required. Some infants produce some insulin and can be treated by rehydration alone.

Subcutaneous injection of insulin is introduced as soon as possible, often within two weeks. Continuous insulin pump therapy (as opposed to intermittent insulin injections) has been used successfully in a number of cases in the UK and France [JP Shield, personal communication]. Successful treatment with subcutaneous insulin glargine has also been reported [Barone et al 2011].

Blood glucose concentration should be monitored and insulin doses changed accordingly as in the standard treatment for diabetes mellitus. Insulin can be discontinued when blood glucose concentrations stabilize.

Once diabetes mellitus is in remission, parents need to be alerted to the possibility of recurrence of the diabetes mellitus, particularly during periods of illness. Symptoms such as excessive thirst, polyuria, and repeated bacterial infections should prompt measurement of blood glucose concentration.

If diabetes mellitus recurs, treatment may require diet alone, oral agents, or insulin, although the doses of insulin needed tend to be less than those required in type 1 diabetes mellitus (i.e., some residual endogenous insulin remains). It should be noted that patients do not always require treatment with insulin even in the neonatal period. In several patients at relapse, sulphonylureas or diet alone is adequate [Valerio et al 2004].

Note: Macroglossia could potentially cause airway obstruction; macroglossia severe enough to require treatment has not been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The main concerns are related to failure to make the diagnosis soon enough. Dehydration secondary to hyperglycemia can cause serious long-term sequelae if not treated promptly. Therefore, rehydration is most important in the early stages of the disease.

Surveillance

Periodic glucose tolerance tests can be used to assess insulin secretion. Most children with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus in remission have no evidence of beta cell dysfunction or insulin resistance in the fasting state. Insulin response to intravenous glucose loading is often normal but suggests future recurrence if abnormal [Shield et al 2004].

Measure growth (height, weight, head circumference) at regular intervals (i.e., at least every six months)

Developmental assessment to identify any special educational needs is appropriate.

Children with HIL need to be monitored for developmental delay and special educational needs.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

General factors that predispose to late-onset diabetes (e.g., excessive weight gain) or risk factors for cardiovascular disorders should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Recommendations vary by underlying genetic mechanism:

When the proband is identified as having TNDM caused by an inherited paternal 6q24 duplication, the sibs and offspring of the proband are at increased risk of inheriting the duplication. Screening for diabetes mellitus is appropriate for those infants who have inherited the paternal 6q24 duplication.

For 6q24-TNDM caused by ZFP57 pathogenic variants, sibs are at a 25% risk for the same condition, although the clinical findings can be variable.

Although individuals reported to have 6q24-TNDM as the result of an imprinting center epimutation have been simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family), it is not clear if all cases are de novo (see also Genetic Counseling).

Screening the mother and sibs of these individuals for diabetes mellitus may be appropriate.

Offspring of female probands with 6q24-TNDM caused by a hypomethylation of the maternal PLAGL1/HYMAI differentially methylated region (DMR) may be at risk of having 6q24-TNDM or of developing diabetes mellitus later in life and should be offered testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no specific guidelines on pregnancy management for women with a history of 6q24-TNDM. However, it is important to inform health professionals during the pregnancy of a susceptibility to diabetes. Rarely some affected women with classic 6q24-TNDM genetic aberrations (e.g., duplication of 6q24, paternal UPD 6, methylation mutations) will develop gestational diabetes; therefore, pregnancy is thought to be a risk factor for recurrence of diabetes.

If prenatal diagnosis identifies an affected fetus, fetal growth is anticipated to lag during the third trimester.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with DNMT1-related dementia, deafness, and sensory neuropathy (HSAN IE), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination to determine the extent of sensory involvement, including sensory testing and observation for skin ulceration

Past medical history to determine extent of autonomic involvement

Evaluation of central nervous system involvement, using tests of cognitive function and brain imaging

Audiologic examination to determine if hearing loss is present and, if present, its type and severity

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Currently no effective treatment exists for any type of HSAN.

The emphasis of management is to help parents and affected individuals understand the sudomotor defect and injury prevention when sensory impairment is significant.

Because hearing loss may be severe, initial use of hearing aids and/or assistive communication methods may be needed.

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations associated with dementia.

Because behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers, information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers are essential.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To prevent injury to extremities with decreased sensation, protect the skin with appropriate socks and shoes and avoid exposure of feet to hot water.

Surveillance

Sensory impairment. Examine feet on a daily basis to screen for skin injury.

Dementia. Perform annual routine clinical testing for dementia:

Observation of behavior

Use of tools such as the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)

Hearing loss. Perform annual audiogram.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid sharp objects and hot water, which may damage skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials,gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Donnai-Barrow syndrome (DBS), the following studies are recommended:

Neuroimaging (preferably MRI scan)

Detailed ophthalmologic examination including glaucoma screening

Audiologic evaluation

Quantitative urine protein determination

Serum tests of renal function including blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations

Determination of circulating levels of vitamin A, vitamin D, and other regulators of calcium status

EEG if symptoms suggest a seizure disorder

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Surgical repair of diaphragmatic hernia and postoperative assessment of respiratory function to determine if the risk for long-term respiratory problems is increased

Surgical repair of omphaloceleNote: Surgical repair of omphalocele and/or diaphragmatic hernia seems to pose no greater risk than repair of these defects in children with other genetic syndromes.

Provision of corrective lenses for myopia; treatment of retinal detachments or glaucoma

Provision of appropriate hearing aids and/or cochlear implants (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for more details)

Education tailored to degree of intellectual, visual, and hearing disabilities

Antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Surveillance

Formal ophthalmic examination should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Frequent and serial monitoring is needed; the schedule should be determined by the findings present. Treatments (e.g., peripheral laser photocoagulation) may minimize the risk of retinal detachment resulting from high myopia.

Hearing evaluations should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Data on the natural history and possible progression of hearing loss are not currently available and thus no timetable for monitoring has been established.

Periodic monitoring of renal function seems prudent, based on the report of Shaheen et al [2010]. However the frequency of DBS-associated renal dysfunction is not currently known.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD), the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination to assess the severity of motor disturbances

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Levodopa

Children. Although an initial dose of 25 mg levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI) two to three times a day was recommended by Nygaard et al [1991], an initial dose of 25 mg or less of levodopa/DCI once a day is currently suggested [Furukawa et al 2005] because some children with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD) demonstrated a remarkable response to smaller doses and a child with the dystonia with motor delay phenotype manifested very severe dyskinesia (lasting 4 days) after receiving a single 50-mg dose of levodopa/DCI. Changing the dose slowly and by small increments is recommended.

Adults. An initial dose of 50 mg levodopa/DCI once or twice a day is suggested [Furukawa et al 2005]. Gradual increase to higher doses is recommended.

Motor benefit can be recognized immediately or within a few days of starting levodopa therapy; full benefit occurs within several days to a few months. Maximum benefit (complete or near-complete responsiveness of symptoms) is usually achieved by less than 300-400 mg/day of levodopa/DCI or by less than 20-30 mg/kg/day of levodopa without a DCI [Nygaard et al 1993a, Segawa & Nomura 1993, Steinberger et al 2000, Grimes et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2005]. According to Nygaard & Duvoisin [1999], no dose of levodopa/DCI greater than 400 mg/day has been necessary for individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD.

At the initiation of levodopa treatment, some individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD develop dyskinesias. However, these dyskinesias subside following dose reduction and do not reappear with later gradual increment in dose. It is important to note that such transient dyskinesias are different from those observed in early-onset parkinsonism and idiopathic Parkinson disease during chronic levodopa therapy. A continued stable response to levodopa therapy and no motor-adverse effects (motor response fluctuations and dopa-induced dyskinesias) for more than 30 years have been confirmed in GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of GTPCH1-deficient DRD; levodopa therapy from infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early diagnosis and therapy (with low doses of levodopa) may prevent transient dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa treatment.

Surveillance

Examination by a movement disorder specialist at least several times yearly is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Discontinuation of levodopa treatment usually results in return of symptoms.

Exacerbation of symptoms after taking oral contraceptives has been reported in some women with GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 1998a, Postuma et al 2003, Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives; however, molecular genetic testing cannot predict the occurrence of symptoms, or if they do occur, the age of onset, severity and type of symptoms, or rate of disease progression.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In 20 pregnancies reported in 12 affected individuals, levodopa was continued without adverse effect in most. Two woman experienced remission resulting in a reduction or cessation of therapy. Two women reported mild deterioration of dystonia; an increase in dose was required in one. No fetal abnormalities were identified [Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Although individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD may respond to trihexyphenidyl and bromocriptine, levodopa is more effective in the treatment of this disorder [Nygaard et al 1991, Segawa & Nomura 1993].

Acute BH4 administration appears to be much less effective in GTPCH1-deficient DRD than levodopa therapy [Furukawa et al 2005]; the reduction of striatal TH protein observed at autopsy in GTPCH1-deficient DRD can be expected to limit a stimulatory effect of acute BH4 administration on dopamine biosynthesis in this disorder [Furukawa et al 1999].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), the following evaluations are recommended:

EEG in the presence of seizures

Head MRI to monitor progression of the disease

Neuropsychological testing for evidence of dementia and psychiatric disturbance

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consultation with a rehabilitation therapist

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) in a standard manner

Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications

Symptomatic treatment of ataxia using riluzole and rehabilitation therapy [van de Warrenburg et al 2014, Romano et al 2015]

Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia

For affected children, adaptation of educational programming to abilities

Surveillance

Surveillance is individualized based on disease progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

General anesthesia can increase the risk of intra- and postoperative seizures [Takayama et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which the medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

The use of riluzole during pregnancy has not been well studied in humans. One woman took riluzole throughout her pregnancy and delivered a healthy term infant whereas another woman delivered an infant with growth restriction [Kawamichi et al 2010, Scalco et al 2012].

See mothertobaby.org for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SALL4-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Eyes. A complete eye examination by an ophthalmologist with special attention to extraocular movements and structural eye defects

Heart. Baseline evaluation by a cardiologist including an echocardiogram and an ECG. If suspected, more extensive evaluation for cardiac conduction defects may be needed especially when structural heart defects are present.

Kidneys. Renal ultrasound examination and routine laboratory tests for renal function

Hearing. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview.

Endocrine. If growth retardation is present, consideration of evaluation for growth hormone deficiency

Blood. Baseline CBC to evaluate for thrombocytopenia and/or leukocytosis.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Duane anomaly. Severe strabismus may require eye surgery.

Radial ray malformations. Severe malformations of the forearms may require surgery, e.g., surgery to correct aplasia of the thumb by constructing a functional thumb (pollicization).

Heart defects. Cardiac surgery, if required for a congenital heart defect, is standard. A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation.

Hearing deficits. Hearing aids may be required.

Growth retardation. Growth hormone therapy should be considered for treating affected children.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance

In those with cardiac malformations or conduction defects:

ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of a known cardiac malformation, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

In those with renal anomalies:

Renal function should be monitored by routine laboratory parameters for renal function (ie, serum creatinine), even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination. In the first years of life, renal function should be performed every six months or once per year. If renal function remains normal, the screening intervals may be extended.

Renal ultrasound should be repeated if renal position anomalies could cause obstruction. The frequency depends on the clinical situation.

In those affected individuals with thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis, blood counts should be monitored at least yearly. However, data are sparse on the natural history of thrombocytopenia in individuals with SALL4 pathogenic variants and so it is unknown at present if more severe complications may occur.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs affecting renal clearance or the inner ear should be avoided in individuals with impaired renal function and/or hearing impairment.

Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Although reduced penetrance does not appear to be associated with most SALL4 pathogenic variants, unaffected persons may consider molecular genetic testing prior to family planning. Children of affected persons who are themselves not obviously affected may be tested for the pathogenic variant present in the family because individuals with the pathogenic variant should undergo clinical evaluation for hearing problems, renal disease, eye disease, and heart defects.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Duane syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Family history

Ophthalmologic examination

Determination of primary gaze position, head position with eyes in primary position, and horizontal and vertical gaze restrictions

Evaluation for aberrant movements. Globe retraction with narrowing of the palpebral fissure in adduction is the sine qua non of Duane syndrome. Other features sometimes observed include up- and downshoot on attempted adduction and Marcus Gunn jaw wink.

Optional forced duction testing and/or force generation testing in cooperative individuals

Photographic documentation to identify changes in the condition and for future review

If surgery is planned, consideration of brain and orbital MRI to determine brain stem and orbital anatomy (muscles and nerves)

General physical examination. Because of association with systemic anomalies, affected children should have a complete physical examination.

If surgery is performed, forced duction testing to confirm tightness of the horizontal rectus muscles

The following may be considered:

Hearing evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation if there is a family history of Duane syndrome, dysmorphic features and/or congenital anomalies in the proband, or if a pathogenic variant is found in CHN1

Treatment of Manifestations

Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings

Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem.

Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment.

Prism glasses may improve the compensatory head position in mild cases. They are more likely to be tolerated by older persons.

Correction of hypermetropic refractive error in children may reduce the angle of strabismus and thus decrease the angle of head turn.

Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle surgery)

To correct or improve compensatory head posture

To improve alignment in primary gaze position

To improve upshoot or downshoot

Note: Surgery does not generally improve abduction of the affected eye, though transposition procedures may provide partial improvement in some cases.

Principles of surgical approach as reviewed in 

Kekunnaya et al [2015]

Type 1 and type 3. If head turn is present, consider recession of the medial rectus muscle or horizontal transposition of the vertical rectus muscles. Vertical rectus muscle transposition may be augmented, either with posterior augmentation sutures on the transposed muscles, or with botulinum toxin injections into the medial rectus muscle. Both the superior and inferior rectus muscles may be transposed, or alternatively the superior rectus muscle alone may be transposed in combination with a medial rectus muscle recession. If up- and/or downshoot occurs in adduction, or if globe retraction is severe and creates a deformity, consider recession of both the medial and lateral rectus muscles. Y-splitting of the lateral rectus muscle may decrease the amount of recession required.

Type 2. If head turn is present, consider recession of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle if the affected individual fixates with the uninvolved eye, and the contralateral lateral rectus if the affected individual fixates with the involved eye. If upshoot or downshoot occurs in adduction, consider recession of the lateral rectus muscle, possibly with Y-splitting.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less preferred eye

Surgery to prevent loss of binocular vision in individuals who abandon the compensatory head posture and allow strabismus to become manifest

Surveillance

Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia if it occurs.

Routine ophthalmologic visits every three to six months during the first years of life

Annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals older than age seven to 12 years who have good binocular vision and thus are no longer at risk for amblyopia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Ophthalmologic examination within the first year of life is appropriate in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the CHN1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an infant diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia, a clinical genetics consultation is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

There is currently no uniform standard of care for patients with Duarte variant galactosemia. Agreement has not been reached as to whether individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia with residual erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity in the range of 14%-25% of controls should be restricted from galactose intake during infancy and early childhood. Until a sufficiently sensitive and statistically powerful study is conducted to determine whether galactose exposure negatively affects long-term developmental outcomes in children with Duarte variant galactosemia, the controversy concerning intervention and outcomes is likely to persist.

Because it is unclear if acute or long-term manifestations can result from Duarte variant galactosemia, and if so, whether dietary galactose restriction would prevent or resolve the issues that have been reported [Powell et al 2009, Lynch et al, in press], any developmental or psychosocial problems experienced by a child with Duarte variant galactosemia should be treated symptomatically and the possibility of other causes should be explored.

Approach for non-treatment. Healthcare providers who choose not to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider Duarte variant galactosemia to be of no clinical significance. These healthcare providers argue against the interruption of breastfeeding when there is no clear evidence to justify it [Fernhoff 2010]. Of note, continued galactose-1-phosphate accumulation may be seen with lactose ingestion but is usually without overt sequelae.

If the infant has not been placed on a galactose-restricted diet, or if feedings are alternating between breast milk and low galactose formula, it is reasonable to check the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level by age 12 months (or sooner if an earlier erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level was particularly high) to ensure that the level is approaching control range by age 12 months.

Approach for treatment. Healthcare providers who choose to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider the intervention to be potentially preventive rather than responsive to current disease manifestations. Options for dietary intervention [Fernhoff 2010, Pyhtila et al 2015] include:

Full dietary restriction of galactose for all infants, through age one year, at which time a galactose challenge is performed;

Following the recommendations for clinical variant galactosemia: immediate dietary galactose restriction for infants with erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate >10 mg/dL;

A compromise approach in which parents either alternate feeding breast milk with low galactose formula, or non-breastfeeding parents use low galactose formula rather than a milk-based formula.

The galactose challenge. If treatment is the chosen approach, conducting a galactose challenge at some point should be considered. For example:

Obtain a baseline erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at diagnosis and again around age six months (i.e., after the introduction of solid foods).

At age 12 months, gradually liberalize the dietary intake of galactose, and obtain an erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level one month later.

If the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is within the normal range (<1.0 mg/dL) despite milk ingestion, dietary restriction of galactose is not resumed.

Surveillance

Most individuals diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia as infants who are followed by a genetics or metabolic specialist are discharged from follow up after a successful galactose challenge at age one year (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Among children with Duarte variant galactosemia who have been restricted for dietary galactose as infants, if the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is >1.0 mg/dL following a galactose challenge at age one year, galactose restriction may be resumed, and the galactose challenge and measurement of erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level repeated every four to six months until the level can be stabilized at <1.0 mg/dL.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

It is unclear if there are any agents or circumstances that individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia should avoid.

Some healthcare providers recommend avoiding all sources of milk and dairy products until age one year as a precaution against possible galactose toxicity; other healthcare providers argue that this precaution is not warranted. See Treatment of Manifestations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Some families with one child with Duarte variant galactosemia wish to evaluate their other children for Duarte variant galactosemia; however, it has not been established that avoidance of all sources of milk and dairy products is warranted in any siblings who test positive for Duarte variant galactosemia.

If the GALT genotype of the proband is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs: sibs can be tested for the presence of the D2 allele and the specific GALT pathogenic variant identified in the proband.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no known additional risks associated with pregnancy for a woman with Duarte variant galactosemia or for a fetus with Duarte variant galactosemia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 15q duplication syndrome or related disorders (dup15q), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete review of systems

Physical examination

Assessment of possible feeding difficulties associated with hypotonia

Neurologic examination including assessment for seizure activity and baseline EEG

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary team evaluation is recommended beginning in early infancy to evaluate motor and speech development and later to assist in referrals for appropriate educational programs.

Supportive care may include the following:

Occupational and physical therapy

Alternative and augmentative communication

Behavioral therapy (e.g., applied behavioral analysis therapy)

Psychotropic medications for behavioral manifestations

Standard management for seizures including medications, vagus nerve stimulators, and/or ketogenic diets [Conant et al 2014]. Effectiveness of antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment varies by seizure type and severity. No prospective or randomized-controlled data on AED therapy in dup15q have been published. See Conant et al [2014] for parent-reported effectiveness of various medications and treatments.

Seizure management is important in preventing secondary complications, including (in the most severe cases) brain damage, developmental regression, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) [Devinsky 2011].

Approximately half of seizure-related deaths are not due to SUDEP, but to other causes including status epilepticus, drowning, falls, and accidents. Many of these are preventable. For example, status epilepticus may be prevented with the use of rescue medications such as rectal diazepam or nasal midazolam. Some evidence suggests that prompt identification of a seizure and basic care (e.g., repositioning a person on the side instead of face down) after a seizure may help prevent SUDEP [Ryvlin et al 2013]. However, the only known preventive therapy is the best possible seizure control [Ryvlin et al 2011]. Although a variety of monitors can help detect SUDEP (e.g., wrist and mattress accelerometers), none can prevent it [Devinsky 2011].

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit (pdf).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations is indicated.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral assessments

Periodic monitoring for evidence of seizures and/or change in seizure type

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Seizure triggers (e.g., sleep deprivation, stress, and failure to follow medication regimen) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Consider genetic testing of sibs of a proband who is known to have an inherited maternal interstitial 15q11.2-q13.1 duplication in order to refer sibs with an interstitial duplication promptly for developmental evaluation and early intervention services

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently, no clinical trials for dup15q exist. However, ongoing work regarding treatment in Angelman syndrome and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may inform future treatments in dup15q.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 17q12 recurrent duplication, the following evaluations are recommended:

General clinical examination

Assessment by neurodevelopmental pediatrician and/or clinical psychologist/psychiatrist to determine extent of delays

Evaluation by a neurologist if neurologic features are present or there is suspicion of seizures

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Echocardiogram

Renal ultrasound examination

Consultation with gastroenterologist and/or feeding team for GI concerns, suspected dysphagia, or feeding difficulties

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Those with developmental delays, cognitive disability, behavioral problems, or psychological phenotypes (autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) should be evaluated by a neurodevelopmental pediatrician or clinical psychologist/psychiatrist for treatment recommendations.

Seizures should be managed by a neurologist using standard practice.

Individuals with cardiac, ophthalmic, or renal abnormalities should be managed by the appropriate specialist.

Surveillance

Regular assessment of psychomotor development is recommended for all children with the 17q12 recurrent duplication. Referral to an early intervention program will likely be of considerable benefit.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to employ genetic testing to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband previously found to have the 17q12 recurrent duplication in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring of developmental milestones in childhood or psychological issues through adulthood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with the 7q11.23 duplication syndrome and to guide medical management, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters. Individuals with short stature should be evaluated for growth hormone deficiency.

Consideration of neuroimaging especially in individuals with macrocephaly and/or abnormal neurologic examination: brain MRI to evaluate for ventriculomegaly/hydrocephalus, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and/or white matter abnormalities. Note: Because sedation is likely to be necessary, this should be considered carefully and may not be necessary in every patient.

Cardiology evaluation

Evaluation by a cardiologist

Echocardiogram, including measurement of the aortic root and ascending aorta with computation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation

Genitourinary system evaluation

Ultrasound examination of the kidneys

Physical examination of males for cryptorchidism

In females with unilateral renal agenesis, evaluation of müllerian structures

Baseline ophthalmologic evaluation

Baseline audiologic evaluation

Clinical genetics evaluation/consultation for individualized assessment/recommendations and discussion of clinical manifestations, natural history, and recurrence risks

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Speech and language (preferably by an examiner who is experienced in evaluating children for childhood apraxia of speech)

Physical therapy

Occupational therapy (including assessment for sensory integration difficulties)

Social skills

Intellectual abilities

Adaptive behavior

Vocational skills

Assessment of behavior (preferably by a licensed psychologist) including:

Anxiety (especially social anxiety disorder, selective mutism, separation anxiety, generalized anxiety disorder)

Attention problems

Oppositional behavior/aggression. If indicated, refer for a functional behavioral assessment, preferably by a board-certified behavior analyst.

Autism spectrum disorder screening. If indicated, refer for gold-standard autism assessment (ADOS-2 [Lord et al 2012] and ADI-R [Lord et al 1994], plus clinical judgment) preferably by an examiner who is experienced with individuals who have social anxiety disorder.

Treatment of Manifestations

Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommendations include speech/language therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. Hippotherapy should be considered, especially for children who have difficulty with balance and children who have an autism spectrum disorder.

Psychological evaluation, psychiatric evaluation, and speech-language evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Childhood apraxia of speech. Intensive speech-language therapy (preferably by a speech-language pathologist who has specific training in treating this disorder) is recommended for children who have childhood apraxia of speech or signs of this disorder, in order to maximize effective oral communication and prevent or limit later language impairment and/or reading disorder.

Anxiety/selective mutism. Cognitive-behavioral intervention for anxiety (preferably by a licensed clinical psychologist) is recommended for those with social anxiety or selective mutism. Educators should be made aware of the signs and symptoms of social anxiety disorder and selective mutism and the appropriate educational interventions and support for children with these disorders. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated. For children who have selective mutism, co-treatment by the speech-language therapist and the psychologist should be strongly considered.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Applied behavior analysis (preferably conducted by a board-certified behavior analyst) or other empirically supported intervention for ASD is recommended for those with co-morbid ASD to address social communication difficulties.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Behavioral modifications in the home and school settings are recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Aggression. When shown, physical aggression should be assessed and treated immediately to prevent development of a long-standing pattern of aggression. Applied behavior analysis intervention is recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Oppositionality. Behavioral interventions are recommended to address oppositionality, with an emphasis on reinforcing positive behaviors. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Specific medical problems are treated in the following ways:

Hydrocephalus as needed with ventriculo-peritoneal shunting

Aortic dilation with beta blocker therapy in some affected individuals. Some with severe aortic dilation have required surgery [Zarate et al 2014, Morris et al 2015, Parrott et al 2015].

Strabismus in the usual manner

Recurrent otitis media in the usual manner

Poor feeding in infants. Feeding therapy

Constipation. Aggressive management at all ages to prevent encopresis and impaction

Growth hormone deficiency. Human growth hormone replacement therapy

Club feet. Casting

Surveillance

Table 2. 

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome 

Interval/Age

Test/Measurement

Infancy

Measurement of head circumference at every visit or at least every 3 monthsHearing evaluation

Annual

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors & strabismusCardiology evaluationEchocardiogram to measure the aortic root & ascending aorta with calculation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation. Significant dilation may require more frequent monitoring and/or CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography.Occupational & physical therapy assessment (through age 6 years)Speech & language assessment (through age 6 years; annual assessment beyond age 6 years if moderate or severe speech/language disorder is present)Behavior assessment (attention, anxiety, opposition, aggression)

Every 3 years

Assessment of intellectual abilities & academic achievement

Adolescents/adults

Genetic counseling

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 22q11.2 duplication, the following are recommended:

Clinical examination

Developmental assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Educational program should be tailored to individual needs.

Surveillance

Periodic developmental assessment to assure that educational needs are being met is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of the disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DYRK1A-related intellectual disability syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation including speech/language evaluation focused on nonverbal language ability and related educational and teaching strategies

Sleep history and sleep evaluation if necessary

Feeding assessment in infants and young children to detect gastroesophageal reflux or suck/swallowing problems

Neurologic evaluation including brain imaging studies and EEG in individuals with microcephaly and/or seizures

Musculoskeletal examination for signs of hypertonia and spine curvature anomalies; orthopedic referral if needed

Physical therapy evaluation regarding interventions needed to achieve optimal ambulation

The following baseline evaluations:

Endocrine

Dental

Cardiac (for possible heart anomalies including valve, aorta and septal defects)

Ophthalmology

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Ongoing routine medical care by a pediatrician or other primary care physician

Educational programs to address the specific needs identified; speech therapy directed at improving communication skills; introduction of sign language and augmentative communication aids such as picture cards, communication boards and/or computer touch screens as early as possible

Therapeutic management of sleep disturbances if necessary

Early intervention with occupational therapy for feeding problems; consideration of tube feeding for severe persisting feeding problems

Epilepsy treatment in accordance with standard practice under care of a neurologist

Early intervention with physical therapy for hypertonic musculature and gait disturbances. A wheeled walker may be useful for children with serious gait disturbances.

Standard treatment for orthopedic, endocrine, dental, cardiac, ophthalmologic, and other medical issues

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring and guidance as needed for educational and behavior problems

Regular lifelong dietary evaluation to assure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring for complications of hypertonic musculature such as scoliosis and the development of a stiff gait

Regular lifelong evaluations of the following:

Teeth: frequency determined by a dentist, based on the dental condition

Heart: based on the type of congenital anomaly. If no congenital cardiac anomaly is present, ongoing cardiac surveillance is not needed.

Eyes

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DYT1 early-onset isolated dystonia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough history, including family history

General physical examination

Neurologic examination. The standard scale used to measure the clinical extent of dystonia is the Burke-Fahn-Marsden rating scale.

If evidence of psychiatric problems (especially depression) exist, consideration of psychiatric assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consideration of occupational and/or physical therapy evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2011, Lubarr & Bressman 2011, Bertucco & Sanger 2015, Dressler et al 2016, Shanker & Bressman 2016].

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (in the range of 100 mg/day) in children, who tend to tolerate high doses better than adults.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely. Pyridostigmine can be used to counter anticholinergic side effects, but does not improve cognitive side effects.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines

Other medications including levodopa, antiepileptics, and dopamine-depleting agents; these have been used to treat dystonia with variable effects.

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail

Surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for medically refractory isolated generalized dystonia in randomized controlled studies [Vidailhet et al 2005, Kupsch et al 2006, Vidailhet et al 2007], including in individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia [reviewed in Fox & Alterman 2015].

GPi DBS has become a well-established and important treatment option for individuals with medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia. Overall, individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia tend to have good outcomes after GPi DBS, with some showing dramatic improvement.

Some, though not all, studies have found that the presence of a TOR1A pathogenic variant is a positive predictive factor of good outcome of GPi DBS surgery [Isaias et al 2008, Andrews et al 2010, Borggraefe et al 2010, Air et al 2011].

Shorter disease duration has been correlated with improved outcomes, highlighting the importance of early referral for DBS in children with severe, medically refractory DYT1 dystonia. [Markun et al 2012, Lumsden et al 2013]. Conversely, referral for DBS should not be made prematurely (i.e., prior to sufficient medication trials).

Clinical effect has been found to be well sustained at follow up of up to 13 years [Alcindor et al 2010, Cif et al 2010, Panov et al 2013, Krause et al 2016].

Note: Intrathecal baclofen therapy has been used for treatment of generalized dystonia of various etiologies in the past [van Hilten et al 2000, Walker et al 2000, Albright et al 2001], however, GPi DBS surgery has become the preferred surgical treatment for severe, medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia because of the good treatment outcomes.

Physical therapy and an appropriate exercise program may be of benefit.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Aggressive medical and surgical intervention including regular follow up for adjustment of medicines and timely referral for GPi DBS surgery when indicated is appropriate in order to prevent long-term orthopedic complications such as joint contractures or spine deformities. However, little systematic data support or negate the use of this approach.

Surveillance

Follow up several times a year with a neurologist specializing in movement disorders is recommended (especially if there is progression) to prevent secondary complications, although little information regarding the benefit of this approach is available.

Individuals treated with GPi DBS surgery require regular follow up, more frequent in the first year after surgery, for programming of the stimulation parameters and monitoring of battery life.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The extremities affected by dystonia should not be placed in a brace or cast, unless medically necessary, as this can worsen the dystonia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Data on the use of the oral medications typically used for treatment of dystonia during pregnancy are limited. Isolated case reports of treatment with trihexyphenidyl or carbidopa/levodopa for various conditions (including certain forms of dystonia) during pregnancy have not found adverse effects on either the affected mother or the fetus [Watanabe et al 2009, Mendhekar & Andrade 2011, Robottom & Reich 2011, Serikawa et al 2011, Watanabe & Matsubara 2012, Dostal et al 2013].

No adverse fetal or maternal outcomes were reported in two series of women, including four women with DYT1 dystonia, who were treated with DBS implantation prior to pregnancy. [Scelzo et al 2015, Ziman et al 2016].

Therapies Under Investigation

RNA interference (RNAi) has been used in cell culture systems overexpressing the mutated torsin protein to block aggregate formation and restore normal distribution of wild type torsin-1A (torsinA) [Kock et al 2006], suggesting a possible future role for RNAi in DYT1 therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with episodic ataxia type 1, the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed medical history of the individual

Neurologic examination

Initiation (and observation) of attacks of ataxia by either mild exercise or vestibular stimuli

EMG to confirm the presence of myokymia, particularly if it is not visible on examination

EEG to evaluate for epilepsy [Zuberi et al 1999, Eunson et al 2000, Chen et al 2007]

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Several drugs variably improve symptoms in affected individuals but, with the lack of clinical trials comparing the efficacy of these drugs, no single medication has been proven to be very effective. Thus, response to the following treatments may be poor.

Acetazolamide

(ACTZ), a carbonic-anhydrase (CA) inhibitor, may reduce the frequency and severity of the attacks in some but not all affected individuals. The mechanism by which ACTZ reduces the frequency and severity of the attacks is unclear. The recommended starting dosage is 125 mg once a day, given orally. However, individuals with good renal function may require higher daily doses, ranging from 8 to 30 mg/kg/day in one to four divided doses (not to exceed 1 g/day). ACTZ should not be prescribed to individuals with liver, renal, or adrenal insufficiency.

Chronic treatment with ACTZ may result in side effects including tiredness, paresthesias, rash, and formation of renal calculi; therefore, for some affected individuals treatment must be discontinued [Graves et al 2014, D’Adamo et al 2015].

Antiepileptic drugs

(AEDs) may significantly reduce the frequency of the attacks in responsive individuals; however, the response is heterogeneous as some individuals are particularly resistant to drugs [Eunson et al 2000].

Diphenylhydantoin treatment at a dose of 150-300 mg daily resulted in reasonable control of seizures in some individuals [VanDyke et al 1975]. In particular, phenytoin treatment at a dose of 3.7 mg/kg/day may improve muscle stiffness and motor performance [Kinali et al 2004]. Nevertheless, phenytoin should be used with caution in young individuals, as it may cause permanent cerebellar dysfunction and atrophy [De Marcos et al 2003].

Sulthiame 50-200 mg daily may reduce the attack rate. During this treatment abortive attacks were still noticed lasting a few seconds and troublesome side effects were paresthesias and intermittent carpal spasm.

Carbamazepine has been prescribed in doses up to 1600 mg daily [Eunson et al 2000]. The dose needs to be adjusted according to different factors including, age, weight, the particular carbamazepine product being used, responsiveness of the individual, and other medications being taken.

Lamotrigine ameliorates attacks in some affected individuals and therefore it has been proposed as an alternative treatment [Graves et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In addition to the pharmacologic treatments mentioned above, behavioral measures such as avoidance of stress, abrupt movements, loud noises or caffeine intake may be used to reduce disease manifestations in either a symptomatic or an asymptomatic person.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Contractures occur in a small proportion of individuals and can be prevented by appropriate physiotherapy.

Surveillance

Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Known triggers of attacks should be avoided; physical exertion, emotional stress, and changes in environmental temperature are the most common triggers.

Marked generalized myokymia has been reported during induction of anesthesia [Kinali et al 2004].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from behavioral measures and avoidance of caffeine intake. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No published literature addresses management of the pregnancy of an affected mother or the effect of maternal EA1 on a fetus. However, affected women should be made aware that pregnancy may trigger attacks [Graves et al 2014] and the possible loss of balance and fall could endanger the fetus’s life. Moreover, several stressors that trigger attacks may cause breathing difficulties, thus, delivery by C-section should be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Morphologic studies on lateral gastrocnemius (LG) muscles derived from a mouse model of EA1 did not reveal changes in muscle mass, fiber type composition, or vascularization [Brunetti et al 2012].

Homozygous Val408Ala/Val408Ala pathogenic variants are embryonically lethal in an animal model of EA1 [Herson et al 2003], although this has not been reported in humans.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination for signs of interictal ataxia and nystagmus

Neuroimaging of the head (if not performed already), preferably MRI, to evaluate for structural lesions and to look for evidence of atrophy

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Acetazolamide is effective in controlling or reducing the frequency and severity of attacks in two thirds of individuals with EA2 [Mantuano et al 2010, Ilg et al 2014]. The typical starting dose is 125 mg/day given orally, but doses as high as 500 mg/2x/day may be required. This medication is generally well tolerated; the most common side effects are paresthesias of the extremities, rash, and renal calculi.

4-aminopyridine, a potassium channel blocker, also reduces attack frequency and duration at doses of 5-10 mg/3x/day [Mantuano et al 2010, Strupp et al 2011].

Generally acetazolomide is used as the firstline therapy, although there are no specific recommendations regarding which medication should be trialed first [Ilg et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Treatment with acetazolamide does not appear to prevent the progression of interictal symptoms [Baloh & Winder 1991]. It is not clear how acetazolamide prevents attacks of EA2, although Yue et al [1997] speculated that the mechanism involves a decrease in pH, thus inhibiting ion permeation through open calcium channels. Acetazolamide could stabilize channels that fail to properly inactivate. Acetazolamide may not work in some individuals, particularly if the pathogenic variant distorts the pore region of the channel, altering the stabilizing effect of H+ ions.

To date no data regarding whether 4-aminopyridine can prevent the progression of interictal symptoms are available.

Surveillance

Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Phenytoin has been reported to exacerbate symptoms.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is limited published literature addressing the management of the pregnancy of an affected woman or the effect of maternal EA2 on a fetus. However, because physical exertion can trigger attacks, it would be prudent for a pregnant woman to be followed closely by her obstetrician and at term to undergo a trial of labor with the intent to proceed to delivery by C-section should the labor trigger an EA2 attack [Spacey 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

Scoggan et al [2006] reported an individual who responded to a combination of acetazolamide and valproic acid.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia (EB-PA), the following evaluations are recommended, if they were not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis:

Evaluation of the sites of blister formation including skin and oral mucosa

Tests of renal function including BUN, creatinine, and urinalysis

Renal ultrasound

Delineation of involvement of the whole esophagus (with concentration on the upper cervical portion) by barium swallow as needed. Endoscopy can be traumatic and should be avoided if possible.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure.

In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary nonadherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

Addition of a topical antibiotic or antiseptic such as bacitracin, mupirocin, silver, or honey

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix® or Conform®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net® or Tubifast®).

Gastrointestinal

Surgical intervention is required to correct pyloric atresia. Many children need medical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

Consultation with a dietitian or nutritionist can be helpful, especially if there is significant mucosal blistering in the mouth preventing adequate oral intake.

Renal. The following are appropriate:

Referral to an urologist if there are symptoms of difficulty or discomfort with voiding

Referral to a nephrologist if renal function studies and/or urinalysis are abnormal

Other

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert the clinician to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue [Ida et al 2012]. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

New blister formation can be minimized by wrapping and padding of extremities; use of soft and properly fitted clothing and footwear; and avoidance of: contact with adhesives, contact sports, and other activities that create friction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), multidrug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Group A beta-hemolytic Streptococci. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

Dilated cardiomyopathy can occur in individuals who survive the neonatal period. The development of dilated cardiomyopathy was associated with nutritional deficiency of carnitine in one study, and it has been postulated that nutritional deficiency of selenium may also contribute [Sidwell et al 2000].

In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified:

Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007]

Selenium and carnitine replacement for possible prevention of dilated cardiomyopathy

Iron deficiency anemia, a chronic problem, can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.

Surveillance

Perform annual screening for iron deficiency anemia with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screen annually for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration to provide zinc supplementation when necessary for enhanced wound healing.

Periodic echocardiographic screening to evaluate for the development of dilated cardiomyopathy is appropriate.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/ or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Most persons with EB-PA cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean section is recommended by some obstetricians to reduce trauma to the skin of an affected fetus during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

See Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa: Management, Therapies Under Investigation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), evaluation of the sites of blister formation including oral and esophageal blisters and erosions is recommended. Clinical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure [Pope et al 2012].

Families must decide which of the many correct and effective methods of bandaging works best for them. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers may include any the following:

Ordinary Band-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Non-stick products (e.g., Telfa® or N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®)

A secondary layer providing stability for the primary layer and adding padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Conform®, Kerlix®,) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer (usually with some elastic properties) that ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Tubifast®, Coban® or elasticized tube-gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Various lubricants and antimicrobial agents such as topical antibiotics, silver, or honey are often added to the contact layer to prevent and treat infection and promote healing.

In infants and children with RDEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes et al 1996, Stehr et al 2008]. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Castillo et al 2002, Kay & Wyllie 2002, Azizkhan et al 2006].

Other. Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

Anemia is a chronic problem with RDEB and can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.

Other nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed:

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Selenium and carnitine replacement to help prevent dilated cardiomyopathy

Zinc replacement to enhance wound healing

Good prophylactic dental care is essential to insure the ability to eat and to allow for adequate caloric intake [Harris et al 2001].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Occupational therapy may be helpful in preventing progressive hand contractures. Splinting of the hands can be problematic because of skin fragility. Surgical release of fingers by several methods has been described; it often needs to be performed repeatedly [Marín-Bertolín et al 1999, Glicenstein et al 2000].

Psychosocial support including social services and psychological counseling is essential.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Age-appropriate play involving activities that cause minimal trauma to the skin is encouraged.

Dressings and padding are needed to protect bony prominences from blister-inducing impact.

If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of DEB, cesarean delivery may reduce trauma to the skin during delivery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus

aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas

aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Surveillance

Because the lifetime risk of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma is greater than 90% in individuals with RDEB, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions may be necessary followed by local excision.

Screening for anemia should be routine with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration in order to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measurement of serum zinc concentration should be routine in order to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening for predisposition to dilated cardiomyopathy secondary to selenium deficiency and carnitine deficiency is possible by measurement of serum concentrations of selenium and carnitine. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy by transthoracic echocardiogram is also useful [Sidwell et al 2000]. No guidelines regarding the age at which such screening should begin have been established.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may pick up early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are committed to participation in such activities should be encouraged to devise ways of protecting the skin.

Most persons with DEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluating an at-risk newborn for evidence of blistering is appropriate so that trauma to the skin can be avoided as much as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean section is often recommended to avoid vaginal delivery in a fetus at risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

The use of mouse models for EB has enhanced molecular therapies for the treatment of EB by mimicking the EB phenotypes and facilitating testing of a number of therapeutic approaches including the following:

Gene replacement therapy [Ito et al 2009], including inducible expression of the target gene under the control of a keratinocyte specific promoter [Adair-Kirk et al 2012]

Stem cell replacement therapy [Chino et al 2008, Tolar et al 2009, Fujita et al 2010]

Generation of three-dimensional skin replacement using pluripotent stem cells [Itoh et al 2013]

Allogenic transplantation of fibroblasts [Fritsch et al 2008]

Infusions of type VII collagen protein [Remington et al 2009, Hovnanian 2013, Woodley et al 2013]

Topical treatment with recombinant collagen VII [Wang et al 2013]

In addition, older approaches involving the use of viral vectors to transfer functional genes to cultured cells for transplant into humans are still being explored [Siprashvili et al 2010, Titeux et al 2010, Melo et al 2014].

A new approach using engineered transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALEN) for precise genome editing results in integration of the desired sequence in the targeted gene and in non-coding regions, reducing the risk of integration mutagenesis.

TALENs were able to induce site-specific double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) leading to homology-directed repair (HDR) from an exogenous normal COL7A1 donor template. This resulted in mutation correction in COL7A1 in primary fibroblasts that were subsequently reprogrammed into inducible pluripotent stem cells and showed normal protein expression and deposition in an in vivo skin model [Osborn et al 2013].

Human trials for the treatment of EB that have just begun include the following:

Use of naturally occurring gene revertant pluropotent cells transplanted into individuals with RDEB [Tolar et al 2014]

Local grafting of skin cells in which the genetic pathogenic variants have been corrected for treatment of human JEB [De Luca et al 2009, De Rosa et al 2013]

Local grafting of revertant skin in the treatment of JEB [Gostyński et al 2014]

Cell transfer-based treatment for DEB [Ortiz-Urda et al 2003; A Lane, Stanford University, personal communication]. One person with JEB has had cell transfer treatment on the legs. A large Stanford University trial for DEB has begun and one one affected individual is reported to be doing well six months after grafting [Siprashvili et al 2014] (see ClinicalTrials.gov).

Intradermal injections of large quantities of recombinant collagen 7 protein grown in vitro has shown efficacy in a murine model [Remington et al 2009

Woodley et al 2013]. Human clinical trials are likely to be under way in the near future.

Intradermal injections of allogenic fibroblasts have reconstituted collagen 7 protein in the basement membrane. Although it appears that this “new” collagen 7 protein is identical to the mutated protein of the host, the increased quantities of collagen 7 seem to be clinically beneficial [Wong et al 2008]. A recent trial in Australia showed that both fibroblasts and a non-fibroblast-containing vehicle improved healing in RDEB [Venugopal et al 2013].

Bone marrow transplantation:

Systemic use of allogenic stem cells has been shown in a murine model to have a clinically beneficial effect on blistering [Tolar et al 2009]. Currently trials of bone marrow and/or umbilical-cord stem cell transplants, using either conventional myeloablative or reduced intensity conditioning, are underway in two centers in the USA. See Wagner et al [2010] and search ClinicalTrials.gov for details of the two EB trials at the University of Minnesota and Columbia University [Tolar & Wagner 2013, Liao et al 2014].

Replacement of missing collagen 7 protein in RDEB has been accomplished using local injections of bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. The clinical effect of healing of chronic wounds was noted in two patients; however, it lasted only four months [Conget et al 2010].

Medical treatment of lesions suspicious for squamous cell carcinoma with agents such as topical imiquimod needs to be studied further.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of the sites of blister formation, including mouth, esophagus, and airway in a child with progressive hoarseness or stridor

Direct examination of the airway by an experienced otolaryngologist with appropriately small and lubricated instruments to determine the extent of airway compromise so that decisions regarding tracheostomy can be discussed with the family

Evaluation for gastroesophageal reflux disease which may cause additional trauma to the upper airway [Ida et al 2012]

Evaluation for existing osteopenia through skeletal radiographs or DEXA scan

Evaluation for cardiomyopathy by clinical evaluation and/or echocardiogram [Fine et all 2008]

Measurements of hemoglobin and electrolytes to evaluate for anemia and electrolyte imbalance

Skin bacterial cultures and blood cultures in clinically ill infants to decide appropriate antibiotic treatment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Skin. The skin needs to be protected from shearing forces and caretakers need to learn how to handle the child with EB [Denyer 2010, Pope et al 2012].

New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

OrdinaryBand-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Other. The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007, Ida et al 2012].

Gastroesophageal reflux disease, when present, should be treated as in the general population.

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Treatment of granulation tissue can be attempted with high-potency topical steroids, silver nitrate, electrocautery, or autologous skin grafts.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].

Pain management becomes an important part of daily care [Goldschneider & Lucky 2010]. In those with difficult-to-control pain, referral to a pain management specialist can be considered.

Dental care is necessary because of inherent enamel abnormalities [Kirkham et al 2000, Krämer et al 2012].

Urologic and renal problems may be serious in this population [Kajbafzadeh et al 2010]. For those affected individuals who survive, referral to a urologist may be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

In infants and children with JEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes 2006].

In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified:

Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007]

Treatment of iron-deficiency anemia (a chronic problem) with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions

Wound infections should be treated with the appropriate antiseptic or antimicrobial medication.

Surveillance

Screening for iron-deficiency anemia should be routine, with complete blood counts and measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration should be routine to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should be initiated.

Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy can be accomplished with regular echocardiograms [Lara-Corrales et al 2010].

Because of the risk for squamous cell carcinoma, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions followed by local excision may be necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Most persons with JEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®. Silicone-based products provide a good substitute for tape.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

Activities that, in general, traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean section may be recommended to reduce trauma to the skin of an affected fetus during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several approaches to gene therapy for JEB, focused on retroviral modification of in vitro epidermal cells, have been proposed [Robbins et al 2001, Ortiz-Urda et al 2003]. One successful clinical trial has been conducted using transplantation of sheets of genetically modified epidermal stem cells in one affected individual with biallelic LAMB3 pathogenic variants [Mavilio et al 2006, Di Nunzio et al 2008]. Animal models include intra-amniotic prenatal laminin 332 delivery in mouse [Mühle et al 2006] and a spontaneous form of JEB in dog [Capt et al 2005, Spirito et al 2006].

Natural gene therapy is being investigated using autologous revertant cells cultured from patches of non-blistering skin [Pasmooij et al 2012].

The knockout mouse model for all JEB-related genes should facilitate the development of these therapeutic approaches [Jiang & Uitto 2005]. Animal models that have been used to study EB were reviewed in Natsuga et al [2010].

Induced pleuripotent stem cells (IPS) are being studied in several laboratories around the world to address the treatment of other types of EB [Tolar et al 2013, Osborn et al 2013].

Protein replacement therapy with LAMB3 has been studied in vitro [Igoucheva et al 2008] with promising results.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a dermatologist to evaluate the sites of blister formation, including oral mucosa

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive care to protect the skin from blistering, appropriate dressings that will not further damage the skin and will promote healing of open wounds, and prevention and treatment of secondary infection are the mainstays of EB treatment.

Encourage children to tailor their activities to minimize trauma to the skin while participating as much as possible in age-appropriate play.

Lance and drain new blisters to prevent further spread from fluid pressure.

Dressings usually involve three layers:

A primary nonadherent dressing that will adhere to the top layers of the epidermis must be used. There is wide variability in tolerance to different primary layers; some individuals with EBS can use ordinary bandages. Some dressings are impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® Gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform). Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa or N-Terface®) or silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®) are also popular.

A secondary layer absorbs drainage, provides stability for the primary layer, and adds padding to allow more activity. Foam dressings and/or rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer, usually with some elastic properties, ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban™ or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters, such as BandNet®).

Note: Many individuals with EBS, in contrast to those with junctional EB and dystrophic EB, find that excessive bandaging may actually lead to more blistering, presumably as a result of increased heat and sweating. Such individuals may benefit from dusting the affected areas with corn starch to help absorb moisture and reduce friction on the skin, followed by a simple (i.e., one-layer) dressing.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In the following studies, small sample sizes limit the statistical validity and generalizability of the results; however, given the lack of effective treatments for EBS, these potentially helpful treatments should be considered on a case-by-case basis:

20% aluminum chloride applied to palms and soles can reduce blister formation in some individuals with EBS, presumably by decreasing sweating.

A case report [Abitbol & Zhou 2009] and small study [Swartling et al 2010] suggest that injection of botulinum toxin into the feet is effective in reducing blistering and associated pain. The mechanism of action is unclear, but likely relates to reduction of sweating and subsequent maceration of the skin.

In one study of a limited number of individuals with EBS-gen sev, cyproheptadine (Periactin®) reduced blistering. This may result from the anti-pruritic effect of the medication, but the true mechanism is not clear [Neufeld-Kaiser & Sybert 1997].

In another study, tetracycline reduced blister counts in two thirds of persons with EBS-loc [Weiner et al 2004]. A recent study evaluated three months of oral erythromycin therapy in six children ages one to eight years with EBS-gen sev, and showed the medication was well tolerated and improved blistering in three children [Chiaverini et al 2015]. An anti-inflammatory mechanism, rather an anti-microbial mechanism, is proposed for the effect of antibiotics in the treatment of EBS.

Other. Use of keratolytics and softening agents such as urea for palmar plantar hyperkeratosis has some benefit in preventing tissue thickening and cracking. In addition, soaking the hands and feet in salt water helps soften hyperkeratosis and ease debridement of the thick skin.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infection is the most common secondary complication. Surveillance for wound infection is important and treatment with topical and/or systemic antibiotics or silver-impregnated dressings or gels can be helpful.

Additional nutritional support may be required for failure to thrive in infants and children with EBS-gen sev or EBS-gen intermed who have more severe involvement. Infants with significant oral disease may develop an aversion to eating by mouth, even after oral disease improves. The involvement of a feeding therapist in these cases is suggested.

Management of fluid and electrolyte problems is critical, as they can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease.

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis, especially in EBS-gen sev. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Surveillance

Surveillance for infection and proper wound healing is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Excessive heat may exacerbate blistering and infection in EBS.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear can cause trauma and should be avoided.

Avoiding activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) can reduce skin damage, but affected individuals who are determined to find ways to participate in these endeavors should be encouraged.

Many individuals with EBS cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of EB, caesarean delivery may reduce the trauma to the skin during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Proposed approaches to gene therapy for EBS include use of ribozymes, addition of other functional proteins [D'Alessandro et al 2004], induction of a compensating pathogenic variant [Smith et al 2004a], and use of pathogenic variant-specific siRNAs [Atkinson et al 2011]; no clinical trials have been carried out. The inducible mouse model for EBS should facilitate the development of these therapeutic approaches [Arin & Roop 2004].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The use of corticosteroids and vitamin E in treating EBS has been reported anecdotally; no rigorous clinical trials have been undertaken.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 2 (HED2, Clouston syndrome), a thorough examination of the nails, hair, and skin is recommended. Clinical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Dystrophic nails. Artificial nails may improve the appearance of the hands/feet, and may be especially helpful to young girls and women.

Hypotrichosis. No special pharmaceutical agent is available to improve hair growth. Alopecia was found to respond to treatment with a combination of topical minoxidil and tretinoin in an individual with probable congenital hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia [Melkote et al 2009]. The individual’s clinical findings were compatible with the clinical diagnosis of HED2; however, the diagnosis was not confirmed with molecular genetic testing. The authors also noted that the efficacy and safety of long-term treatment need to be explored further.

Special hair care products may help to manage dry and sparse hair.

In many cases, wigs are helpful.

Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. Skin emollients may help relieve palmoplantar hyperkeratosis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED), the following evaluations are recommended:

Elicitation of pain history

Assessment of joint mobility

Radiographs to determine the extent and severity of joint involvement

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

For pain control, a combination of analgesics and physiotherapy including hydrotherapy is helpful to many affected individuals; however, pain can be difficult to control. Referral to a rheumatologist or pain specialist may be indicated.

Limitation of joint destruction and the development of osteoarthritis is a goal. Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon can determine if realignment osteotomy and/or acetabular osteotomy may be helpful in slowing the progression of symptoms.

In some individuals, total joint arthroplasty may be required if the degenerative hip changes are causing too much pain or dysfunction.

Psychosocial support addressing issues of short stature, chronic pain, disability, and employment is appropriate.

Surveillance

Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon is recommended if the affected individual has chronic pain or limb deformities (genu varum, genu valgum).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Obesity, which increases stress on joints

Exercise that causes repetitive strain on affected joints

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (EDM4/rMED), the following evaluations are recommended:

Height measurement

Radiographs of the entire spine (AP and lateral), pelvis (AP), and knees (AP and lateral)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic individuals should be seen by a physical therapist and an orthopedist in order to assess the possibility of treatment (physiotherapy for muscular strengthening and maintaining mobility, cautious use of analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) and the optimal time for surgery (joint replacement), if indicated.

Career counseling is recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Intensive physiotherapy may help in delaying joint contractures and in maintaining mobility.

Surveillance

Radiographic surveillance by an orthopedist is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Sports involving joint overload are to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Presymptomatic testing of at-risk relatives is not indicated because no preventive measures or therapeutic interventions to reduce morbidity are available

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women affected by EDM4/rMED may suffer from chronic joint pain which may be increased during pregnancy due to maternal weight gain. Appropriate pain management should be offered and physical therapy should be intensified.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), the following evaluations are recommended:

ECG, Holter-ECG monitoring, echocardiography, radionucleotide angiography, and cardiac MRI

Note: Electrophysiologic study is often advisable in EDMD; however, it is performed in selected individuals on the basis of the clinical presentation and the results of noninvasive studies and not as an "evaluation at initial diagnosis" in all individuals.

Evaluation of respiratory function (vital capacity measurement and other pulmonary volume measurements)

Evaluation of joints by a physical therapist or orthopedist to determine need for therapies (physiotherapy, mechanical aids, orthopedic surgeries)

For LMNA-linked EDMD: evaluation of metabolic functions (glycemia, insulinemia, trigylceridemia). Rarely, an individual with LMNA-linked EDMD has had an overlapping LMNA phenotype and additional partial lipodystrophy features, thus requiring a careful metabolic assessment [Garg et al 2002, van der Kooi et al 2002].

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic surgeries to release Achilles tendons and other contractures or scoliosis as needed

Use of mechanical aids (canes, walkers, orthoses, wheelchairs) as needed to help ambulation

Specific treatments for cardiac features (arrhythmias, AV conduction disorders, and congestive heart failure), including antiarrhythmic drugs, cardiac pacemaker, implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), and both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic therapy for heart failure [Bécane et al 2000, Bonne et al 2003, Boriani et al 2003]. Heart transplantation may be necessary in the end stages of heart failure; some individuals may not be candidates for heart transplantation because of associated severe skeletal muscle and respiratory involvement.

Use of respiratory aids (respiratory muscle training and assisted coughing techniques, mechanical ventilation) if indicated in late stages

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical therapy and stretching exercises promote mobility and help prevent contractures.

When indicated, implantation of cardiac defibrillators can considerably reduce the risk of sudden death [Meune et al 2006].

Antithromboembolic drugs (vitamin K antagonists, warfarin, heparin) are probably required to prevent cerebral thromboembolism of cardiac origin in those individuals with either decreased left ventricular function or atrial arrhythmias [Boriani et al 2003].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual cardiac assessment consisting of ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography in order to detect asymptomatic cardiac disease. More advanced and invasive cardiac assessment may be required.

Monitoring of respiratory function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although malignant hyperthermia susceptibility has not been described in EDMD, it is appropriate to anticipate a possible malignant hyperthermia reaction and to avoid triggering agents such as depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) and volatile anesthetic drugs (halothane, isoflurane). Other anesthetic precautions have to be considered [Aldwinckle & Carr 2002].

Body weight should be monitored, as affected individuals may be predisposed to obesity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk sibs, parents, and relatives of individuals with EDMD because of the high risk for cardiac complications (including sudden death) associated with LMNA, EMD, and FLH1 pathogenic variants. Evaluation may allow early identification of family members who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures [Manilal et al 1998, Bécane et al 2000, Canki-Klain et al 2000, Vytopil et al 2002, Boriani et al 2003, Taylor et al 2003, Gueneau et al 2009, Knoblauch et al 2010, Jimenez-Escrig et al 2012]. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the LMNA, EMD, or FHL1 pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known;

Cardiac evaluation if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In a woman with EDMD, pregnancy complications may include the development of cardiomyopathy or progression of preexisting cardiomyopathy, preterm delivery, respiratory involvement, cephalopelvic disproportion, and delivery of a low birth-weight infant. Pregnancy management is challenging, with very limited literature addressing the issue. Caesarean section delivery may be required. Referral of an affected pregnant woman to a specialized obstetric unit in close collaboration with a cardiologist is recommended for optimal pregnancy outcome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), classic type, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical examination of the skin with assessment of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scars and bruises, and other manifestations of classic EDS

Evaluation of joint mobility with use of the Beighton score

Evaluation for hypotonia and motor development in infants and children

A baseline echocardiogram with aortic diameter measurement for individuals under age ten years

Evaluation of clotting factors if severe easy bruising is present

Treatment of Manifestations

In children with hypotonia and delayed motor development, a physiotherapeutic program is important.

Non-weight-bearing muscular exercise, such as swimming, is useful to promote muscular development and coordination.

Individuals with muscle hypotonia and joint instability with chronic pain may have to adjust lifestyle and professional choices accordingly. Emotional support and behavioral and psychological therapy may help in developing acceptance and coping skills.

Dermal wounds should be closed without tension, preferably in two layers. Deep stitches should be applied generously. Cutaneous stitches should be left in place twice as long as usual and additional fixation of adjacent skin with adhesive tape can help prevent stretching of the scar.

For recommendations on treatment of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type. (Note: Surgical stabilization of joints may lead to disappointing, or only temporary, improvement.)

Anti-inflammatory drugs may help with joint pain.

Long-term chronic pain may result in the need for mental health services.

Cardiovascular problems should be treated in a standard manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Very young children with pronounced skin fragility can wear protective pads or bandages over the forehead, knees, and shins in order to avoid skin tears. Older children who are active can wear soccer pads or ski stockings with shin padding during activities.

For recommendations on prevention of primary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising but has no effect on the primary findings of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, and joint hypermobility. In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults, with proportionally reduced doses for children; however, there is no limitation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For recommendations on prevention of secondary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Surveillance

If no abnormalities are found on echocardiogram in an adult, a follow-up echocardiogram is not necessary. (Because longitudinal data on progression of aortic dilation are not available, specific recommendations for follow-up in individuals with a normal aortic diameter are not available.)

Yearly echocardiogram is warranted if an abnormality such as aortic dilatation or mitral valve prolapse is present.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Sports with heavy joint strain (contact sports, fighting sports, football, running)

Acetylsalicylate (aspirin)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

Because of the increased risk of skin lacerations, postpartum hemorrhages, and prolapse of the uterus and/or bladder, monitoring of women throughout pregnancy and in the postpartum period is recommended.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults; however, no strict guidelines exist regarding recommended dose during the third trimester of pregnancy.

Monitoring of pregnant women for preterm labor is warranted during the third trimester when the risk of premature rupture of the membranes is increased.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), hypermobility type, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough history and physical examination, especially for musculoskeletal, skin, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and oral/dental manifestations

Assessment of prior experience with mechanical, pharmacologic, and/or surgical treatment of pain and joint instability, as well as current degree of pain and disability

Baseline echocardiogram to evaluate aortic root diameter, as adjusted for age and body surface area [Campens et al 2014]. Significant aortic enlargement and/or other cardiac abnormalities should prompt consideration of alternative diagnoses.

The following evaluations should not be routine, but may be appropriate in some situations:

For individuals with significant orthostatic intolerance and/or tachycardia, consider tilt-table testing to help confirm postural orthostatic tachycardia and/or neurally mediated hypotension. However, treatment of the symptoms may not differ based on the outcome, so tilt-table testing is optional. It is also sometimes appropriate to rule out adrenocortical insufficiency.

If irritable bowel syndrome is suspected, consider formal gastroenterology consultation and possible endoscopy to rule out other treatable diagnoses. Celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and other causes of malabsorption or bowel dysfunction are not associated with EDS, but may be coexisting diagnoses.

Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is appropriate at any age if height loss greater than one inch is documented or x-rays are suggestive of osteopenia. Screening DEXA in those without suggestive signs or symptoms is not currently recommended.

If a history of severe or prolonged bleeding is present, consider hematologic evaluation for von Willebrand disease, thrombocytopenia, or other bleeding diathesis. Although pathophysiologically unrelated, these conditions may coexist with hypermobility type EDS and exacerbate the hematologic manifestations.

For individuals with significant pain and/or fatigue, screen for and correction of other potential causes, including (but not limited to) vitamin D deficiency, vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency, iron deficiency, celiac disease, or hypothyroidism.

When needed, the pain management recommendations below can be implemented by any member of the care team who feels confident enough to do so, or evaluation by a pain management specialist could be considered.

If there is suspicion of Chiari malformation, consider cerebral MRI, possibly with CSF flow studies.

Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate if there is uncertainty about the diagnosis or for assistance in evaluation and management.

Treatment of Manifestations

Physical Therapy

Myofascial release (any physical therapy modality that reduces spasm) provides short-term relief of pain, lasting hours to days. While the duration of benefit is short and it must be repeated frequently, this pain relief may be critical to facilitate participation in toning exercise for stabilization of the joints. Modalities must be tailored to the individual; a partial list includes heat, cold, massage, ultrasound, electrical stimulation, acupuncture, acupressure, biofeedback, and conscious relaxation.

Low-resistance muscle toning exercise can improve joint stability and reduce future subluxations, dislocations, and pain. See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Transvaginal pelvic physical therapy and myofascial release (in which massage or ultrasound is applied to the pelvic musculature via a transvaginal approach) may improve dyspareunia, abdominal pain, back pain, and sometimes radicular lower-extremity pain.

Assistive Devices

Braces are useful to improve joint stability. Orthopedists, rheumatologists, and physical therapists can assist in recommending appropriate devices for commonly problematic joints such as knees and ankles. Shoulders and hips present more of a challenge for external bracing. Occupational therapists may be consulted for ring splints (to stabilize interphalangeal joints) and wrist or wrist/thumb braces in affected individuals with small joint instability. A soft neck collar, if tolerated, may help with neck pain and headaches.

A wheelchair or scooter may be necessary to offload stress on lower-extremity joints. Special wheelchair customizations such as lightweight and/or motorized chairs, seat pads, and specialized wheels and wheel grasps may be necessary to accommodate pelvic and upper-extremity issues.

A waterbed, adjustable air mattress, or viscoelastic foam mattress (and/or pillow) may provide increased support with improved sleep quality and less pain.

Pain Medication

Pain medication is frequently underprescribed, and should be tailored to the individual's subjective symptoms and objective measures of pain, not to physical examination or radiologic findings. Individuals with mild to moderate pain may get sufficient relief from as-needed use. Those with more significant pain typically require higher doses and combinations of multiple medications. Prevention or control of pain with regularly scheduled dosing is often more successful than acute treatment with as-needed dosing. Many clinicians recruit a pain management specialist, but pain can be managed by the primary physician if desired.

Note: All of the following dose recommendations are for adults without hepatic or renal disease; adjustments may be necessary for other populations.

Acetaminophen, 4000 mg daily in three or four divided doses, will not completely alleviate pain but is a useful and well-tolerated adjunct in combination with other agents. Acetaminophen is often present in combination with other analgesic medications and cold/flu preparations, and careful attention should be paid to the total daily dose to avoid exceeding 4000 mg/day.

NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) (e.g., ibuprofen, naproxen, meloxicam, nabumetone) should be titrated to the maximum dose or as tolerated by upper gastrointestinal symptoms. NSAIDs are particularly useful for arthralgia, myalgia, and secondary inflammatory conditions (e.g. bursitis, tendinitis, costochodritis, or post-dislocation pain). Bruising is not a contraindication to NSAID therapy, but occasionally requires dose reduction or change to a Cox-2 inhibitor.

Cox-2 inhibitors (e.g., celecoxib) in maximal doses are no stronger than dose-equivalent NSAIDS, but may be better tolerated and thus more effective.

Topical lidocaine as a cream or patch is sometimes useful for localized areas of pain. Topical capsaicin is of questionable utility, but is safe.

Skeletal muscle relaxants are useful in combination with all of the above to treat myofascial spasm. They are also sometimes helpful in treating neuropathic pain. Metaxalone may be the least sedating, but all are potentially limited by sedation. There is theoretic risk that skeletal muscle relaxants can increase joint instability by reducing muscle tone. This is not a contraindication to their use, but does justify monitoring for potential complications.

Magnesium, either topically as Epsom salt baths or orally in any form, may also reduce muscle spasm and pain. No specific formulation or dosage has been established as superior to any other. The most common adverse effects – sedation, nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea – are more likely to occur with oral rather than topical supplementation.

Tricyclic antidepressants are often effective for neuropathic pain, with additional benefits of mild sedation (for those with sleep disturbance) and a little mood elevation. Constipation, a common side effect, can be managed with fluids, fiber, stool softeners, and laxatives. For those with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome, the constipating effect may be therapeutic. Typical doses are nortriptyline (25-150 mg) or trazadone (50-300 mg) every evening.

Serotonin/norepinephrine receptor inhibitors (SNRIs), such as venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, and milnacipran also offer combined benefit for depression and neuropathic pain. Venlaxafine may raise the blood pressure a few points, which potentially could be helpful for individuals with neurally mediated hypotension.

Some anti-seizure medications are also effective for neuropathic pain and can be used in addition to tricyclic and/or SNRI antidepressants. All require gradual titration before reaching therapeutic levels. Gabapentin should be titrated as tolerated up to at least 1200 mg/3x/day before declaring failure, but is often limited by sedation and/or gastrointestinal side effects. Pregabalin can be dosed twice or three times daily up to a total daily dose of at least 300 mg, and tends to be better tolerated than gabapentin. Topiramate and lamotrigine have also been used successfully.

Short courses of steroids can be very effective for controlling acute flares of pain associated with secondary inflammation. EDS is not an intrinsically inflammatory condition, and there is no role for chronic steroid use.

Glucosamine and chondroitin may help to prevent or treat osteoarthritis in the general population. They have not been studied specifically in EDS, but are not contraindicated.

Cannabinoids such as dronabinol and (where legal) marijuana may be helpful for several different types of pain. Their benefits should be weighed against the potential for dependency and/or psychoactive effects.

Tramadol can be added to acetaminophen plus an NSAID or Cox-2 inhibitor before resorting to opioids. Nausea is the most common side effect.

Opioids are effective for both myofascial pain and neuropathic pain, but should be reserved for use after failing the above medications. They should be administered in conjunction with all of the above, except tramadol, in order to minimize total opioid requirements. Since they are typically used chronically (or at least several months), the primary formulation should be long acting (e.g., sustained-release oxycodone or morphine or topical fentanyl patch) with short-acting forms of the same drug used as needed for breakthrough pain. Routine use of two or more daily doses of a short-acting form should prompt an increase in the long-acting dose or another adjustment to the pain regimen.

Benzodiazepines may offer some short-term reduction in muscle spasm, but are poor choices for long-term muscle relaxation and carry high risk of tolerance, dependency, and addiction. Routine use of benzodiazepines is not recommended.

Medication precautions

It is critically important to evaluate all potential sources of acetaminophen and assure that total daily use does not exceed 4000 mg.

Abrupt cessation of anti-seizure medications can precipitate a seizure. When discontinuing, they should be tapered gradually.

Chronic opioid use can result in tolerance and dependency with escalating dose requirements and diminishing effect. Narcotic bowel syndrome can also develop, and may be confused with irritable bowel syndrome.

Serotonin syndrome can occur when combining multiple serotonergic medications, such as tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants, SNRI antidepressants, anti-seizure medications, and opiods. Symptoms and signs may include agitation, restlessness, tremor, hyperreflexia, ataxia, confusion, irritability, nausea, diarrhea, hyperthermia, tachycardia, hyper/hypotension, and/or diaphoresis. Severity can range from mild to life threatening. Many of these manifestations overlap those associated with EDS, making diagnosis difficult. Some individuals find mild-to-moderate serotonergic symptoms acceptable in order to achieve adequate pain control.

Surgery and Other Procedures

Many individuals will have undergone several orthopedic procedures prior to diagnosis. These often include joint debridement, tendon relocations, capsulorraphy, and arthroplasty. The degree of stabilization and pain reduction, overall patient satisfaction, and duration of improvement are variable, but usually less than in individuals without EDS [Aldridge et al 2003, Rose et al 2004, Rombaut et al 2011b]. In general, orthopedic surgery should be delayed in favor of physical therapy and bracing. When surgery is performed, the affected individual and physician should cautiously anticipate some improvement but expect less than optimal results. There is one report of long-term improvement in shoulder stability with Achilles tendon allograft reconstruction of the joint capsule in an individual with EDS, hypermobility type [Chaudhury et al 2012]. It is not yet known if this approach will be successful in other affected individuals. Unlike the classic and vascular types of EDS, the hypermobility type is not associated with increased risk for perioperative skin and soft tissue complications.

Prolotherapy, in which saline and/or other irritants are injected in tendons or around joints to induce scar formation and increase stability, has not been objectively studied. It is probably safe and probably subject to the same limitations as orthopedic surgery.

Anesthetic/corticosteroid injections for localized areas of pain and acute inflammation are often helpful, but cannot be repeated indefinitely. "Dry needling" without injection of any material sometimes provides similar benefit.

Anesthetic nerve blocks can provide temporary relief of neuropathic pain. These are sometimes followed by surgical nerve root destruction and/or implantable stimulators (sensory or motor), with variable results.

Constant intrathecal delivery of anesthetic and/or opioid medication may reduce the need for oral/systemic medications, but should only be considered as a last resort.

Bone Density

Therapy is the same as for any other individual with low bone density, including supplementation of calcium and vitamin D. Simple weight-bearing exercise, such as walking or use of an elliptical trainer, should not be overlooked as a means to help maintain bone density as well as improve resting muscle tone.

Hematologic

Easy and spontaneous bruising does not require treatment, and does not require avoidance of NSAIDs.

For severe bleeding (e.g., epistaxis, menometrorrhagia) or operative prophylaxis, desmopressin acetate (ddAVP) is often beneficial [Stine & Becton 1997, Mast et al 2009].

Gastrointestinal

Gastritis and reflux symptoms may require intensive therapy, including proton pump inhibitor twice daily before meals, high-dose H2-blocker at bedtime (e.g., famotidine 20-40 mg or ranitidine 150-300 mg), sucralfate one gram four times daily, and over-the-counter acid-neutralizing agents. Other treatable causes, such as H. pylori infection, should be investigated. Upper endoscopy is indicated for resistant symptoms, but frequently is normal other than chronic gastritis.

Delayed gastric emptying should be identified if present and treated the same way as in patients without EDS. Assistance from a gastroenterologist experienced in managing GI dysmotility can be helpful.

Irritable bowel syndrome is treated as usual with dietary modification, fiber, antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, and laxatives as needed. Lubiprostone is a motility enhancer that may be helpful for those with constipation only. Tricyclic antidepressants may be helpful for persons with both neuropathic pain and diarrhea.

Cardiovascular

Beta-blockade is rarely necessary, but should be considered for progressive aortic enlargement. Rarely, severe enlargement (>4.5-5.0 cm) requires surgical evaluation. When such severe enlargement is noted, other hereditary disorders of connective tissue should be considered (see Differential Diagnosis).

Neurally mediated hypotension and postural orthostatic tachycardia are treated as usual, with avoidance of sudden postural change, consideration of lower-extremity and/or abdominal compression garments, exercise to increase muscle tone, supplementation of sodium and water to expand the blood volume, and sometimes pharmacologic treatment with beta-blockers, midodrine, fludrocortisone, and/or other medications [Mathias et al 2011]. Commercially available electrolyte tablets can be added to water to facilitate oral expansion of blood volume.

Dental

Orthodontic and palatal corrections may tend to relapse, requiring prolonged use of a retainer.

Periodontal disease should be identified and treated.

Temporomandibular joint laxity and dysfunction are difficult to treat. There are no specific interventions of proven benefit. Intra-oral devices are sometimes helpful. Oral rest (minimization of chewing and talking), local myofascial release, and muscle relaxant medications may be beneficial for acute flares. Surgical intervention is often disappointing and should be considered only as a last resort.

Psychiatric

Validation of the affected individual's symptoms can be immensely helpful, as many with EDS, hypermobility type have been accused of malingering or diagnosed with primary psychiatric disorders by previous physicians.

Establishing trust, rapport, and a supportive relationship between patient and provider is important. Emphasis should be placed on chronic, rather than acute, pain management. Distraction and hypnosis are often helpful [Branson et al 2011].

Depression is a common result of the chronic pain, disability, and other complications. Psychological and/or pain-oriented counseling can improve adaptation to and acceptance of these issues and the necessary physical limitations. Cognitive behavioral therapy can be particularly beneficial, but requires active patient participation [Baeza-Velasco et al 2011]. Antidepressants are also of great benefit. Many individuals initially resist a diagnosis of or therapy for depression because of concern that their problems are being written off as purely psychiatric.

Consumer support groups are available and can be very beneficial.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Improved joint stability may be achieved by low-resistance exercise to increase muscle tone (subconscious resting muscle contraction), as opposed to muscle strength (voluntary force exerted at will). Emphasis should be placed on both core and extremity muscle tone. Examples include walking, bicycling, low-impact aerobics, swimming or water exercise, and simple range-of-motion exercise without added resistance. Core toning activities, such as balance exercises and repetitive motions focusing on the abdominal, lumbar, and interscapular muscles, are also important. Progress should be made by gradually increasing repetitions, frequency, or duration, not resistance. It often takes months or years for significant progress to be recognized.

Wide-grip writing utensils can reduce strain on finger and hand joints. An unconventional grasp of a writing utensil, gently resting the shaft in the web between the thumb and index finger and securing the tip between the distal interphalangeal joints or middle phalanges of the index and third fingers (rather than using the tips of the fingers), results in substantially reduced axial stress to the interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, and carpometacarpal joints. These adjustments frequently result in marked reduction of pain in the index finger and at the base of the thumb.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Calcium (500-600 mg/2x/day), vitamin D (400 or more units daily), and low-impact weight bearing exercise should be encouraged to maximize bone density.

Surveillance

DEXA should be repeated approximately every other year if bone loss is confirmed. Otherwise, routine population surveillance of bone density is all that is necessary.

Annual echocardiography is not necessary in those with a normal initial echocardiogram [Atzinger et al 2011]. In children and adolescents with a normal aortic root diameter, it is the author's practice to repeat every two to three years until young adulthood (age ~25 years). If the aortic root diameter is increased or accelerating faster than body surface area, more frequent monitoring is appropriate. In adults with a normal aortic root diameter, no further monitoring is needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Joint hyperextension may not need to be avoided. In a randomized controlled trial of physical therapy among 26 children and adolescents with joint hypermobility and knee pain, those allowed to exercise into hyperextension had similar improvement in pain score and better improvement in psychosocial score compared to those restricted to neutral joint position [Pacey et al 2013].

Resistance exercise can exacerbate joint instability and pain. In general, it is preferable to increase the number of repetitions of exercise rather than to increase the resistance.

High-impact activity increases the risk for acute subluxation/dislocation, chronic pain, and osteoarthritis. Some sports, such as tackle football, are therefore contraindicated. However, most sports and activities are acceptable with appropriate precautions.

Chiropractic adjustment is not strictly contraindicated, but must be performed cautiously to avoid iatrogenic subluxations or dislocations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

All first-degree relatives are at a 50% risk of having EDS, hypermobility type, and may wish to undergo formal clinical assessment. Those without significant clinical manifestations may not benefit directly from knowing that they are affected, but may benefit from knowing that their children are at risk. Evaluation of children under age ten years (and especially under age 5 years) is difficult because of the normal joint laxity in that age group.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Labor and delivery may progress very rapidly. Even in primigravid women, any perception of labor should be taken seriously and she should promptly report to her intended place of delivery.

There is no clear advantage to vaginal vs. cesarean delivery. Cesarean delivery may reduce the risk of hip dislocation [Volkov et al 2007, Dutta et al 2011], but carries the same risk for surgical complications as in the general population.

There is no increase in risk for cervical incompetence, and no evidence to support use of prophylactic cerclage [Volkov et al 2007].

Pregnant women with known aortic dilation should have an echocardiogram in each trimester. Echocardiography is not needed if the aortic root is normal prior to pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Vitamin C is a cofactor for cross-linking of collagen fibrils. Supplementation with up to 500 mg daily may improve some of the manifestations, but this has not been studied. Higher doses are likely excreted and probably offer no additional clinical benefit.Currently, no consensus exists regarding the appropriate extent of evaluation at the time of initial diagnosis.

Approach to a vascular evaluation depends on the age of the individual and the circumstances in which the diagnosis is made. Because of the risk of asymptomatic aneurysm/dissection, initial visualization of the arterial tree is commonly undertaken [Chu et al 2014]; the approach employed varies by geographic region and by institution (see Surveillance).

Because no specific gastrointestinal findings are known to precede or predict bowel rupture, there is no benefit from invasive GI evaluation.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is appropriate.

Establishment of an organized care team including a primary care physician, vascular surgeon, general surgeon, and a geneticist may aid in emergency preparedness. In addition, individuals with vEDS should carry documentation of their genetic diagnosis, such as a MedicAlert® or emergency letter.

Treatment of Manifestations

Surgical intervention may be life-saving in the face of bowel rupture, arterial rupture, or organ rupture (e.g., the uterus in pregnancy). When surgery is required for treatment, it is appropriate to target the approach and minimize surgical exploration because of the risk of inadvertent damage to other tissues [Oderich et al 2005]. In general, surgical procedures are more likely to be successful when the treating physician is aware of the diagnosis of vEDS and its associated tissue fragility [Shalhub et al 2014]. There are no guidelines to direct recommendations for elective repair in individuals with aneurysm(s) and vEDS. A decision about the timing and approach of an elective vascular procedure or the use of endovascular approaches is typically based on an individualized risk/benefit assessment. Reports of successful endovascular approaches are growing but no studies have compared outcomes between endovascular and open repair.

Prompt surgical intervention of bowel rupture is essential to limit the extent of infection and facilitate early restoration of bowel continuity. Death from bowel rupture is uncommon because intervention is generally effective. Bowel continuity can be restored successfully in most instances, usually three to six months after the initial surgery.

The recurrence of bowel tears proximal to the original site and the risk of complications resulting from repeat surgery have led some to recommend partial colectomy to reduce the risk of recurrent bowel rupture. Some physicians and affected individuals consider total colectomy as a prophylactic measure to avoid recurrent bowel complications and the need for repeat surgery [Fuchs & Fishman 2004].

Affected individuals should be instructed to seek immediate medical attention for sudden, unexplained pain.

Surveillance

The use of surveillance of the arterial vasculature assumes that effective interventions will decrease the risk of arterial dissection or rupture and prolong life. At a time when an open surgical approach was the only option, the benefit of surveillance could not be established. As endovascular approaches to management of aneurysms and dissection become more available, intervention is considered earlier and surveillance is seen to have greater benefit. There are, however, no published data that assess the efficacy of screening strategies to identify the regions in the arterial vasculature at highest risk; conversely, there are examples in which regions of concern in the arterial vasculature failed to progress and arterial rupture occurred at other more distant sites. Thus, the benefit of controlled studies cannot be overemphasized.

If undertaken, noninvasive imaging such as ultrasound examination, magnetic resonance angiogram, or computed tomography angiogram with and without venous contrast is preferred to identify aneurysms, dissections, and vascular ruptures [Chu et al 2014]. Because arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter and at sites of high pressure injection, conventional arteriograms are not recommended.

Blood pressure monitoring on a regular basis is recommended to allow for early treatment if hypertension develops, which will presumably reduce vascular stress and injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Trauma. Because of inherent tissue fragility, it is prudent for individuals with vEDS to avoid collision sports (e.g., football), heavy lifting, and weight training. Of note, no evidence suggests that moderate recreational exercise is detrimental.

Arteriography. Conventional arterial angiography (with contrast injection) should be discouraged because it has been associated with added de novo complications [Zilocchi et al 2007]. Arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter; furthermore, injection pressure may lead to arterial aneurysms. Arteriography is currently best used as part of a planned interventional procedure, such as coil embolization or stenting of bleeding arteries.

Routine colonoscopy. There are several reports of colonoscopy-associated bowel perforation in individuals with vEDS. Virtual colonoscopy, which also involves insufflation, may have similar complications. Routine colonoscopy for cancer screening is discouraged in the absence of concerning symptoms or a strong family history of colorectal cancer. Individuals with vEDS who have a family history of colon cancer are encouraged to utilize genetic testing for colon cancer risk assessment (provided the genetic etiology of colon cancer has been established in an affected family member).

Elective surgery. Because tissue fragility results in a higher risk of surgical complications, elective surgery for individuals with vEDS is discouraged unless the benefit is expected to be substantial. In general, avoidance of surgery in favor of more conservative management is advised.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who could benefit from surveillance, awareness of treatment for potential complications, and appropriate restriction of high-impact sports. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Clinical evaluation and physical examination if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

It is prudent to follow pregnant women with vEDS in a high-risk obstetrical program.

It is not known if elective caesarian section or pre-term delivery decreases the risk of mortality.

Educating the pregnant woman as to possible complications and the need for close monitoring is recommended.

Experience with use of assisted reproductive technologies for women with vEDS is limited [Bergeron et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical trial of the efficacy of a cardioselective β-blocker with β-2 agonist vasodilatory properties (celiprolol) in reducing risk of arterial rupture or dissection concluded that there was a benefit: a reduced number of arterial events (rupture or dissection, fatal or not) was reported in the treatment group [Ong et al 2010]. Although the study was directed to measure benefit in individuals with vEDS, randomization to treatment or control group was undertaken prior to molecular testing. The treated and untreated groups with a confirmed pathogenic variant differed in size and age distribution; thus, it is difficult to determine if there is a measurable benefit. No further studies published to date have attempted to replicate the original findings.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliotic form, the following evaluations are recommended:

Musculoskeletal

Evaluation for kyphoscoliosis. Photographic and radiologic documentation of the spine is recommended in view of the progressive kyphoscoliosis.

Physical therapy evaluation to develop a plan for ongoing therapy to strengthen large muscle groups and prevent recurrent shoulder dislocation

Cardiovascular. Measurement of aortic root size and assessment of heart valves by echocardiogram at the time of diagnosis or by age five years

Ophthalmologic. Formal ophthalmologic evaluation at diagnosis for myopia, astigmatism, and potential for retinal detachment

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Musculoskeletal

Referral to an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis is appropriate.

Orthopedic surgery is not contraindicated in individuals with EDS, kyphoscoliotic form and can be performed as necessary.

Bracing may be required to support unstable joints.

Physical therapy is recommended for older children, adolescents, and adults to strengthen large muscle groups, particularly at the shoulder girdle, and to prevent recurrent shoulder dislocation. Swimming is recommended.

Due to skin fragility, protective pads over knees, shins, and elbows may be helpful in preventing lacerations, particularly in children. The use of helmets in active sports is always advised.

Cardiovascular

Vigilant observation and control of blood pressure can reduce the risk of arterial rupture.

Vascular surgery is fraught with danger. Although virtually no surgical literature exists on EDS, kyphoscoliotic form, the review by Freeman et al [1996] on surgical complications of EDS, vascular type is relevant.

Individuals with aortic dilation may require treatment with beta blockers to prevent further expansion.

Ophthalmologic

Myopia and/or astigmatism may be corrected by glasses or contact lenses.

Laser treatment of the retina is indicated in case of imminent detachment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with mitral valve prolapse should follow standard American Heart Association guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine ophthalmologic examination for management of myopia and early detection of glaucoma or retinal detachment

Routine examination for inguinal hernia and surgical referral as necessary

Vigilant observation of blood pressure

Regular follow up by an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis

Echocardiogram at five-year intervals, even if the initial echocardiogram is normal

Females should be made aware of complications associated with pregnancy (see Pregnancy Management).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In children with significant joint hyperextensibility, sports which impact the joints such as gymnastics or long-distance running should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected pregnant women may be at increased risk for spontaneous abortions, premature rupture of membranes, and rupture of arteries [Esaka et al 2009]. Two affected women had a total of seven pregnancies resulting in three miscarriages and four healthy children, three of whom were born vaginally at term and one of whom was born at 24 weeks; there were no maternal complications [Steinmann, unpublished]. Delivery should be performed in a medical center.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Ascorbate therapy has been suggested as a treatment, but its effectiveness has not been biochemically proven.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE), the recommended evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis) are as summarized in Table 2.

Table 2. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy (EE)

Affected System

Evaluation

Comment

Neurologic

Neurologic evaluation

Particularly if medications are being used to treat spasticity and/or extrapyramidal movement disorders (e.g., dystonia)

Brain MRI

Indicated in any child w/EE w/seizures or spasticity who has not previously had a brain MRI

EEG and video EEG

If seizures are suspected

Gastrointestinal

Feeding evaluation & nutrition assessment

Referral to appropriate feeding therapist and/or nutritionist as indicated

Assessment for chronic diarrhea

Referral to gastroenterologist as needed

Musculoskeletal

Orthopedic evaluation

Referral to orthopedist as needed

Miscellaneous /Other

Consultation w/clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy (EE)

Treatment of Manifestations

Multi-specialty care that includes child neurology, pediatrics, clinical genetics, nutrition, gastroenterology, orthopedic, pain management, and physical therapy can help with timely detection and treatment of the multi-organ dysfunction that characterizes ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Treatment is primarily supportive including anti-spastic medications, muscle relaxants, and antiepileptic drugs. Physical therapy early in the disease course can help prevent contractures.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Spasticity

Antispastic medications

Dystonia

Muscle relaxants

Contractures

Physical therapy

Seizures

Antiepileptic drugs

Severe diarrhea

Maintain hydration & caloric intake

Tube feeding often necessary

Poor energy metabolism & oxidative stress

L-carnitine, riboflavin and/or coenzyme Q10 supplements (a cocktail of drugs generally used in mitochondrial disorders) as well as other vitamin therapies 1

1. 

Gorman et al [2016]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Gorman et al [2016]

Off-label compassionate use of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in combination with metronidazole may be considered as they are the only drugs known to slow disease progression and improve the metabolic abnormalities of EE [Viscomi et al 2010, Kılıç et al 2017].

N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a cell-permeable precursor of glutathione, is abundant in mitochondria where it can act as one of the physiologic acceptors of the sulfur atom of hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which has deficient clearance in persons with EE.

Metronidazole is widely used to combat infections caused by anaerobic bacteria, and can reduce the sulfide-producing bacterial load in the large intestine.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay / intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies, and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, writing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

All affected individuals should receive routine immunizations; as well as annual immunizations for influenza.

Physicians must pay particular attention to the prevention of infections that could be fatal.

Surveillance

Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.

Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

System

Evaluation/Action

Frequency

Growth

Assess growth and monitor for failure to thrive

At each visit

Gastrointestinal

Monitor feeding and electrolyte status, particularly in those with severe diarrhea

Neurologic

Monitor for epileptic crisis; modify therapy according to clinical presentation and EEG findings

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

While clearance of circulating sulfide by a transplanted liver could be beneficial, to date only one instance of liver transplantation in EE has been reported [Dionisi-Vici et al 2016]. Although results were encouraging, follow up of this patient and experience with additional patients are necessary to determine therapeutic efficacy of liver transplantation in EE and possible relevance for national or state-mandated newborn screening, particularly in populations with relatively high prevalence of pathogenic variants.

Possible future treatments include AAV-mediated gene therapy [Di Meo et al 2012] or liver transplantation [Dionisi-Vici et al 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with EFEMP2 -related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Chest roentgenogram

Echocardiography

3D-CT scan

Lung function test

MR angiography (MRA) from head to pelvis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hernia. Routine repair is appropriate.

Pulmonary emphysema is treated symptomatically. Tracheostomy may be necessary when retrognathia leads to upper airway obstruction.

Arterial abnormalities. No definitive treatment is available. Based on experience in other related disorders (e.g., Marfan syndrome), treatment with beta-blockers or angiotensin receptor blockers can be considered when aortic root dilatation is present. However, the efficacy of these interventions in EFEMP2- related disorders has not been proven. Surgical repair of large aortic aneurysms (at risk for dissection) should be considered. Aortic aneurysm replacement has been performed successfully

Joint hypermobility can be supported by muscle reinforcing physical therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular and pulmonary follow up starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis

Annual MRA from head to pelvis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Cigarette smoking, which can worsen emphysema

Sun tanning, which can damage skin

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the EFEMP2 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No experience with pregnancy in an affected proband has been reported.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials related to this disorder.No current guidelines to evaluate the clinical manifestations that contribute to morbidity and mortality have been published. The following measures ‒ based on the literature and the authors' experience ‒ are recommended (if they have not already been completed) to establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Emanuel syndrome:

Palatal evaluation for cleft palate

Cardiac evaluation with an echocardiogram to screen for cardiac defects. Atrial septal defects are the most common defects and may not be detected by auscultation alone.

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for structural kidney anomalies; if indicated, vesicoureterogram (VCUG) to evaluate for vesicoureteral reflux

Gastrointestinal evaluation with appropriate radiologic studies for structural anomalies of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, in particular anal stenosis or diaphragmatic abnormalities, gastroesophageal reflux

Feeding and swallowing assessment

Orthopedic evaluation with appropriate radiologic studies for hip dysplasia as well as joint contractures, club foot, curvature of the spine, and radioulnar synostosis

Otolaryngology (ENT) evaluation for stenosis or atresia of ear canals

Audiology evaluation with auditory brain stem response testing and otoacoustic emission testing (See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for more information about this testing.)

Ophthalmologic evaluation including dilated fundoscopic examination to assess visual acuity and to evaluate for strabismus

Urologic evaluation in males with cryptorchidism and/or micropenis

Evaluation by a developmental pediatrician and therapists to develop educational/therapeutic intervention with emphasis on communication skills

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor for evaluation for genetic counseling and to identify at-risk relatives (The +der(22) is almost always inherited from a carrier parent.)

Treatment of Manifestations

Depending on the age and extent of systemic involvement of the individual with Emanuel syndrome, evaluations involving healthcare providers from multiple specialties are necessary.

In some individuals, palliative care is appropriate when there are severe structural defects and/or renal failure.

Standard management of gastroesophageal reflux; supplementary formulas and consideration of enteral feeds if there is failure to thrive

Surgical correction for anal atresia (or stenosis if indicated) and inguinal hernias

Standard interventions for:

Cardiac defects

Cleft palate

Hip dysplasia and other skeletal complications. Assistive devices such as walkers are often required for ambulation.

Hearing loss

Cryptorchidism and/or micropenis

Refractive errors, strabismus, or other ophthalmologic issues

Seizures, if present

Ongoing physical, occupational, and speech therapies to optimize developmental outcome

Alternative communication methods to facilitate communication as verbal skills are often very limited

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Care during sedation and/or operative procedures should be provided by a pediatric anesthesiologist as small airways, various palatal abnormalities, and laryngomalacia can be seen in children with Emanuel syndrome.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Follow up as needed based on the extent of systemic involvement in the affected individual

Regular assessment of developmental progress to guide therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Patients and their families should be informed regarding natural history, treatment, mode of inheritance, genetic risks to other family members, and consumer-oriented resources.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with EPB42-related hereditary spherocytosis (EPB42-HS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Hemoglobin concentration and reticulocyte count to evaluate severity of disease

Serum bilirubin concentration

Transfusion history

Serum ferritin concentration to evaluate iron load status

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate:

Spleen size if physical examination is not conclusive due to body habitus or if contact sports are contemplated

For evidence of cholelithiasis when symptoms are present. If hemolysis is significant a screening ultrasound may be considered after age 10-12 years, even without symptoms.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Detailed management guidelines for hereditary spherocytosis (HS) have been published [Eber & Lux 2004, Bolton-Maggs et al 2012].

Conservative management recommendations for mild EPB42-HS (Hgb 11-15 g/dL, reticulocytes 3-8%) (Table 1) include the following:

Folic acid supplementation (400 µg 1x daily until age 1 year; then 1 mg 1x daily thereafter)

Avoidance of iron supplementation unless concurrent iron deficiency is confirmed with iron studies, in which case treatment with supplemental iron should be carefully monitored and discontinued after iron stores are repleted to avoid iron overload

Note: Hereditary spherocytosis (as all chronic hemolytic anemias) involves an increased risk for iron overload even with oral iron supplementation (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, if needed, for hemolytic or aplastic crisis

Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. However, when disease is moderate (see Table 1) and normal activity or quality of life is compromised, splenectomy can be performed after age five years provided that hereditary stomatocytosis has been ruled out (see Differential Diagnosis). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).

Although splenectomy is curative, it entails potential long-term increased risk for life-threatening infection and, thus, should not be undertaken before the risks and benefits have been fully weighed [Casale & Perrotta 2011].

Ideally, the following immunizations should be completed before splenectomy:

Immunizations for Streptococcus pneumoniae with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and for N. meningitidis with a meningococcal conjugate vaccine against the serogroups A, C, W, and Y (MenACWY) at least two weeks before splenectomy. A two-dose primary series of MenACWY is recommended 8-12 weeks apart [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2011].

Prevnar-13® and H. influenzae type b vaccines during infancy per general pediatric immunization guidelines

The incidence of post-splenectomy sepsis varies among studies. Although low overall, the risk for sepsis, a life-threatening complication, is higher than in the general population [Iolascon et al 1998]. To reduce the risk of infection post splenectomy, the following are recommended:

Give booster vaccination for PPSV23 five years after the first dose. No more than two PPSV23 doses are recommended [Pekka Nuorti & Whitney 2010].

Give booster dose for meningococcal vaccine three years after the primary series if the primary two-dose series was given between ages two and six years and every five years for persons whose two-dose primary series or booster dose was given at age seven years or older [Cohn et al 2013].

Serogroup B meningococcal vaccines are recommended for people age ten years and older with history of splenectomy.

Controversy exists regarding the duration of use of antibiotics for prophylaxis post-splenectomy: some hematologists recommend prophylactic antibiotics for the first three years post splenectomy and others for life [Eber & Lux 2004]. The antibiotics recommended are penicillin V-K 250 mg twice daily or erythromycin for those allergic to penicillin.

In any case, an individual who has undergone splenectomy needs immediate medical attention for fever and prompt use of IV antibiotics with good coverage for encapsulated organisms (typically ceftriaxone in doses adequate to treat meningitis: 100 mg/kg/day up to 2 g/day in single daily dose).

Partial splenectomy appears to be associated with a lesser risk for post-splenectomy sepsis and a sustained decrease (although not elimination) of hemolysis and may be preferable for young children if the surgeon is experienced in the procedure [Bader-Meunier et al 2001]. An ongoing prospective observation of more than 100 children in a congenital hemolytic anemia multi-institutional registry, who have undergone total or partial splenectomy, may elucidate better the risks and benefits of each procedure [Rice et al 2012, Rice et al 2015].

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be discontinued one year after partial splenectomy if immune splenic function is adequate as assessed by pit count (percentage of pitted or pocked red cells) or the uptake of radioactive colloid by the spleen [Eber & Lux 2004].

Cholecystectomy

The gallbladder should be removed in affected individuals undergoing splenectomy who have a history of cholelithiasis.

In children who require cholecystectomy, concurrent splenectomy is not recommended automatically any more. The need for splenectomy should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and the indication of splenectomy justified independently [Bolton-Maggs et al 2012, Ruparel et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. Note: When indicated, splenectomy is curative; however, it can have potential life-threatening complications (see Treatment of Manifestations). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regular immunizations are recommended as well as influenza vaccine annually to prevent infections that can precipitate hemolytic or aplastic crisis.

Iron overload and its associated chronic organ failure are risks with any chronic hemolytic anemia especially if frequent transfusions are required.

Treatment with an iron chelator should be implemented, typically after about ten transfusions (which correlate to a serum ferritin concentration of approximately 1000 ng/mL).

The effectiveness of chelation should be monitored by evaluation of liver iron by T2*-weighted MRI or FerriScan® so that the dose of iron chelator can be adjusted appropriately.

Surveillance

Neonates with HS require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus.

Infants with HS require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion

Those dependent on frequent transfusions require at least annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration.

If iron chelation is required secondary to frequent transfusions in children too young to undergo splenectomy, appropriate monitoring for toxicity and effectiveness of chelation treatment is necessary [Musallam et al 2013].

When hemolysis is significant, ultrasound examination to evaluate for cholelithiasis is indicated by age ten to twelve years, and every five to ten years thereafter.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any preparations containing iron should be avoided (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Contact sports are not advisable in those with splenomegaly; of note, acute or excessive splenomegaly is a greater risk than chronic mild splenomegaly.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to perform laboratory evaluation of the phenotype (CBC and reticulocyte count, blood smear, osmotic fragility or ektacytometry) and clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the EPB42 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Neonates require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus.

Infants require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion and initiation of folate supplementation

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Folic acid supplementation (800-1000 µg daily) is necessary in pregnant women with chronic hemolytic anemias such as EPB42-HS.

Monitoring for exacerbation of anemia with CBC and reticulocyte count is recommended in pregnant women with HS, as hemolytic crisis and persistent anemia have been reported during pregnancy, especially in women who have not undergone splenectomy [Pajor et al 1993].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Unverricht-Lundborg disease (EPM1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical evaluation including walking, coordination, handwriting, school performance, and emotional features

Examination of myoclonus including evaluation of myoclonus at rest, with action, and in response to stimuli

EEG evaluation before initiation of therapy, as it is most characteristic before use of anticonvulsive medication

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic pharmacologic and rehabilitative management are the mainstay of patient care [Kälviäinen et al 2008]:

Valproic acid is the first drug of choice. It diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures.

Clonazepam, the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of myoclonic seizures, is used as add-on therapy [Shahwan et al 2005].

High-dose piracetam has been formally studied and has been found useful in the treatment of myoclonus [Koskiniemi et al 1998].

Levetiracetam has been evaluated in several series and seems to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures.

Topiramate and zonisamide may also be used as add-on therapies.

Surveillance

Patients need lifelong clinical follow up and psychosocial support including evaluation of the drug treatment and comprehensive rehabilitation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Phenytoin should be avoided, as it has been found to have aggravating side effects on the associated neurologic symptoms, and may even accelerate cerebellar degeneration [Eldridge et al 1983].

Sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin) and GABAergic drugs (tiagabine, vigabatrin) as well as gabapentin and pregabalin should in general be avoided as they may aggravate myoclonus and myoclonic seizures [Medina et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Brivaracetam, a SV2A ligand that differs from levetiracetam by its mechanism of action profile, has demonstrated significant antiepileptic activity in experimental models of epilepsy and myoclonus. Brivaracetam has been granted orphan drug designation by the FDA (United States) for the treatment of symptomatic myoclonus, and by the EMEA (European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products; European Union) for the treatment of progressive myoclonic epilepsies.

Brivaracetam is currently being investigated as an add-on treatment for Unverricht-Lundborg disease in adolescents and adults.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Vagus nerve stimulator therapy reduces seizures and significantly improves cerebellar function on neurologic examination [Smith et al 2000].

N-acetylcysteine has been tried with variable results [Edwards et al 2002].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile if not performed as part of diagnostic testing

Assessment of hepatic function as well as imaging studies such as abdominal sonogram if cholelithiasis is suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute photosensitivity. Afamelanotide (Scenesse®), a synthetic α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog was approved for treatment of EPP by the European Medicines Agency in 2014. The drug is administered through a subcutaneously inserted bioresorbable implant which results in increased pigmentation due to an increase in eumelanin. Phase III clinical trials in the US and Europe showed an increase in pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in individuals with EPP. In the United States, the drug is pending FDA approval.

The phototoxic pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Current management centers on prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Tanning products. Some tanning creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all. Topical sunscreens are typically not useful.

β-carotene. Oral Lumitene™ (120-180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight in some patients if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600-800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The dose of Lumitene depends on age, ranging from two to ten 30-mg capsules per day and usually started six to eight weeks before summer. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. However, there are currently no data to support its efficacy [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Some affected individuals develop severe liver complications that are difficult to treat, often requiring liver transplantation [Anderson et al 2001]. Hepatic complications may be accompanied by motor neuropathy.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988].

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002].

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, transplant recipients may experience a recurrence of protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006].

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Sun avoidance is the only effective means of preventing primary manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency as a result of to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance

Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies including abdominal sonogram are indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs that may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk family members as newborns or infants in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early intervention (sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of liver dysfunction.

Evaluations can include the following:

Molecular genetic testing if both FECH pathogenic variants in the family are known

Biochemical testing to detect markedly increased free erythrocyte protoporphyrin if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is not complicated by EPP. There may be some improvement in photosensitivity during pregnancy as well as a reduction in protoporphyrin levels [Poh-Fitzpatrick 1997, Heerfordt & Wulf 2016].

Therapies Under Investigation

Phase III clinical trials from the US and Europe with a subcutaneous insertion of a biodegradable, slow-released α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog, afamelanotide (Scenesse®), which increases pigmentation by increasing melanin, showed increased pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in those with EPP [Harms et al 2009, Minder et al 2009, Minder 2010, Langendonk et al 2015]. A long-term observational study of 115 individuals receiving Scenesse® for up to eight years showed improved quality of life and high compliance with the drug [Biolcati et al 2015].

Scenesse® is currently approved for use in patients with EPP in the European Union.

In the United States, the drug is pending FDA review.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked protoporphyria (XLP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile if not performed as part of diagnostic testing

Assessment of hepatic function as well as imaging studies such as abdominal sonogram if cholelithiasis is suspected

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment specific for this disease; furthermore, there is no specific treatment for the acute photosensitivity.

The pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Although several treatments have been proposed, most have been tried only in a single patient or a small number of patients. The only effective current treatment is prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light.

Use of protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats is indicated.

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows prevents exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Topical sunscreens are typically not useful; however, some tanning products containing creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent (e.g., zinc oxide) are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all.

Oral Lumitene™ (β-carotene) (120–180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600–800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. While oral beta-carotene has been used typically six to eight weeks before summer to reduce photosensitivity, its effectiveness may be limited [Minder et al 2009].

A systematic review of about 25 studies showed that the available data are unable to prove efficacy of treatments including beta-carotene, N-acetyl cysteine, and vitamin C [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Treatment of hepatic complications, which may be accompanied by motor neuropathy, is difficult.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988]

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002]

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, many transplant recipients experience a recurrence of the protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006]

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy in EPP [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].

Whatley et al [2008] reported some evidence of diminished iron stores in males with XLP; in one patient with iron deficiency, iron repletion decreased protoporphyrin accumulation and corrected the anemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance

Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies such as an abdominal sonogram is indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of alcohol and drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the ALAS2 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, at-risk relatives can be tested as newborns or infants so that those with the pathogenic variant can benefit from early intervention (sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of liver dysfunction.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no information on pregnancy management in XLP. Based on experience with EPP pregnancy is unlikely to be complicated by XLP [Poh-Fitzpatrick 1997].

Therapies Under Investigation

Recent clinical trials with a subcutaneous insertion of a biodegradable, slow-released α-melanocyte stimulating hormone analogue, afamelanotide, that increases pigmentation by increasing melanin appear promising for the treatment of EPP (see Differential Diagnosis) and XLP [Harms et al 2009, Minder et al 2009, Minder 2010].

In Europe Phase 3 trials have been completed and the drug is currently approved for the management of EPP in Italy and pending EMA approval for other countries in the European Union.

In the US, Phase 2 trials have been completed and Phase 3 trials are currently underway in order for the drug to receive FDA approval.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SCN9A-related inherited erythromelalgia (SCN9A-related IEM), the following are recommended:

Assessment of the pain management strategies used (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The pain of SCN9A-related IEM or secondary erythromelalgia is often refractory to treatment.

Reports on treatments in a series involve heterogeneous populations. In a report of 169 individuals with erythromelalgia of mixed etiologies, 84 medications or treatments were used [Davis et al 2000]. Response is highly variable, and no treatment is consistently effective. No controlled treatment trial has compared the effectiveness of various classes of medications.

Cooling the extremities reduces pain in a symptomatic person.

Medications. The effectiveness of medications and the order in which they should be tried is highly controversial, according to a consensus of expert opinion. Treatment should be determined by the individual’s treating physician, based on factors including other medical conditions, known medication allergies, and potential for drug-drug interactions.

Aspirin should be tried because of the known, dramatic response of thrombocythemia-associated EM to low-dose aspirin. A positive response warrants evaluation for and monitoring for myeloproliferative disease because the symptoms of thrombocythemia-associated EM may precede a diagnosis by several years. If pain is not relieved, aspirin should be discontinued.

Misoprostol, an oral prostaglandin E1 analog, was tested in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, one-way crossover clinical trial in 21 adults with erythromelalgia and 11 healthy controls. Improvements in pain and cooling scores were significant (p<0.01) [Mork et al 2004].

Seratonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) /selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Venlafaxine, an SNRI, has induced remissions in approximately a dozen individuals even after other classes of medications have been unsuccessful [DiCaudo & Kelley 2004]. SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline) have been reported to be helpful in some additional affected individuals.

Gabapentin has been one of the more effective medical treatments in both primary and secondary EM. Of 16 individuals taking gabapentin in a survey of Erythromelalgia Association members, all 16 reported benefit, although the degree was not quantified. Experts have reported typically mild to moderate pain relief. Remissions (i.e., remaining pain-free for 4-6 months) on gabapentin have been reported in an adult and a child [Cohen 2000].

Sodium channel blockers including lidocaine infusion, lidocaine patch, or oral mexilitine have been used successfully in inherited erythromelalgia and secondary erythromelalgia [Kuhnert et al 1999, Davis & Sandroni 2005, Nathan et al 2005, Choi et al 2009]. Because of the absence of systemic side effects, partial relief in 55% of the individuals studied, and greater than 80% pain relief in 12% of individuals, Davis & Sandroni [2005] have suggested a lidocaine patch as first-line treatment. It is not known whether sodium channel blockers are more effective in individuals with SCN9A-related IEM than in individuals with other forms of EM.

Carbamazepine. In a survey of 41 members of the Erythromelalgia Association, one of four persons using carbamazepine reported improvement [Cohen 2000]. A family with a known SCN9A pathogenic variant (p.Val400Met) reported significant improvement of symptoms while using carbamazepine [Fischer et al 2009].The combination of carbamazepine and gabapentin has been reported to produce relief in one individual with SCN9A-related IEM [Natkunarajah et al 2009].

Oxcarbazepine use in treating EM has not been reported.

Tricyclic antidepressants used alone or in combination with other classes of medications have reduced pain. Their use has diminished with the introduction of newer agents with a more favorable side-effect profile, but they should be considered in refractory individuals. Topical application of 1.0% amitriptyline hydrochloride and 0.5% ketamine hydrochloride in pluronic lecithin organogel has been reported effective in four of five patients with refractory EM [Sandroni & Davis 2006].

Calcium antagonists. Diltiazem is very effective in some individuals, inducing at least one remission. Paradoxically, diltiazem and other calcium channel antagonists have been reported to trigger secondary EM.

Magnesium. In 13 persons, high doses of oral magnesium induced remission in one person, improved symptoms in seven, did not change them in four, and exacerbated symptoms in one. Diarrhea was a limiting side effect [Cohen 2002]. Remission (freedom from pain) was also reported in an Italian child [Dell'era et al 2004].

Sodium nitroprusside infusion has been successful in the acute hospital setting in individuals with severe attacks [Chan et al 2002].

Cyclosporine was successful in one person with erythromelalgia. The postulated mechanism was inhibition of nitric oxide synthase in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells [Sano et al 2003]. Conversely, cyclosporine caused EM in another individual treated for psoriasis vulgaris [Thami & Bhalla 2003].

Sympathetic block, surgical sympathectomy, and epidural infusion

Sympathetic block has had mixed results in individuals with severe symptoms. Some have improved, some have not improved, and others have worsened [Cohen 2000]. Sympathetic block should be tried – and the response to repeated blocks considered – prior to surgical sympathectomy.

In at least two individuals, sympathectomy reduced redness but not pain.

Epidural infusions of opiates have been used in combination with bupivicaine and other oral and topical medications with good results in a few individuals.

Other

Reports of a single or a few individuals have noted remission or significant improvement with cyproheptadine, propranolol, or thalamic stimulation [Delye et al 2005].

Additional combinations of medical, surgical, and alternative treatments tried with varying success in individuals with either primary EM or secondary EM are summarized by Davis et al [2000] (see Table 2) and Cohen [2000] (see Table 3).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Avoidance of triggers (warmth, prolonged standing) may reduce the number or severity of episodes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications from prolonged immersion in ice baths include: skin maceration, infection, and gangrene. Amputation has occasionally been necessary to treat these complications.

Cooling with a fan is generally safer than immersion in water.

Surveillance

There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are treated in dermatology clinics, neurology clinics, or pain clinics, or by anesthesiologists specializing in the management of chronic pain. It is important to monitor for side effects of treatment.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Symptoms are triggered by warmth and standing and, in some individuals, by alcohol and spicy foods including chili peppers or garlic.

In some individuals, exercise can trigger symptoms. However, for many individuals, the benefits of mild exercise outweigh the disadvantages. Swimming is a preferred exercise because the extremities remain cool.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Potential teratogenic effects of medications given for treatment of erythromelalgia should be discussed with affected women of childbearing age. The ideal time to discuss this is prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation

Small molecule inhibitors of the SCN9A encoded sodium channel Nav1.7 have been developed. In one exploratory, randomized, double-blind crossover trial of four subjects with EM in whom the presence of SCN9A pathogenic variants had been confirmed, the compound was reported to be more effective than placebo in reducing the amount of pain for two hours following a pain induction stimulus [Goldberg et al 2012]. Given the small number of treated individuals and short duration of the study, strong conclusions cannot be drawn from these results.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with EXOSC3-related pontocerebellar hypoplasia, the following are recommended:

Optionally to evaluate disease progress: neurologic evaluation (EMG, NCV) and brain MRI.

Pediatric evaluation, including assessment of feeding, pulmonary function, and nutritional status

Ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopy to assess the optic nerve and measurement of visual acuity.

Orthopedic evaluation to assess joint contractures and scoliosis.

Electroencephalography in those with suspected liability of seizures

Medical genetics consultation, including counseling and prenatal advice regarding future pregnancies and counseling of related family members.

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific therapy is available. Treatment is symptomatic. The main problems to manage are:

Contractures, including scoliosis, due to neurogenic atrophy, by passive or active movement and if necessary by bracing.

Prevention of aspiration due to bulbar muscle and respiratory muscle involvement

Adaptation of education to the level of cognitive handicap

Epilepsy, which is amendable to standard treatments

Surveillance

Regular examinations to address:

Growth and nutritional status, including problems with feeding and risk of aspiration

Respiratory function

Joint contractures and scoliosis

Development or management of epileptic seizures

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary multiple osteochondromas (HMO), the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed history of symptoms from osteochondromas

Physical examination to document location of osteochondromas, functional limitations, and deformity (shortness of stature, forearm bowing and shortening, knee and ankle angular deformities)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Osteochondromas require no therapy in the absence of clinical problems.

Angular deformities, leg-length inequalities, and pain resulting from irritation of skin, tendons, or nerves often require surgery. Most individuals with HMO have at least one operative procedure and many have multiple procedures [Porter et al 2004]:

Painful lesions without bony deformity can be treated with simple surgical excision. Excision of osteochondromas may also slow the growth disturbance and improve cosmesis and must include the cartilage cap and overlying perichondrium to avoid recurrence.

Surgery for forearm deformity may involve excision of the osteochondromas, corrective osteotomies, and/or ulnar lengthening procedures that may improve pronation, supination, and forearm alignment [Matsubara et al 2006, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007, Watts et al 2007]; however, adults with HMO and untreated forearm deformities describe few functional limitations.

Though uncomplicated resection of osteochondromas in growing children is frequently reported [Fogel et al 1984, Danielsson et al 1990, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007], there is a theoretic risk of growth abnormality resulting from resection of periphyseal osteochondromas.

Abnormal growth and development of the forearm and leg in untreated individuals with HMO is common, including both proportionate and disproportionate shortening of the two bones of the forearm or leg, producing shortened and angulated limbs, respectively.

Waiting to resect osteochondromas until they have migrated away from the physis would decrease the risk of injury to the physis, as well as potentially limiting the likelihood of recurrence of lesions [Chin et al 2000, Shin et al 2006]. However, numerous studies suggest that early treatment (in individuals age <10 years) of forearm deformities via resection of distal osteochondromas may decrease proportionate shortening and bowing of the forearm [Masada et al 1989, Ishikawa et al 2007] as well as deformity about the ankle [Chin et al 2000].

Leg-length inequalities greater than 2.5 cm are often treated with epiphysiodesis (growth plate arrest) of the longer leg.

Angular misalignment of the lower limbs may be treated with hemiepiphysiodeses (or osteotomies) at the distal femur, proximal tibia, or distal tibia [Ofiram et al 2008, Boero et al 2011, Rupprecht et al 2011, Tompkins et al 2012, Driscoll et al 2013].

Early surgical treatment of tibio talar tilt may prevent or decrease the incidence of late deterioration of ankle function; long-term follow-up studies are needed [Noonan et al 2002].

Surgical resection is the treatment for sarcomatous degeneration. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy are controversial for secondary chondrosarcoma, but are often used in the setting of a secondary osteosarcoma.

Surveillance

Monitoring of the size of adult osteochondromas, in particular those involving the pelvis or scapula, may aid in early identification of malignant degeneration, but no cost/benefit analyses are available to support routine surveillance.

Radiography, CT scanning, MRI, positron emission tomography and technicium-99 radionuclide imaging can be used to evaluate centrally located osteochondromas, but it is not known whether the benefits outweigh the risks of irradiation and the potential for false positive results that lead to unnecessary interventions. In addition, optimal screening intervals have not been determined.

A single screening MRI of the spine in children with HMO has been recommended by some [Roach et al 2009] to identify spinal lesions that may cause pressure on the spinal cord. The presence of osteochondromas in the canal would then warrant close clinical follow up; encroaching lesions and those causing symptoms may merit excision.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Presymptomatic testing is not warranted because the clinical diagnosis is evident at an early age and because no precipitants, protective strategies, or specific nonsurgical interventions are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and management requirements in an individual diagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a hematologist, to include complete blood count, fetal hemoglobin, full blood typing, blood chemistries (assessing liver, kidney, and iron status), and bone marrow aspirate for cell morphology, FISH and cytogenetics, as well as biopsy for cellularity

Note: The bone marrow of individuals with FA can exhibit signs of dysplasia, such as nuclear/cytoplasmic dys-synchrony, hypo-lobulated megakaryocytes, and bi-nucleated erythroid cells. These features must be distinguished from true forms of MDS by a hematopathologist experienced in the evaluation of MDS in individuals with FA.

HLA typing of the affected individual, sibs, and parents for consideration of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Examination by an ophthalmologist

Ultrasound examination of the kidneys and urinary tract

Formal hearing evaluation

Echocardiogram

Referral to an endocrinologist

Developmental assessment (particularly important for toddlers and school-age children)

Referrals as indicated to an otolaryngologist, hand surgeon, gastroenterologist, gynecologist, and urologist

Evaluation by a clinical geneticist and genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Recommendations for treatment were agreed upon at a 2014 consensus conference (full text).

Androgens improve (at least transiently) the red cell and platelet counts in approximately 50% of individuals. Androgen therapy can be considered when the hemoglobin drops below 8 g/dL or the platelet count falls below 30,000/mm3 ('severe' – see Table 2). Although only 10%-20% of individuals receiving continuous low-dose androgen therapy are long-term responders, this option can be particularly useful for individuals who do not have access to or are not ready for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), or to individuals for whom of a suitable donor is not available.

Oxymetholone, given orally at a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day, may be increased up to 5 mg/kg/day.

Doses may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose with careful monitoring of the blood counts.

Other synthetic androgens used in FA include stanazolol in Asia, and oxandrolone and danazol in North America.

Side effects of androgen administration include virilization and liver toxicity such as elevated liver enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis (vascular lesion with multiple blood-filled cysts), and hepatic tumors. Individuals taking androgens should be monitored for liver tumors and undergo regular liver function tests (LFT) for abnormalities. Blood tests for LFTs should be performed every three to six months; liver ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 months. If no response is seen after three to four months, androgens should be discontinued [Scheckenbach et al 2012, Rose et al 2014].

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves the neutrophil count in some individuals. G-CSF dose should be titrated to the lowest possible dose and frequency to keep ANC above 1,000/mm3. Note: (1) A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed prior to the initiation of G-CSF and monitored every six months throughout treatment, given the theoretic risk of stimulating the growth of a leukemic clone. (2) G-CSF should be administered in consultation with an FA expert.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations, including aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and acute leukemia. Ideally, HSCT is performed prior to onset of MDS/AML and before multiple transfusions [MacMillan & Wagner 2010, Mehta et al 2010]. Individuals with FA are sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation, need special transplant regimens, and should be cared for and transplanted at centers with the most experience in HSCT in FA.

A multi-institutional study reported a one-year probability of overall survival of 80% in 45 individuals with FA transplanted for marrow failure and/or MDS, using alternative donors (including mismatched related and unrelated donors) and chemotherapy-only preparative regimen. Survival for individuals younger than age ten years transplanted for marrow failure was even better, at 91.3% (±5.9%) [Mehta et al 2017].

Fludarabine reduced the incidence of graft failure and allowed for removal of radiation from the preparative regimens in a matched sib donor setting [MacMillan et al 2015].

MDS/AML treatment remains challenging. Options include chemotherapy, HSCT with or without prior induction chemotherapy, and investigational trials. Chemotherapy should be undertaken in coordination with centers experienced with FA, as it can cause severe, prolonged, or irreversible myelosuppression. Plans for HSCT should be in place prior to starting chemotherapy. Published reports of chemotherapy regimens for AML in individuals with FA are sparse and limited by the unclear benefit to the overall outcome due to the lack of longitudinal follow up [Mehta et al 2007, Talbot et al 2014, Beier et al 2015].

Solid tumors. Prompt, aggressive workup for any symptoms suggestive of a malignancy is indicated. Early detection and surgical removal remains the mainstay of therapy. Treatment is challenging secondary to the increased toxicity associated with chemotherapy and radiation in FA. Data is limited on use of chemotherapy at standard doses or reduced doses and schedules in individuals with FA, and there are reports of severe or fatal toxicities and poor treatment outcomes [Masserot et al 2008, Hosoya et al 2010, Tan et al 2011, Spanier et al 2012]. Individuals diagnosed with a genital tract cancer should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist immediately, and care should be coordinated with FA experts.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination should be initiated at age nine years in order to reduce the risk of gynecologic cancer in females, and possibly reduce the risk of oral cancer in all individuals.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with FA treated with HSCT who developed graft vs host disease (GVHD) had a 28% incidence of head and neck cancers in the ten years following treatment (vs 0% in those without GVHD); this finding points to the importance of minimizing the risk of GVHD [Guardiola et al 2004]. Increased risk for GVHD observed in earlier studies was reduced significantly by T-cell depletion of the donor graft [Chaudhury et al 2008, MacMillan et al 2015].

Individuals successfully treated with HSCT are at increased risk for solid tumors, in addition to the baseline increased risk [Rosenberg et al 2005]. Due to the known contribution of radiation to the long-term complication of secondary solid tumors most recent efforts have focused on using a conditioning regimen without radiation even in an unrelated donor setting. German, Brazilian, and US groups now report excellent outcomes with alternative donors with a 'chemotherapy-only' preparative regimen in single-center studies. The study from Germany showed 88% survival and normal hematopoiesis at a median follow up of 30 months [Bonfim et al 2015, Chao et al 2015]. A prospective multi-institutional US study also showed similar excellent outcomes. One-year probabilities of overall and disease-free survival for the entire cohort, including patients with myeloid malignancy and those receiving mismatched related/haploidentical grafts, were 80% and 77.7% respectively at a median follow-up of 41 months. All young children (age <10 years) undergoing HSCT for marrow failure using low-dose busulfan-containing regimen survived [Mehta et al 2017].

Surveillance

See 2014 consensus guidelines [Frohnmayer et al 2014] (full text).

Annual evaluation with a multidisciplinary team including an endocrinologist

Regular blood counts, every three to four months while stable and more often as needed

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy at least annually to evaluate morphology, cellularity (from the biopsy), FISH, and cytogenetics (the latter two for emergence of a malignant clone). Individuals on GCSF need to have a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy every six months, if possible.

In individuals who develop Sweet syndrome (neutrophilic skin infiltration), prompt investigation for hematologic disease progression including bone marrow evaluation

Notes: (1) Progressively changing blood counts without a potential cause (e.g., acute infection or suppression from medication) require immediate evaluation with a complete blood count and bone marrow examination with FISH and cytogenetics. (2) It is important to recognize that rising blood counts can be due to either the development of MDS/AML or, rarely, reversion of a germline mutation in a stem cell, which repopulates the marrow with normal cells (somatic stem cell mosaicism). These individuals may require immediate HSCT (for MDS/AML) or continued close monitoring with complete blood counts at least every one to two months and a bone marrow examination with cytogenetics every six months.

Individuals receiving androgen therapy

Liver function tests every three to six months

Liver ultrasound examination every six to 12 months for androgen-related changes, including tumors

Cancer surveillance

Annual gynecologic assessment for genital lesions beginning at age 13. Thorough vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear can begin when women become sexually active or by age 18 years, whichever is earlier. Suspicious genital tract lesions should be biopsied.

Examination every six months for oral, head, and neck cancers beginning by age nine to ten years. Screening should be performed by a dentist, oral surgeon, or ENT familiar with FA. Nasolaryngoscopy starting at age ten years, or within the first year after HSCT. Individuals with difficulty or pain with swallowing should be evaluated for esophageal cancer.

For individuals with a history of premalignant or malignant lesions: surveillance examinations every two to three months

For individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants in BRCA2: screening for neuroblastomas, brain tumors, and kidney tumors every six months (see also Risk to Family Members – Autosomal Recessive FA)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Blood transfusions. Blood products should be cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe and irradiated. To reduce the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors. Once an individual requires transfusions, he/she should be referred for transplantation.

Toxic agents to avoid include smoking, second-hand smoke, and alcohol, which have been implicated in tumorigenesis.

Unsafe sex practices increase the risk for HPV-associated malignancy.

Radiographic studies for the purpose of surveillance should be minimized in the absence of clinical indications. However, baseline skeletal surveys may be considered, in order to document bony anomalies that may lead to problems with age, such as anomalies of the wrist, hip, and vertebrae.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate all sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from appropriate monitoring for physical abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and related cancers.

DEB/MMC testing can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is possible in females with FA, whether or not they have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [Dalle et al 2004, Nabhan et al 2010].

Pregnancy needs to be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician along with a hematologist.

Therapies Under Investigation

Previous clinical trials failed to accomplish permanent gene correction of stem cells; current work is focusing on development of novel vector and delivery strategies [Tolar et al 2011]. The first FA lentiviral gene therapy trial led by the University of Washington/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center is now open [Becker et al 2010]. Dr. Juan Bueren has an open trial of a hematopoietic stem cell mobilization in Madrid, Spain and plans to have their FANCA gene therapy trial opened soon.

A Phase I study of the antioxidant quercetin in children with Fanconi anemia is currently underway at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Fabry disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Careful history for evidence of acroparesthesia, sweating abnormalities (i.e., hypohidrosis), or other manifestations of the disorder

Renal function studies, including BUN, creatinine, and urinalysis

Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiography

Examination of the skin for angiokeratomas

Formal audiology assessment

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Neurologic assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Acroparesthesia

Diphenylhydantoin. The severe pain of such episodes in affected males and heterozygous females often responds to low-maintenance doses of diphenylhydantoin by reducing the frequency and severity of the periodic crises of excruciating pain and constant discomfort. A potential side effect of diphenylhydantoin is gingival hypertrophy.

Carbamazepine has similar effects. The combination of the two drugs may also significantly reduce the frequency and severity of the pain. Dose-related autonomic complications with carbamazepine include urinary retention, nausea, vomiting, and ileus.

Gabapentin has been demonstrated to improve pain [Ries et al 2003].

Renal disease. Renal insufficiency is the most frequent and serious late complication in males with the classic phenotype. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be used in those with evidence of renal involvement, especially to reduce proteinuria [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014, Warnock et al 2015].

Chronic hemodialysis and/or renal transplantation have become lifesaving procedures. The engrafted kidney remains histologically free of glycosphingolipid deposition because the normal alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme activity in the allograft catabolizes endogenous renal glycosphingolipid substrates. Therefore, successful renal transplantation corrects renal function.

Reviews of the registries of the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplantation Association and the United States Renal Data System support excellent outcomes for renal transplantation in individuals with Fabry disease. For example, during the ten-year period from 1988 to 1998, 93 individuals who underwent renal transplantation were reported to the US registry. Compared to a matched control group, recipients with Fabry disease had equivalent five-year life survival (82% vs 83%) and graft survival (67% vs 75%), respectively.

Note: (1) Immune function in males with Fabry disease is similar to that in other individuals with uremia, obviating any immunologic contraindication to transplantation in this disease. Autoimmune conditions have, however, been reported to occur at an increased frequency in individuals with Fabry disease [Martinez et al 2007]. (2) Transplantation of kidneys from female heterozygotes should be avoided, as the organs may already contain significant substrate deposition; all related potential donors must be evaluated to exclude affected males and heterozygous females.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The two ERTs using recombinant or gene-activated human α-Gal A enzyme that have been evaluated in clinical trials are Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and Replagal™ (agalsidase alfa 0.2 mg/kg every 2 weeks). Both were approved in 2001 by the European Agency for Evaluation of Medical Products; only Fabrazyme® was approved by the FDA for use in the United States.

The following is a summary of some of the clinical trials for each drug:

Single-center double-blind placebo-controlled studies of agalsidase alfa have shown a beneficial effect of ERT on neuropathic pain [Schiffmann et al 2001] and left ventricular hypertrophy [Hughes et al 2008]. Data from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) suggest that ERT with agalsidase alfa improves pain and quality of life, reduces the natural rate of decline of renal and cardiac function in males and females with Fabry disease [Mehta et al 2009] and may improve life expectancy [Beck et al 2015]. The enzyme is safe in children [Ramaswami et al 2006]. In persons with advanced renal disease, weekly administration of 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa may be associated with a slower decline in renal function [Schiffmann et al 2007, Schiffmann et al 2015].

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of agalsidase beta demonstrated increased clearance of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) from the endothelial cells of the kidney, heart, and skin among treated subjects [Eng et al 2001].

A Phase IV extension study showed that the risk of major clinical events (a combination of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, development of ESRD, or a 33% increase in serum creatinine concentration) was reduced by 53% with agalsidase beta treatment after adjustment for baseline proteinuria (P=0.06) [Banikazemi et al 2007]. In a ten-year follow up of these individuals, with additional data from the Fabry Registry, Germain et al [2015] reported that 49 of 52 were alive and 42/52 (81%) did not experience any severe clinical events during the ten-year treatment interval. Disease progression was most likely to be observed in those individuals who initiated treatment after age 40 years and/or had advanced renal disease at baseline. A study of cardiac outcomes from the Fabry Registry of 115 males treated with agalsidase beta for at least two years reports that treated individuals fared better than 48 untreated males. Left ventricular mass fell at a slope of -3.6 g/year in 31 males aged 18-30 years but rose by 9.5 g/year in 15 males who were not treated [Germain et al 2013].

The largest comparative study is the Canadian Fabry Disease initiative. Sirrs et al [2014] have reported five-year follow-up data on 362 subjects for a composite endpoint (death, neurologic or cardiovascular events, development of ESRD, or sustained increase in serum creatinine of 50% from baseline). Ninety-two of 178 individuals treated with ERT were randomly allocated to either agalsidase alfa or agalsidase beta. No differences were found with regard to the clinical efficacy of the two medications, and individuals who switched from agalsidase beta to agalsidase alfa during the time of Fabrazyme® shortage were stable. In comparison with the placebo group in the Banikazemi study individuals treated with ERT had a significant reduction in clinical events, which occurred at an older age. The eight-year follow-up data continued to suggest that the two medications are equivalent at their standard doses [M West, personal communication].

Antibody formation has been reported with both agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta in males, but not females [Linthorst et al 2005, Wilcox et al 2012]. Lenders et al [2015] reported that 40% of 68 males with Fabry disease on ERT have evidence of serum-mediated inhibition of agalsidase activity. They further reported that inhibition-positive individuals have worse clinical outcomes and higher levels of lyso-Gb3 than inhibition-negative individuals. There appeared to be no difference between agalsidase alfa and beta with regard to the development of serum inhibitors. The impact of antibody formation on the overall efficacy of treatment is currently unknown.

During 2009-2012, a shortage of agalsidase beta resulted in the substitution of agalsidase alfa for agalsidase beta in several cohorts of affected individuals. Reports thus far have not indicated any significant difference in clinical parameters as a result of this transition [Smid et al 2011, Tsuboi & Yamamoto 2012, Pisani et al 2013, Goker-Alpan et al 2016].

Lubanda et al [2009] have shown in a small study of 21 individuals that those who have been ‘stabilized’ with agalsidase beta at 1 g/kg can thereafter be safely treated with a maintenance dose of 0.3 g/kg every other week. A study of lower-dose agalsidase beta has been conducted in children (FIELD study [Wijburg et al 2015]); it will be interesting to observe if lower doses of agalsidase beta are equally efficacious in children.

There is an emerging consensus that ERT has, at best, a limited impact on the long-term outcome of Fabry disease. Studies of consecutive affected persons from individual centers suggest that cardiac, renal, and cerebrovascular outcomes are comparable among treated and untreated cohorts [Rombach et al 2013, Weidemann et al 2013]. A recent Cochrane review has also highlighted the generally poor quality of evidence in favor of ERT for Fabry disease.

Despite these emerging data, a panel of physician experts have recommended that ERT be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease, including children and those with ESRD undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation, and in heterozygous females with significant disease [Desnick et al 2003, Eng et al 2006] because all are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and neurologic complications including transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The treatment initiation guidelines from a group of European physicians are generally more conservative [Biegstraaten et al 2015]. They emphasize the need to start ERT before the advent of irreversible complications and suggest that initiation of ERT after irreversible organ damage has occurred is to be avoided. ERT should be discontinued if it is making no impact on organ function in an individual; and compliance should be closely monitored.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The prophylaxis for renovascular disease, ischemic heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease in persons with Fabry disease is the same as for the general population.

Proteinuria/microalbuminuria should be minimized with ACE inhibitors/ARBs [Tahir et al 2007]; blood pressure control optimized; and cholesterol normalized [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014].

Aspirin and other anti-platelet agents such as clopidogrel may be recommended for the prophylaxis of stroke.

Although evidence as to the effect on long-term outcomes is lacking, use of aspirin and lipid-lowering agents and optimal blood pressure control are recommended in persons with symptoms of cardiac ischemia [Eng et al 2006].

The role of ERT in the long-term prophylaxis of renal, cardiac, and CNS manifestations is unproven; however, on the basis of stabilization of organ function in persons with more advanced disease, some have suggested the initiation of ERT in early disease stages: at first sign of disease manifestations in boys; at age 12-13 years in asymptomatic boys; and at the time of diagnosis in adult males [Eng et al 2006]. Studies indicate that late initiation of therapy when renal or cardiac manifestations are significant is associated with less effect than initiation earlier in the disease course [Germain et al 2015, Ortiz et al 2016].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual or more frequent renal function studies

Annual cardiology evaluation

Annual audiology evaluation

Biennial brain MRI/MRA

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The obstructive lung disease, which has been documented in older hemizygous males and heterozygous females, is more severe in smokers; therefore, affected individuals should be discouraged from smoking.

Amiodarone has been reported to induce cellular and biochemical changes resulting in a phenocopy in particular of the keratopathy of Fabry disease [Whitley et al 1983]. Given potential effects on cellular levels of α-Gal A enzyme activity, it has been contraindicated in persons with Fabry disease. However, little evidence of a detrimental effect in this specific group exists and the relative benefit in individuals with cardiac arrhythmia should be considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk male and female relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment (ERT) and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known:

Males. Measure α-Gal A enzyme activity.

Females. Measurement of α-Gal A enzyme activity is unreliable in females although demonstration of decreased α-Gal A enzyme activity is diagnostic of the heterozygous state. Ophthalmologic examination for the characteristic whorl-like corneal opacities by slit-lamp microscopy can be considered if enzyme analysis is uninformative. However, only 80%-90% of heterozygous females have the corneal lesions.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene replacement therapy has been investigated in the mouse model of Fabry disease [Ziegler et al 1999, Ziegler et al 2002, Ziegler et al 2004]. A trial of gene therapy via autologous stem cell transplantation is currently in progress in Canada.

Chaperone therapy, a novel approach, uses small molecules designed to enhance the residual enzyme activity by protecting the mutated enzyme from misfolding and degradation in the cell [Desnick & Schuchman 2002]. A report of chaperone therapy in a male with the cardiac variant demonstrated the "proof of concept" for this therapeutic strategy for Fabry disease [Frustaci et al 2001].

Phase I trials have demonstrated elevation of plasma α-Gal A levels in healthy volunteers [Fan et al 1999, Ishii et al 2004]. Phase III trials are now in progress in males and females with Fabry disease with a pharmacologic chaperone (1-deoxygalactonojirimycin; DGJ; Migalastat Amicus Therapeutics, NJ, USA). DGJ has been demonstrated to enhance trafficking of mutated α-Gal A to lysosomes of fibroblasts derived from persons with Fabry disease and to increase enzyme activity while reducing GL-3 substrate in tissues of a transgenic/knockout animal model of Fabry disease. In 2016 Migalastat received marketing approval in the European Union.

Alternative enzyme therapy. A PEGylated version of recombinant α-Gal A with a longer circulating half-life is currently in a Phase II trial.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Substrate reduction therapy for Fabry disease has a biochemical rationale. Clinical trials of substrate reduction therapy will be commencing soon.To assess the risk for thrombosis in an individual diagnosed with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Individuals heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele should be tested for other inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders. Testing should include:

DNA testing for the prothrombin gene pathogeic variant (G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 20210)

Multiple phospholipid-dependent coagulation assays for a lupus inhibitor

Serologic assays for anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-beta2-glycoprotein 1 antibodies

Evaluation in high-risk individuals (i.e., those with a history of recurrent VTE, especially at young age, or those with strong family history of VTE at young age) should also include assays of:

Protein C activity

Antithrombin activity

Protein S activity or free protein S antigen

Note: (1) Measurement of serum concentration of homocysteine is no longer routinely recommended since no data support a change in duration of anticoagulation or the use of vitamin supplementation in individuals with hyperhomocysteinemia and a history of VTE. In a randomized placebo-controlled trial, supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B12, and pyridoxine did not reduce the incidence of recurrent VTE [den Heijer et al 2007]. (2) There is no clinical rationale for DNA testing for MTHFR polymorphisms. (3) Although routine measurement of factor VIII levels is not recommended, testing may be useful in selected cases [Chandler et al 2002]. (4) It is still unclear whether assessment of clotting factor concentrations should be included in a thrombophilia evaluation [Chandler et al 2002].

Treatment of Manifestations

Thrombosis

The management of individuals with factor V Leiden thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin or intravenous unfractionated heparin [Kearon et al 2008a]. Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with low molecular-weight heparin (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international normalized ratio (INR). A target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.5 (therapeutic range 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in individuals with homozygous factor V Leiden [Baglin et al 1998, Kearon et al 2008a]. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin therapy should be overlapped for at least five days, and until the INR has been within the therapeutic range on two consecutive measurements over two days. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin are both safe in breast-feeding women.

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be tailored to the individual, based on an assessment of the risks for VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with an incident VTE develop recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent ten years [Prandoni et al 1996]. Since individuals remain at risk for recurrence even after ten years, VTE is now considered a chronic disease. The optimal duration of anticoagulation for individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele is debated. Individuals with a spontaneous thrombosis and no identifiable provoking factors or persistent risk factors require a longer course of anticoagulation. In contrast, individuals with transient (reversible) risk factors such as surgery require a shorter course of therapy [Kearon et al 2008b].

The risk for VTE recurrence is higher in persons with proximal than with distal DVT (relative risk=0.5) and in those with one or more prior episodes of VTE. Other risk factors for recurrent VTE include male sex and a negative D-dimer level one month after discontinuation of warfarin [McRae et al 2006, Palareti et al 2006]. Multiple other studies confirmed residual proximal thrombosis after a course of anticoagulation as a strong risk factor for recurrence [Siragusa et al 2008, Prandoni et al 2009].

The presence of hereditary thrombophilia was not a major factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2008 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy based on evidence that these disorders are not major determinants of recurrence risk. Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2008b].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring.

Long-term anticoagulation should also be considered in individuals homozygous for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant or with multiple thrombophilic disorders [Kearon et al 2008b]. In these individuals at high risk for recurrence, the potential benefits from long-term warfarin may outweigh the bleeding risks.

Individuals receiving long-term therapy should be reevaluated at periodic intervals to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation outweigh the bleeding risks.

Unfractionated and low molecular-weight heparin, fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide), and warfarin are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolism. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin and argatroban) are approved for use in certain circumstances. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. It is unknown whether the presence of a factor V Leiden allele should influence the duration of anticoagulation in children. There are no randomized trials of antithrombotic therapy of VTE in children and treatment guidelines are adapted from those in adults. The American College of Chest Physicians 2008 guidelines recommend at least three months of anticoagulation after a provoked VTE. A minimum of six months is recommended for children with a first idiopathic VTE. Indefinite anticoagulation is favored for children with recurrent idiopathic VTE [Monagle et al 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele because the 1%-3%/year risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated less than 1%/year risk for thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation. Because the initial thrombosis in factor V Leiden heterozygotes occurs in association with other circumstantial risk factors in 50% of cases, a short course of prophylactic anticoagulation during exposure to hemostatic stresses may prevent some of these episodes.

Prophylactic anticoagulation should be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for all asymptomatic carriers.

Decisions regarding prophylactic anticoagulation should be based on a risk/benefit assessment in each individual case. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in consensus guidelines [Geerts et al 2008].

Pregnancy. No consensus exists on the optimal management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are similar to those for individuals who are not pregnant [Kujovich 2004b, Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Until more specific guidelines are defined by prospective trials, decisions about anticoagulation should be individualized based on the thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis. These women should be warned about potential thrombotic complications, counseled about the risks and benefits of anticoagulation during pregnancy, and offered a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation after delivery, as the greatest thrombotic risk is in the initial postpartum period [Bates et al 2008].

Is recommended for women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of unprovoked VTE. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin should be given during pregnancy, followed by a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation post partum [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for heterozygous women with a prior estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for asymptomatic women with homozygous factor V Leiden or double heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or with other combined thrombophilic defects, especially those with circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Barbour 2001, Bates et al 2008].

Graduated elastic compression stockings are recommended for all women with a prior DVT [Bates et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of pregnancy loss. The current data on antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss are limited to several observational studies and two randomized trials.

In one study, 50 women with thrombophilia (including 20 factor V Leiden heterozygotes) and recurrent pregnancy loss were treated with enoxaparin throughout 61 subsequent pregnancies. The live birth rate was 75% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 20% in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2000].

Another study reported a similar live birth rate of 77% with enoxaparin prophylaxis compared to 44% in untreated historical controls, suggesting a threefold greater likelihood of a favorable outcome. The beneficial effect of anticoagulation was most pronounced in women with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, although the small number of individuals studied precluded definitive conclusions [Carp et al 2003].

A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women with factor V Leiden, the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or protein S deficiency and a single unexplained fetal loss. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin, suggesting a 15-fold higher likelihood of a successful outcome. In the subgroup of women with heterozygous factor V Leiden (n=72) the live birth rate was 94% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 33% with aspirin, suggesting a 34-fold higher likelihood of a successful pregnancy outcome [Gris et al 2004].

A prospective randomized trial (Live-Enox) compared two different prophylactic doses of enoxaparin in thrombophilic women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss (including 55 heterozygous for factor V Leiden). Both prophylactic doses (40 mg/day and 80 mg/day) achieved similar high live birth rates of 84% and 78%, respectively. These rates were substantially higher than the 23% live birth rate in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005b].

No prospective randomized trials including an untreated control group confirming the benefit of low molecular weight heparin in preventing pregnancy loss in thrombophilic women have been performed. However, the concordant results of the studies cited above suggest that anticoagulation may improve pregnancy outcome in thrombophilic women.

Antithrombotic prophylaxis may be considered in selected women with factor V Leiden and unexplained pregnancy loss after an informed discussion of the risks and the data suggesting benefit [Walker et al 2005].

ACCP 2008 and recent obstetric consensus guidelines and expert opinion do not routinely recommend antithrombotic therapy for women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy loss because of the lack of sufficient evidence confirming benefit [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008, Rodger et al 2008].

Several randomized trials with a no treatment or placebo arm are currently underway. Until the results are available, the risks and benefits of antithrombotic therapy and limited evidence of an improved pregnancy outcome should be discussed with the patient to allow an informed decision.

Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in thrombophilic women with other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited. In the Live-Enox study, the incidence of preeclampsia, placental abruption, and fetal growth retardation was substantially lower with enoxaparin prophylaxis than in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005a]. A study of thrombophilic women with prior fetal loss who received either enoxaparin or aspirin during a subsequent pregnancy showed that those who received enoxaparin had newborns with significantly higher birth weights and fewer classified as small for gestational age [Gris et al 2004]. However, neither study was designed to evaluate these complications as primary outcomes.

A recent pilot randomized trial compared dalteparin to no treatment in a group of women without thrombophilia and a prior history of placental-mediated complications. Prophylactic dose dalteparin significantly reduced the incidence of the composite outcome of severe preeclampsia, low birth weight, placental abruption, and fetal death after 20 weeks. However, the study design excluded women with factor V Leiden [Rey et al 2009].

ACCP 2008 guidelines recommend low-dose aspirin throughout pregnancy for women at high risk for preeclampsia. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin is not routinely recommended for thrombophilic women with a history of preeclampsia or other adverse pregnancy outcomes [Bates et al 2008]. An obstetric expert consensus panel was also unable to make recommendations on the efficacy and safety of low molecular-weight heparin in this group [Duhl et al 2007].

Decisions about antithrombotic therapy in women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy complications should be based on an individual risk/benefit assessment. Assessment of the maternal thrombotic risk during pregnancy should also be incorporated into the decision regarding prophylaxis.

Surveillance

Individuals on long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation of their clinical course to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected factor V Leiden heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT.

Asymptomatic women who are heterozygous for factor V Leiden should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT use and should be encouraged to consider alternative forms of contraception and control of menopausal symptoms.

Asymptomatic heterozygous women electing to use oral contraceptives should avoid third-generation formulations because of their higher thrombotic risk.

Homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen containing contraception and HRT.

For heterozygous women who require short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms, low-dose transdermal preparations may have a lower thrombotic risk [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The genetic status of asymptomatic at-risk family members can be established using molecular genetic testing; however, the indications for family testing are unresolved. In the absence of evidence that early diagnosis of factor V Leiden reduces morbidity or mortality, decisions regarding testing should be made on an individual basis.

Clarification of factor V Leiden allele status may be useful in women considering hormonal contraception or pregnancy or in families with a strong history of recurrent venous thrombosis at a young age.

Asymptomatic factor V Leiden heterozygotes and homozygotes should be aware of the signs and symptoms of venous thromboembolism that require immediate medical attention and the potential need for prophylactic anticoagulation in high-risk circumstances. They should be informed that although a factor V allele is an established risk factor, it does not predict thrombosis with certainty because the clinical course is variable, even within the same family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several novel inhibitors of the initiation of coagulation and fibrin formation are in various stages of clinical development. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years. Long-acting pentasaccharides administered on a weekly basis are also in advanced clinical trials [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008].

None of these new antithrombotic agents is specific for factor V Leiden or thrombophilia in general.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN), the following evaluations may be useful:

Neurologic examination for dystonia, ataxia, and spasticity, including formal evaluation of ambulation, speech, and feeding

Ophthalmologic assessment for evidence of optic atrophy or eye movement abnormalities

Screening developmental assessment, with referral for more formal testing if delay is indicated

Assessment for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy and appropriate assistive devices

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms.

Weighted gloves can sometimes be used to assist with dysmetria.

Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be debilitating. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following:

Oral trihexyphenidyl, baclofen, tizanidine, benzodiazepines, and/or dantrolene

Intramuscular botulinum toxin targeting abnormal co-contraction of selected muscle groups

Ablative pallidotomy or thalamotomy. Dystonia may return despite this aggressive measure [Justesen et al 1999]. (For discussion of deep brain stimulation [DBS] see Therapies Under Investigation.)

It is important to help affected individuals to maintain independence whenever possible.

Affected individuals should be referred to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the visually impaired (if optic atrophy is present), and special education.

As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids such as a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities and augmentative communication devices.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition and prevent aspiration. Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated.

Surveillance

The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment. Fundus photography may be helpful in characterizing changes in the optic nerve over time.

Assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing

Regular review of communication needs and environmental adaptations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). To the authors’ knowledge, DBS has not yet been employed in the treatment of dystonia secondary to FAHN. Ongoing studies in the use of DBS for the management of other forms of NBIA suggest that it does provide benefit to a subset of affected individuals [Timmermann et al 2010]. Future studies will be necessary to determine whether DBS may be similarly useful for dystonia in FAHN.

Intrathecal baclofen pump. The implantable intrathecal baclofen pump has shown efficacy in ameliorating dystonia in some forms of NBIA. The intraventricular baclofen pump has been used successfully in at least one person with NBIA among a cohort of individuals with refractory dystonia [Albright & Ferson 2009]. Additional experience is necessary to better define the optimal mode of drug delivery and risk/benefit ratio.

Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as trials using deferiprone have been published in other disorders of brain iron accumulation, including Friedreich ataxia [Boddaert et al 2007] and superficial siderosis [Levy & Llinas 2011]. Deferiprone can cross the blood-brain barrier and remove intracellular iron.

A single case report suggests regression of symptoms in an adult with NBIA of unknown cause [Forni et al 2008].

A recently completed phase II deferiprone trial in Italy in persons with PKAN demonstrated after six months of treatment decreased T2 hypointensity but no detectable change in clinical symptom severity [Zorzi et al 2011]. No serious treatment-related adverse events occurred.

Long-term clinical trials of deferiprone in specific forms of NBIA will be necessary to further assess safety and efficacy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Riluzole, recently recommended for cerebellar ataxia [Ristori et al 2010], has not to the authors’ knowledge undergone a therapeutic trial in FAHN.Individuals who are diagnosed with FAP or attenuated FAP should be counseled about age-appropriate recommendations for surveillance and prevention of primary manifestations, in addition to treatment of manifestations, as outlined in this section. Currently, consensus management guidelines for GAPPS are unavailable.

Treatment of Manifestations

Practice parameters, including information on surgery, have been outlined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) [Provenzale et al 2016] (full text), the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] (full text), the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons [Church et al 2003b], the American Society of Clinical Oncology [Stoffel et al 2015] (full text), and the Society of Surgical Oncology [Guillem et al 2006] (full text).

Colonic polyps. For individuals with FAP, colectomy is recommended after adenomas emerge. Colectomy may be delayed depending on adenoma size, presence of advanced histology (villous architecture, high-grade dysplasia), and number of adenomatous polyps. Absolute indications for colectomy include documented or suspected colorectal cancer or significant symptoms (obstruction, bleeding – although these are uncommon in the absence of cancer). Relative indications for colectomy include presence of multiple adenomas larger than 6 mm that cannot be reasonably managed by endoscopy, a significant increase in adenoma number between surveillance examinations, presence of adenomas with high-grade dysplasia or inability to adequately survey the colon (e.g., due to innumerous diminutive adenomas or limited access/compliance with colonoscopy).

For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient (see Surveillance).

Types of colectomy include the following:

Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA) which can be performed laparoscopically, laparoscopically-assisted, or open. The IPAA can be stapled, leaving 1-2 cm of anal transition epithelium and low rectal mucosa; or it can be hand-sewn after a complete anal mucosectomy.

Total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA). This is a single-stage procedure.

Total proctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy

The choice of procedure depends on the clinical circumstances.

An IPAA is generally performed in FAP where the rectal polyp burden is high or as a second procedure after IRA when rectal disease burden cannot be managed endoscopically. The advantage of this procedure is nearly eliminating the risk of rectal cancer and relatively good preservation of bowel function. There may be an increased risk of bladder/sexual dysfunction and functional results can be variable.

A study of individuals with FAP and ileal pouches found that 57% had adenomatous polyps in the ileal pouch. No apparent relationship between the development of pouch adenomas and the severity of polyps in the colon or duodenum was found [Groves et al 2005]. Cancer in the surgical transition zone has been reported [Ooi et al 2003] but is rare.

An IRA is generally considered when the rectal polyp burden is low and deemed to be endoscopically manageable (usually in the setting of attenuated FAP). It is a technically straightforward procedure with low complication rates. It is usually associated with good functional outcome and minimizes risk of sexual or urinary dysfunction. This procedure should not be performed if there is severe rectal disease or the individual cannot reliably undergo endoscopic surveillance of the remaining rectum post-operatively.

A total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy is almost never required unless a proctocolectomy is necessary (due to rectal polyp/cancer burden) and a contraindication to IPAA is present (e.g., a mesenteric desmoid preventing a pouch from reaching pelvic floor, low rectal cancer invading pelvic floor, or individual preference due to poor sphincter control).

Small-bowel polyps. Endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas is recommended if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms [Wallace & Phillips 1998, Saurin et al 1999, Kadmon et al 2001].

Surgical options include a pancreas-sparing duodenectomy which is a good option when the papilla is not involved and there is no suspicion for cancer. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) is a surgical option associated with significantly higher morbidity; however, it must be considered if the duodenal papilla is involved or there is confirmed or strongly suspected cancer.

Osteomas may be removed for cosmetic reasons.

Desmoid tumors. Available treatments include surgical excision (associated with high rates of recurrence), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-estrogens, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and radiation [Griffioen et al 1998, Clark et al 1999, Smith et al 2000a, Tonelli et al 2003, Gega et al 2006]. A review of desmoid treatments can be found in Guillem et al [2006].

Adrenal tumors.

Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

Chemoprevention. There are currently no FDA-approved chemopreventive agents for FAP.

NSAIDs. Non-placebo controlled trials and observational studies on sulindac were initially promising, showing remarkable reduction in polyp size and number.. However, these preliminary studies were limited in their design (non-placebo controlled, limited number of affected individuals, some individuals with only surveyable rectum). Several controlled trials subsequently confirmed a decrease in polyp burden during sulindac therapy [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a, Nugent et al 1993]. Rapid reappearance or increase in polyp number was observed, however, after sulindac was stopped [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a]. A subsequent study designed to evaluate primary prevention of polyps in indivduals with APC pathogenic variants showed a non-statistically significant trend towards benefit compared to placebo [Giardiello et al 2002].

The FDA initially approved celecoxib for FAP based on evidence showing decrease in polyp burden and size in the colon (as well as modest decrease in the duodenum) [Steinbach et al 2000, Phillips et al 2002]. However, due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular safety concerns, rofecoxib was taken off the market altogether and FDA approval for celecoxib for FAP was withdrawn.

Aspirin has been shown to be of little or no benefit in FAP [Burn et al 2011, Ishikawa et al 2013].

Interest in combination of NSAIDs with other drugs was raised when reports of sulindac plus difluoromethylornithine (celecoxib) showed marked reduction in sporadic metachronous adenomas [Meyskens et al 2008]. In a randomized placebo-controlled study of 92 participants with FAP, sulindac plus erlotinib (an EGF receptor inhibitor) resulted in decreased duodenal polyp burden compared to placebo after six months of use [Samadder et al 2016]. Adverse events were common in the treatment group (87% experienced an acne-like rash), though serious adverse events were rare (2 total participants) [Samadder et al 2016]. When celecoxib was compared to celecoxib plus difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in FAP, there was no significant difference in polyp burden within a defined endoscopic field (however, when more comprehensive video assessment was used, there was a decrease in polyp burden in the combination therapy group) [Lynch et al 2016].

A number of chemoprevention trials are currently under way (see Therapies Under Investigation). The FDA has stated that changes in adenoma number and size are insufficient for regulatory approval, with evidence of clinical benefit required. Suitable examples of clinical benefit cited include decreasing the risk of colorectal cancer or reducing the need for surgery. Trials currently under way are designed to address these end points.

Note: NSAID use before colectomy remains experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Colectomy is advised to reduce the risk for colorectal cancer in FAP. For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals, the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient to prevent colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy can therefore be utilized for surveillance, as well as prevention of colorectal cancer.

To reduce the risk for duodenal/periampullary adenocarcinoma, endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas should be considered if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms.

Surveillance

Multiple professional societies have published guidelines based on the available evidence to date as well as expert consensus [Church et al 2003b, Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. The following surveillance recommendations are based on these expert society guidelines.

In individuals known to have FAP

Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy every one to two years, beginning at age ten to 12 years

Colonoscopy, once polyps are detected

Annual colonoscopy thereafter if colectomy is delayed more than a year after polyps emerge. In individuals age ten to 20 years in whom adenomas are smaller than 6.0 mm and without villous component or high grade dysplasia, delay in colectomy may be considered.

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) including complete visualization of the ampulla of Vater (using a duodenoscope if necessary) is recommended, though the age of initiation is variable. The American College of Gastroenterology recommends beginning screening at age 23 to 30 years, whereas the NCCN recommends starting at age 20 to 25 years or prior to colectomy. Surveillance is recommended every six months to four years depending on duodenal adenoma burden. The frequency of EGD depends on the severity of duodenal adenomas; Spigelman staging criteria can help determine the frequency. The Spigelman staging criteria are summarized by Syngal et al [2015] (see Table 9). The NCCN recommends examination of the stomach at time of upper endoscopy (frequency determined by duodenal polyp surveillance). Fundic gland polyps are common in FAP and low-grade dysplasia can be found, but rarely progresses. Specific gastric polyp screening or surgery should be considered in the setting of high-grade dysplasia only. Non-fundic gland polyps should be removed endoscopically.

Annual physical examination including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations and neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm) and palpation of the thyroid starting in the late teenage years

Thyroid cancer. In addition to annual thyroid examination, starting in late teenage years [NCCN 2016], annual thyroid ultrasound may be considered with fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]; however, data supporting this recommendation are limited [NCCN 2016].

Annual abdominal palpation for desmoids. If family history of desmoids, consider MRI or CT scan within one to three years post colectomy and then every five to ten years. Data to support screening and treatment of desmoid tumors are limited.

Small-bowel polyps and cancer. Although the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] does not recommend routine small bowel screening distal to the duodenum, the NCCN recommends considering adding small bowel visualization to CT or MRI for desmoids (if applicable), especially if duodenal polyposis is advanced.

Screening for hepatoblastoma. Efficacy in individuals with FAP is unclear. Screening protocols in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, in which the risk for hepatoblastoma is also increased, often include frequent (every 2-3 months) abdominal ultrasound examinations and measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations, and have resulted in early detection of hepatoblastomas [Tan & Amor 2006]. Screening for hepatoblastoma in FAP using liver palpation, abdominal ultrasound, and measurement of AFP every three to six months during the first five years of life has been suggested [NCCN 2016].

Adrenal tumors. Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

In individuals who have undergone colectomy

If total colectomy with IPAA is performed, routine endoscopic surveillance of the ileal pouch is recommended every two years [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016].

If subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is performed, surveillance of the remaining rectum every six to 12 months, depending on the number of polyps that develop [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. Cancer may still occur in the remaining rectum, but the risk is low with current management [Church et al 2003a].

If total colectomy with end ileostomy is performed, ileoscopy is recommended every two years [NCCN 2016].

In individuals known to have attenuated FAP

Colonoscopy every two to three years, beginning in late teens

Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy with polypectomy every one to two years depending on polyp burden

Colectomy. The absolute and relative indications for colectomy are the same as for FAP (see Surveillance).

Screening and surveillance of the upper gastrointestinal tract as for FAP (see Surveillance)

Annual physical examination, including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations, neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm), and palpation of the thyroid with consideration of follow-up ultrasound examination and fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011].

Due to the lower risk of desmoid tumors and hepatoblastomas in attenuated FAP compared to FAP, screening of these tumors is currently not recommended.

In individuals known to have GAPPS. It is currently unknown if screening for gastric cancer or prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Due to the extent of gastric polyposis, in addition to reports of rapid progression of fundic gland polyposis, gastric cancer surveillance in this condition may have limited effectiveness [Repak et al 2016].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Surgery and desmoid risk. There is evidence that the risk for desmoid tumors is increased by abdominal surgery and may be higher in surgical procedures that require two stages to complete. Individuals at high risk for desmoids (women; those with APC pathogenic variants in codons 1395-1493; those with a family history of desmoids) may consider delaying surgery longer than might otherwise be recommended or undergoing an operation that is likely to be definitive for colorectal cancer risk (e.g., total colectomy with ileostomy) in order to minimize the likelihood of the need for a second operation.

Surgery and fecundity. There is a lower rate of fecundity in women after a total colectomy with ileo-anal anastamosis than after an ileorectal anastamosis. This issue should be included as part of the discussion of surgical options with women with FAP [Olsen et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Recommended genetic testing for at-risk family members. Early recognition of APC-associated polyposis conditions may allow for timely intervention and improved final outcome; thus, surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk children for early manifestations is appropriate; see Syngal et al [2015] (full text), NCCN [2016].

Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members (see Genetic Counseling) improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant. A cost analysis comparing molecular genetic testing and sigmoidoscopy screening for individuals at risk for APC-associated polyposis conditions shows that genetic testing is more cost effective than sigmoidoscopy in determining who in the family is affected [Cromwell et al 1998]. Additionally, individuals diagnosed with APC-associated polyposis conditions as a result of having an affected relative have a significantly greater life expectancy than those individuals diagnosed on the basis of symptoms [Heiskanen et al 2000].

As colon screening for those at risk for FAP begins as early as age ten to 12 years, molecular genetic testing is generally offered to children at risk for FAP by age ten years. Genetic testing at birth may also be warranted, as some parents and pediatricians may consider hepatoblastoma screening from infancy to age five years in affected offspring. Colon screening for those with attenuated FAP begins in late teenage years; thus, molecular genetic testing may be delayed until that time.

Note: No evidence points to an optimal age at which to begin screening; thus, the ages at which testing is performed and screening initiated may vary by center, family history, hepatoblastoma screening, and/or the needs of the parents and/or child.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy/fertility/hormone use. Limited information is available on the effect of pregnancy on females with FAP. In one study of 58 Danish women with FAP including 16 who had undergone colonic surgery, the same frequency of fertility, pregnancy, and delivery was observed as in a control population [Johansen et al 1990]. A larger study of 162 women with FAP compared fertility rates before and after two types of colorectal surgery with a control population. Women with FAP who had not yet undergone surgery had the same fertility as a control population of normal women. Additionally, those women with FAP who had a colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA) had the same fertility as the control population. Fertility was significantly reduced in women with FAP who had a proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) compared to the control population [Olsen et al 2003].

In another study, the prevalence of self-reported fertility problems was similar among individuals with FAP who had undergone IRA, IPAA, or proctocolectomy with ileostomy [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010]. However, those who had their first surgical procedure at a younger age had more postoperative fertility problems [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010].

Little evidence supports an association between desmoid tumor development or growth and pregnancy [Sinha et al 2011].

Women who have undergone colectomy are considered to be at the same risk for obstetric complications as any other woman who has had major abdominal surgery and are more likely to be delivered by C-section than those without such surgery.

As anti-estrogen medications have been successfully used in the treatment of desmoid tumors, the development of desmoid tumors is thought to be affected by hormones important in pregnancy. However, one study has shown that women who had a previous pregnancy and developed a desmoid tumor had significantly fewer complications from the desmoid tumor than those who had never had a pregnancy [Church & McGannon 2000].

In a study of women with FAP at the time of their colectomy, no association was found between pregnancy history and colonic polyp severity; however, the proportion of parous women with severe duodenal disease was significantly higher than the proportion of nulliparous women [Suraweera et al 2007].

Some studies have suggested that female hormones protect against colorectal cancer development in the general population. In one woman, reduction in polyps after use of oral contraceptives was observed [Giardiello et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

There is currently an ongoing (recruitment is complete) multicenter trial comparing DFMO plus sulindac versus each agent alone to evaluate time to first occurrence of an FAP-related event (defined as need for surgery or development of advanced neoplasia or death). See ClinicalTrials.

In a single controlled trial, the omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) led to a 20%-30% decrease in FAP polyp size and number [West et al 2010]. Trials with similar agents are being planned.

Curcumin is the main component in the spice turmeric. In a small uncontrolled series of five affected individuals, all individuals had a reduction in polyp size and number after six months of therapy compared to baseline [Cruz-Correa et al 2006]. Recruitment has been completed on a 12-month dual-center, double-blinded randomized placebo-controlled trial of curcumin in FAP with a primary outcome of polyp size and number. See ClinicalTrials.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FBLN5-related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Chest roentgenogram

Echocardiogram

Kidney ultrasound examination

Medical genetics consultation

If clinically indicated:

Pulmonary vessel angiogram

Barium enema

Voiding cystouretrogram (VCUG)

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment for:

Inguinal hernias. Routine repair

Cutis laxa. Repeat plastic surgery of the face and trunk as needed

Pulmonary emphysema. Symptomatic treatment

Arterial abnormalities. No treatment available

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Attention to respiratory function prior to surgery

Prophylactic antibiotics (cotrimoxazole) in case of vesicoureteral reflux

Surveillance

Routine surveillance of the urinary tract for evidence of bladder diverticula and/or vesicoureteral reflux is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Smoking is contraindicated; however, the limited life span of affected individuals makes this recommendation mostly theoretic.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of the disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome, the evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) listed in Table 4 are recommended.

Table 4. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

System

Evaluation

Comment

Eyes

Ophthalmologic evaluation

ENT

Hearing assessment

Cardiovascular

Cardiac evaluation w/electrocardiogram & echocardiography

Consider referral to cardiology if results are abnormal

Gastrointestinal

Nutritional evaluation; swallowing assessment for feeding difficulties

Evaluation of liver function w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile

Neurologic

Neurology consultation including comprehensive neurologic examination

Brain MRI to evaluate extent of the disease

Electroencephalogram

If there is a history of seizures

Immunologic

Complete blood count to evaluate for neutropenia

Consider more detailed immunologic evaluation if there is a history of recurrent infections

Miscellaneous / Other

Developmental evaluation to provide baseline level of functioning & recommendations for services (speech, occupational, & physical therapy)

Consultation w/a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including Neurology, Nutrition, Clinical Genetics/ Metabolism, and Developmental Pediatrics. Other specialties including Gastroenterology, Cardiology, Hematology, Immunology, Ophthalmology, and Nephrology may be involved based on the associated complications.

No definite treatment is available to date; thus, treatment is mainly supportive (Table 5). Administration of cofactors and antioxidants, used in mitochondrial disorders with (generally) limited evidence of benefit, may be considered.

Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Inadequate nutrition

A nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube are frequently needed due to feeding difficulties & failure to thrive

In one affected child, improved nutrition resulted in improvement in hypogammaglobulinemia & neutropenia 1

Seizures

Standard treatment w/antiepileptic drugs

Immobility/wheelchair dependence

Consultation w/physical medicine & rehabilitation (PM&R) specialists to help w/mobility or assistive devices (e.g., wheelchair

Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia

Standard treatment per Cardiology recommendations

Neutropenia

Consider granulocyte colony stimulating factor 2

Significant acidosis

Consider bicarbonate therapy

Cataract and/or strabismus

Surgical treatment if indicated

Hearing loss

Hearing aids

1. 

Antoun et al [2016]

2. 

Huemer et al [2015]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Antoun et al [2016]

Huemer et al [2015]

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regular immunization to prevent life-threatening infections is indicated.

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be indicated for those with immunodeficiency [Antoun et al 2016].

Surveillance

No surveillance guidelines have been published. The following evaluations should be performed on a regular basis, with the treating physician determining the frequency based on initial presentation and severity of the condition.

Table 6. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Eyes

Ophthalmologic evaluation

ENT/Mouth

Hearing evaluation

Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram & electrocardiogram to monitor for development of cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, respectively

Gastrointestinal

Continued assessment of nutrition and growth

Measurement of serum lactate, electrolytes, & liver function tests w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile

Neurologic

Regular neurologic evaluations & developmental assessments

Immunologic

Complete blood count

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation, including EEG and brain MRI

Developmental assessment including assessment of motor skills, cognition, and speech

Physical therapy evaluation of joint range of motion

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Feeding and swallowing assessment in individuals with lack of head control or lack of the ability to sit without support

Assessment of caloric intake and nutritional status

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no definite treatment for FCMD. Multidisciplinary and appropriate management can prolong survival and improve the quality of life for individuals with FCMD.

Treatment includes the following:

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Monitoring for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis. When scoliosis is present, spinal fusion can preserve breathing function and improve sitting balance [Takaso et al 2010]

Use of mechanical assistance such as long leg braces to maintain standing posture and wheelchairs to help mobility

Use of respiratory aids such as nasal intermittent positive pressure ventilator when indicated

Note: Noninvasive ventilation is offered, particularly at night, before respiratory distress becomes acute.

Prompt treatment of acute respiratory tract infections; particularly important, as these infections are the most common cause of hospital admissions and death in people with FCMD

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) when indicated

Surgical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux when indicated

Gastrostomy when indicated to assure adequate caloric intake

Routine therapy of cardiomyopathy

Surveillance

Surveillance includes:

Monitoring of respiratory function in individuals with advanced FCMD over age ten years. Those who survive beyond age 20 years may require tracheostomy or noninvasive respiratory support.

Monitoring of myocardial involvement by chest x-ray, ECG, and echocardiography in individuals over age ten years.

Observation/evaluation of gastrointestinal function by a qualified specialist, using a video-fluoroscopic swallow assessment, upper gastrointestinal tract image and pH monitor for gastroesophageal reflux

Monitoring for foot deformities and scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Taniguchi-Ikeda et al [2011] reported that introduction of antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) targeting the splice acceptor, the predicted exonic splicing enhancer, and the intronic splicing enhancer prevented pathogenic exon-trapping by SINE (short interspersed sequence)-VNTR (variable number tandem repeat)-Alu (SVA) retrotransposon in cells of patients with FCMD and model mice, rescuing normal fukutin mRNA expression and protein production. They have discovered in human disease a role for SVA-mediated exon-trapping and demonstrated the promise of splicing modulation therapy as the first radical clinical treatment for FCMD.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of neurologic and intellectual impairment in an individual diagnosed with familial dysautonomia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Standardized intelligence tests; frequently demonstrate better verbal than motor performance.

Electroencephalography; may identify epileptic activity, although seizures with decerebrate posturing can follow breath holding even in children with normal EEG findings.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); frequently shows generalized atrophy, including in the cerebellum, which may contribute worsening of the ataxic gait and greater balance problems.

Assessment of chronic respiratory disease including spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Feeding problems. Maintain adequate nutrition and avoid aspiration. For infants, thickened formula and different-shaped nipples are useful in managing orophyaryngeal incoordination. Aversion to feeding and failure to thrive are managed frequently by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement.

Gastroesophageal reflux. Upright positioning with feeds, prokinetic agents, H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and gastrostomy with or without fundoplication are appropriate.

Vomiting crises are treated with intravenous or rectal diazepam (0.2 mg/kg q3h) and rectal chloral hydrate (30 mg/kg q6h), and IV administration of fluids to prevent dehydration.

Other treatments used include [Palma et al 2014]:

Alpha2 adrenergic agonist clonidine (transdermal clonidine patch): 0.1-0.3 mg/24h provides stable blood levels and is preferable to oral dosages. Clonidine, which augments baroreflex sensitivity and parasympathetic modulation in familial dysautonomia, stabilizes the cardiovascular system and may attenuate feeding-induced crises [Marthol et al 2003]. Although no controlled trials have been conducted, clonidine is frequently used in autonomic crisis. Slow tapering is recommended when discontinuing clonidine treatment [Palma et al 2014].

In some patients admitted to an ICU, dexmedetomidine (a selective agonist of alpha2 adrenoreceptors in the brain and spinal cord that inhibit sympathetic outflow) was effective.

Carbidopa (a reversible dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor) 200 mg three times daily was assessed in a recent double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that provided level II-b evidence that treatment with carbidopa can reduce the frequency and severity of hypertensive vomiting [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Lung disease. Chronic lung disease is treated with daily chest physiotherapy (nebulization, bronchodilators, cough augmentation, incentive spirometry, and postural drainage). Giarraffa et al [2005] determined that the use of high-frequency chest-wall oscillation improved all measured health outcomes significantly, including pneumonias, hospitalizations, antibiotic courses, antibiotic days, doctor visits, absenteeism, and oxygen saturation.

Early diagnosis of pneumonia and infectious agents is important due to the common involvement of gastric flora (secondary to aspirations).

Individuals with FD are prone to viral respiratory infections and, in some cases, concomitant bacterial infections. Treatment with oseltamivir is indicated for influenza virus infections [Palma et al 2014].

Orthostatic hypotension. Therapeutic measures include hydration, elastic stockings, and leg exercises to increase muscle tone and reduce pooling of blood in the veins of the legs.

Counter-maneuvers (e.g., squatting, bending forward, and abdominal compression) improve orthostatic blood pressure in persons with FD mainly by increasing cardiac output [Tutaj et al 2006]. Squatting had the greatest effect. However, the suitability and effectiveness of a specific counter-maneuver depend on the orthopedic and/or neurologic complications identified in each individual.

To determine whether fludrocortisone is effective in treating postural hypotension and whether it has an effect on survival and secondary long-term FD problems, Axelrod et al [2005] compared persons treated with fludrocortisone with untreated persons and found that cumulative survival was significantly higher during the first decade in treated versus untreated individuals. In subsequent decades, the addition of midodrine improved cumulative survival. Of note, treatment of orthostatic hypotension with high doses of fludrocortisone (>0.2 mg/day) was shown to accelerate the progression of renal damage in persons with FD [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Hypertension. Attention to factors precipitating hypertension rather than use of antihypertensive agents is appropriate because blood pressure is labile.

Sleeping with the head of the bed raised (20°-40°) helps to reduce orthostatic hypotension by lowering supine hypertension, reducing nocturnal pressure-diuresis, and raising intravascular volume in the morning.

The guidelines for hypertension treatment in patients with FD and chronic kidney disease are the same as for the general population.

Kidney and bladder. Chronic renal failure, resulting from ischemic glomerulosclerosis, is common.

Adequate control of blood pressure is an important factor in delaying the appearance of kidney disease.

Renal tubular acidosis, which occurs frequently in FD, often requires treatment with bicarbonate.

Hyperkalemia, which is also common, is treated with low potassium diet.

Bradyarrhythmia. Speculating that fatal bradyarrhythmia is an etiologic factor in sudden death associated with FD, Gold-von Simson et al [2005] studied 20 persons with FD with a history of syncope and cardiac arrest and concluded that a pacemaker may protect from fatal bradyarrhythmia and may decrease the incidence of syncope.

If sleep-disordered breathing is confirmed, treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) must be initiated.

Eyes. Decreased corneal sensation and absence of tearing predispose to corneal ulcerations, which can be managed with artificial tear solutions containing methylcellulose administered three to six times daily, maintenance of normal body hydration, and moisture chamber spectacle attachments. Soft contact lenses can promote corneal healing. Tarsorrhaphy is reserved for treatment of corneal injury that is unresponsive to these measures. Corneal transplantation has had limited success.

Chronic blepharitis is common and requires treatment with combined topical antibiotic/corticosteroid ointment.

Strabismus is almost always present (93%), and early surgical correction may help.

Spine. Spinal fusion may be necessary.

Other

Many adults use walkers or wheelchairs when outside the home.

Sialorrhea is a common. Surgical and anti-cholinergic drugs were used in the past. Recently the use of botulinium toxin injected to major salivary glands has been suggested [Daniel & Cardona 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Use of general anesthetics requires adequate hydration.

Fitting of braces requires care as reduced sensitivity to pain may cause decubitus ulcers to develop at pressure points.

Exercise can help correct or prevent secondary contractures.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of growth in children

Periodic evaluation of chronic respiratory disease: spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study. Follow-up frequency depends on findings.

Regular monitoring of blood pressure and optimal management of blood pressure lability to help prevent some of the neurologic progression with age, which can be associated with compromised cerebral perfusion

Routine monitoring of other cardiovascular problems that can worsen with age (e.g., a greater degree of postural hypotension, worsening of supine hypertension, development of ischemic glomerulosclerosis, and cardiac arrhythmias) [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]

Monitoring for adequate hydration by measurement of blood urea nitrogen levels

Screening for sleep-disordered breathing with polysomnography

Periodic eye examination for strabismus, corneal opacities, or abnormal eye movements

Annual examination of the spine for early evidence of scoliosis to permit timely institution of bracing and exercise therapy

Periodic assessment of psychomotor development and behavior in children

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Symptoms tend to be worse in hot or humid weather; patients should try to avoid being outdoors in such conditions as much as possible.

Other situations that can exacerbate disease manifestations include a full bladder; frequent visits to the lavatory are recommended [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Since long car rides, coming out of a movie theater, or fatigue can also worsen symptoms, such situations should be avoided to the extent that this is possible [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Episodic hypertension can occur in response to emotional stress or visceral pain, and therefore patients should also try to avoid these [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Environmental situations associated with hypobaric hypoxia (e.g., aircraft flight or ascent to high altitude) pose a potential risk to patients with daytime hypercapnia [Palma et al 2014].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies in women with FD are considered high risk because of abrupt changes in blood pressure.

High blood pressure secondary to FD is difficult to differentiate from toxemia or other causes of pregnancy-related high blood pressure.

Awareness of volume loss and low blood pressure is important because of the absence of reflex tachycardia to low blood pressure.

Visceral pain related to contractions during labor is perceived normally; therefor, analgesia should be provided. Epidural anesthesia is preferable due to blood pressure lability during general anesthesia or spinal block [Maayan et al 2000].

Therapies Under Investigation

Kinetin. FD results from an intron 20 pathogenic variant that causes a unique pattern of tissue-specific exon skipping. Accurate splicing of the mutated allele is particularly inefficient in the nervous system. Slaugenhaupt et al [2004] showed that treatment with the plant cytokinin kinetin alters splicing of ELP1 (IKBKAP) and significantly increases inclusion of exon 20 from the endogenous gene. Hims et al [2007] demonstrated that treatment of FD lymphoblast cell lines with kinetin increases ELP1 mRNA and elongator complex protein 1 (Elp1, also known as IKBKAP or IKAP) to normal levels and that deletion of a region at the end of ELP1 exon 20 disrupts the ability of kinetin to improve exon inclusion.

In a later study, Gold-von Simson et al [2009] investigated whether oral kinetin altered ELP1 splicing in vivo. They administered kinetin to 29 healthy carriers of the major ELP1 pathogenic variant associated with FD and monitored adverse effects, as well as kinetin and ELP1 mRNA levels. After eight days they found that ELP1 mRNA expression in leukocytes increased as kinetin levels increased and noted that these findings strongly suggest a therapeutic role for kinetin in FD.

In a study conducted by Axelrod et al [2011], kinetin was administered to eight individuals with FD at a dose of 23.5 mg/kg/d for 28 days. An increase in wild type ELP1 mRNA expression in leukocytes was noted after eight days in six of the eight; after 28 days, the mean increase compared with baseline was significant (p = 0.002). Long-term clinical trials are warranted.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The isolation of human iPSCs offers a novel strategy for modeling human disease. Lee et al [2009] derived patient-specific FD-iPSCs from three persons with familial dysautonomia and performed directed differentiation into cells of all three germ layers including peripheral neurons. They exposed FD-iPSC-derived neural crest precursors to kinetin, which resulted in a dramatic reduction of the mutated ELP1 splice form. In contrast, no significant improvements in ELP1 splicing were observed after ECGC or tocotrienol exposure. The kinetin-mediated decrease in mutated ELP1 was associated with an increase in normal ELP1 levels and the ratio of normal:mutated transcript. No significant increase in normal ELP1 transcript levels was observed after kinetin treatment of neural crest precursors derived from control iPSCs.

Although short-term (1-day or 5-day) kinetin treatment of FD-iPSC-derived neural crest precursors had considerable effects on ELP1 splicing, it did not result in a significant increase in the expression of neurogenic markers or improve migration behavior. They next tested the effect of continuous (28-day) kinetin treatment of FD-iPSCs starting at the pluripotent stage one day before differentiation. Notably, continuous kinetin treatment induced a significant increase in the percentage of differentiating neurons and in the expression of key peripheral neuron markers such as ASCL1 and SCG10 at the neural crest precursor stage. No significant increase was observed in FD-iPSC neural crest precursor cell migration, suggesting incomplete restoration of disease phenotype. The authors note that while future studies will be required to define the developmental windows of kinetin action in greater detail, these data indicate that long-term treatment beginning in the early stage may be particularly beneficial in persons with FD.

More recently Lee et al [2012] performed large scale screening using FD-induced pluripotent stem cells to identify compounds that rescue IKBKAP expression. They screened 6,912 small-molecule compounds and characterized eight that rescued expression of IKBKAP. One of the compounds, SKF-86466, was found to induce IKBKAP transcription through modulation of intracellular cAMP levels and PKA-dependent CREB phosphorylation. SKF-86466 also rescued IKAP protein expression and the disease-specific loss of autonomic neuronal marker expression. SKF or other compounds including kinetin do not rescue the migratory defect of FD-iPSC derived neural crest cells. Because it is not clear whether any of the compounds will affect degenerative aspects of the disease such as the survival of postmitotic sensory or autonomic neurons, more pre-clinical studies are required.

Tocotrienols.

Anderson & Rubin [2005] found that individuals with FD have reduced MAO A mRNA levels, and that FD-derived cells, stimulated with tocotrienols (members of the vitamin E family) or (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG, a major polyphenolic antioxidant present in green tea to produce increased levels of functional Elp1, expressed increased amounts of MAO A mRNA transcript and protein. They found that administration of tocotrienol to individuals with FD resulted in increased expression of both functional Elp1 and MAO A transcripts in peripheral blood cells and suggested that this demonstrates the value of therapeutic approaches designed to elevate cellular levels of functional Elp1 and MAO A.

Subsequently, Rubin et al [2008] examined the impact of tocotrienols on the frequency of hypertensive crises and cardiac function. After three to four months of tocotrienol ingestion, 80% of the patients reported a significant (50%) decrease in the number of crises. In a smaller group of patients, most exhibited a post-exercise increase in heart rate and a decrease in the QT interval. Based on these findings, the authors hypothesized that tocotrienol therapy would improve the long-term clinical outlook and survival of patients with FD.

In a study by Anderson et al [2012] the simultaneous exposure of FD-derived cells to genistein and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) resulted in the almost exclusive production of the exon-20-containing transcript and the production of wild type amounts of IKAP protein. The authors suggest clinical evaluation of combined administration of these commonly used nutraceuticals.

Pregabalin.

Axelrod & Berlin [2009] investigated the use of pregabalin, a 3-isobutyl derivative of GABA known to have anticonvulsant, antiepileptic, anxiolytic, and analgesic activities, in the treatment of nausea and dysautonomic crises. They treated a cohort of 15 patients with FD who experienced frequent dysautonomic crises with pregabalin and found that nausea and overt crises markedly decreased in 13 (87%). The overall assessments of benefit were extremely favorable, prompting the authors to suggest that pregabalin may be a potentially useful therapeutic agent in FD.

Phosphatidylserine (PS). Another study performed by Keren et al [2010] showed that PS, a phospholipidic component of cell membranes and FDA-approved food supplement, elevates the levels of IKAP (ELP-1) in FD cell lines. While kinetin increases the levels of correctly spliced IKAP transcripts (thus altering the ratio between exon 20 inclusion and skipping), phosphatidylserine appears to increase levels of transcription without altering the ratio. PS treatment of FD cells elevated wild type IKAP mRNA and protein levels and resulted in a cell cycle distribution similar to that of the control cells. A significant number of genes up-regulated following PS treatment are also involved in DNA metabolic processes and in DNA repair mechanisms. On increases in cellular metabolism and synthesis of nucleotides, transcription by RNA polymerase II increases; thus, the increase in mRNA levels is not specific to IKAP.

Recently, Bochner et al [2013] showed an increase of IKBAKP mRNA and IKAP protein levels following PS administration in various tissues of FD humanized mice (homozygous humanized mouse strain carrying human exon 20 and its two flanking introns) without affecting exon 20 inclusion levels. The authors of the studies suggest PS as a potential therapeutic agent.

Digoxin. The cardiac glycoside digoxin was shown by Liu et al [2013] to alter and increase the production of the wild type, exon 20-containing, I ELP1-encoded transcript and the full-length IκB-kinase-complex-associated protein in FD-derived cells. The digoxin-mediated effect on splicing was SRSF3-binding site dependent; the site is located in the intron 5' of the alternatively spliced exon and digoxin was shown to mediate its effect by suppressing the level of the SRSF3 protein. These experiments were conducted in cells transfected with an ELP1 minigene construct bearing the IVS20+6T>C pathogenic variant. The author suggests further investigation of the possible use of digoxin as a therapeutic modality for FD.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Feingold syndrome 1 (FS1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Cardiac investigation (echocardiogram)

Renal ultrasound to evaluate for structural abnormalities

Audiometry for the possibility of hearing loss

Neuropsychological evaluation if there are concerns about psychomotor development

Analysis of the family pedigree for other possible affected individuals

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment includes the following:

Surgical treatment of gastrointestinal atresia when present

Follow up and treatment of possible cardiac and renal anomalies

Treatment for significant hearing loss

Developmental or educational intervention for children with learning difficulties

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prophylactic antibiotics may be needed when cardiac or renal anomalies are present.

Surveillance

Routine follow up for any of the above-listed medical issues by the appropriate specialist is warranted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because of the risk for major congenital abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract, heart, and kidney, high-resolution ultrasound investigations (including fetal echocardiogram) are advised in any pregnancy in which one of the parents is known to be affected.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (adFEVR), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination, including indirect ophthalmoscopy and scleral depression

Fundus fluorescein angiography, which increases the detection rate of peripheral avascularity in asymptomatic affected individuals [Ober et al 1980]

Treatment of Manifestations

Retinal avascularity per se often requires no treatment; however, it can induce ischemia, leading to neovascularization of the retinal periphery, which can be treated with prophylactic cryotherapy or argon laser photocoagulation to attempt to induce regression of the new vessels. Similar treatments are used to treat retinal holes and areas of retinal exudate to prevent retinal detachment.

Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments produced by retinal traction are repaired surgically using conventional methods, but the prognosis is guarded.

Exudative retinal detachments may be stabilized with cryotherapy, but the prognosis is poor.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The arc of peripheral retinal avascularity, thought to be an aberration of retinal development, is not preventable using current treatments.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients with FEVR associated with reduced bone density would be expected to benefit from drugs used to treat osteoporosis, although long-term data demonstrating an increase in bone density in these patients is not yet available [Downey et al 2006].

Surveillance

Children who are at risk based on family history should undergo regular fundus examination to evaluate for the development of retinal neovascularization, traction, or exudate.

Asymptomatic individuals with a small region of peripheral avascularity may require annual review only. Those with active neovascularization or exudate may well require treatment and close observation thereafter.

Individuals with retinal traction require review at intervals depending on the degree of stability of the clinical findings. The frequency of the review varies by individual depending on the assessment of the examining clinician.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Relatives at risk benefit from fundus examination and, ideally, fundus fluorescein angiography to identify any characteristic lesions. Prophylaxis in the form of peripheral retinal ablation with laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy depends on the individual's age and the progression of the lesion.

If the pathogenic mutation has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing of at-risk family members may be useful: relatives who do not have the family-specific mutation do not need regular retinal examinations.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors are currently in widespread use for acquired retinal diseases with a neovascular or exudative component. An as-yet unpublished study presented information on six children with FEVR and sight-threatening retinal neovascularization and exudate who had failed to stabilize with conventional treatments [Drenser 2006]. Treatment with pegaptanib sodium intravitreal injection resulted in a sustained decrease in exudate over six months; however, retinal traction continued to progress; in some eyes this appeared to be initiated by VEGF inhibition. The long-term effects of VEGF inhibition on the eye and the effects of VEGF inhibition in a pediatric population are currently unknown.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FG syndrome type 1 (FGS1), Lujan syndrome (LS), or X-linked Ohdo syndrome (XLOS) the following are recommended:

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

Developmental and behavioral assessment

Neurologic history and examination for evidence of seizures and hypotonia

Evaluation for evidence of spasticity in individuals with FGS1

Consideration of brain imaging studies in individuals with FGS1 and LS

Ophthalmologic evaluation for strabismus, visual deficits, and other ophthalmologic features

Examination for evidence of anal anomalies in individuals with FGS1

Examination for evidence of genitourinary anomalies

Cardiology evaluation with echocardiogram

Audiology evaluation in individuals with XLOS

Dental evaluation to evaluate for dental anomalies in individuals with XLOS and LS

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

The following measures are appropriate:

Early individualized education planning and therapies, including physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy

Individualized management of behavior problems

Neurologic management of seizures

Ophthalmologic management of strabismus and other ocular anomalies, if present

Standard management of chronic constipation for individuals with FGS1

Surgical intervention for imperforate anus, congenital heart defects, and other major malformations, if needed

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical therapy can help prevent and manage joint contractures for individuals with FGS1 or LS.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Growth parameters followed on a regular basis and plotted on age-appropriate curves

Regular follow up to monitor developmental progress, behavior concerns, gastrointestinal functioning, and neurologic issues

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of strabismus and any visual issues

Annual audiology evaluation for evidence of hearing loss in XLOS

Regular dental evaluations for individuals with XLOS and LS

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial or sporadic hemiplegic migraine, the following evaluations are recommended:

Quantitative eye movement examination in individuals with nystagmus or complaints of incoordination or imbalance to look for additional clues of cerebellar involvement

EEG and neuroimaging studies if seizures are present in order to further characterize the seizure disorder.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic support during an episode of hemiplegic migraine is the only therapy available.

A trial of acetazolamide for individuals with FHM1 or a trial of standard migraine prophylactic drugs (tricyclic antidepressants, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, anti-epileptic medications) for all FHM types may be warranted for frequent attacks. Limited correlation exists between drug response and hemiplegic migraine type.

There are anecdotal reports of therapeutic response to antiepileptic medications including topiramate, lacosamide, levetiracetam, and valproate, along with other medications commonly used for migraine prophylaxis.

Antiepileptic treatment may be necessary for seizures that are prevalent in FHM2 (caused by mutation of ATP1A2).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In general, vasoconstricting agents should be avoided because of the risk of stroke.

Cerebral angiography is hazardous as it may precipitate a severe attack [Chabriat et al 2000].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation including assessment of gross and fine motor skills, speech/language, cognitive abilities, and vocational skills with special attention to speech delay and anomalies

Measurement of growth and plotting of growth parametersNote: Syndrome-specific charts are currently not available for children with a SRCAP pathogenic variant.

Ophthalmologic examination

Hearing evaluation (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for details of evaluation.)

Renal ultrasound examination and blood pressure assessment

Assessment for cryptorchidism in males

Orthopedic assessment of hip dysplasia and clavicular anomalies

Dental evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Early intervention programs, special education, and vocational training to address developmental disabilities

Communication rehabilitation with sign languages or alternative means of communication

Behavior management strategies including referral to a behavioral specialist/psychologist and consideration of medication if needed

Referral of the family to support groups and other resources

Standard treatment for any of the following if identified:

Refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing loss

Seizures

Renal disease

Cryptorchidism

Orthopedic complications

Dental problems

Referral to an endocrinologist for consideration of human growth hormone (HGH) therapy. HGH therapy with modest response has been reported in three children with FHS. Caution is indicated as limited information about HGH therapy in FHS is available.

Investigation for celiac disease if indicated by clinical features

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual:

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Audiologic screening; more frequent evaluation if there is a history of multiple episodes of otitis media

Blood pressure measurement and assessment of renal function

Standard monitoring for renal anomalies

Monitoring of bone age and for early puberty especially in cases of growth hormone use

Sonographic evaluation for renal cysts in teenage/adult years as indicated by abnormalities on the renal function tests and/or blood pressure measurement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No specific pregnancy complications for the mother or the fetus have been observed in the two women with SRCAP pathogenic variants who had children with FHS.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FLNB-related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) syndrome

Ophthalmologic examination for retinal anomalies

Audiometry to assess for sensorineural hearing loss

Spine films to evaluate for vertebral abnormalities that predispose to scoliosis

Cervical spine films to evaluate for cervical dysplasia

Medical genetics consultation

Larsen syndrome

Lateral cervical spine films in flexion and extension to look for dysplasia that can lead to cervical cord myelopathyNote: Early diagnosis of cervical kyphosis may influence the surgical approach used to stabilize the spine (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Audiometry to assess hearing

Assessment of the hips for dislocation

Treatment of Manifestations

Cervical spine instability. Case series indicate that early intervention to improve cervical spine stability in asymptomatic infants using posterior arthrodesis is successful. In infants with myelopathic signs function can be stabilized, if not improved, by a combination of anterior decompression and circumferential arthrodesis [Johnston et al 1996, Sakaura et al 2007, Madera et al 2008].

Large joint dislocations. Conservative, nonsurgical management of hip dislocation in Larsen syndrome is often unsuccessful and operative reduction is usually required.

Scoliosis is treated medically; no effective surgical intervention has been described.

Club feet are managed in a routine manner.

Cleft palate should be treated by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team when possible.

Hearing loss. Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf may also be required. An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Evidence suggests that preemptive posterior stabilization of the cervical spine in individuals with Larsen syndrome with cervical spine dysplasia may prevent this complication and that combined anterior and posterior stabilization can lead to clinical improvement in individuals with evidence of myelopathy [Sakaura et al 2007].

Because of the cervical vertebral abnormalities observed in both SCT syndrome and Larsen syndrome, the cervical spine should be evaluated for features of instability prior to general anesthesia. Care must be taken intraoperatively to minimize extension of the cervical spine [Malik & Choudhry 2002, Critchley & Chan 2003]. Additionally, individuals with Larsen syndrome are at increased risk for airway complications related to laryngotracheomalacia; thus, it has been suggested that anesthetic agents that exhibit more rapid induction and recovery are preferred [Morishima et al 2004].

Surveillance

Vertebral anomalies can lead to progressive scoliosis; orthopedic monitoring is therefore indicated.

If an individual with Larsen syndrome is born without dislocated hips, careful surveillance should be maintained to ensure that dislocation does not occur.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Delivery of an affected infant has the potential to be complicated by extended breech presentation due to dislocation of the hips and knees.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to assess joint problems

Urinalysis for the presence of protein. If proteinuria is found, further evaluation is required including measurement of 24-hour urinary protein, renal function tests, and consider a rectal biopsy for the presence of amyloid.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

For information on treatment with colchicine see Prevention of Primary Manifestations. Colchicine is not effective as treatment for an acute FMF attack.

During an acute episode, the therapeutic approach should be mainly supportive, including administration of intravenous saline for hydration and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), paracetamol or dipyrone for pain relief [Ozturk et al 2011].

Febrile and inflammatory episodes are usually treated with NSAIDs.

End-stage renal disease caused by renal amyloidosis should be treated as for other causes of renal failure. The long-term outcome of live related-donor renal transplantation in individuals with FMF-amyloidosis is similar to that in the general transplant population [Sherif et al 2003].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Colchicine

Homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. Individuals who are homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val or compound heterozygous for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele should be treated with colchicine as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed to prevent both the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Colchicine is given orally, 1-2 mg/day in adults. Children may need 0.5-1 mg/day according to age and weight. Affected individuals should receive colchicine for life.

Individuals who do not have the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant and who are only mildly affected (those with infrequent inflammatory attacks) should either be treated with colchicine or be monitored every six months for the presence of proteinuria.

Continuous treatment with colchicine appears to be less indicated for individuals who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Glu148Gln. Colchicine should only be given to these individuals if they develop severe inflammatory episodes and/or proteinuria as a result of amyloidosis.

Heterozygotes. The presence of a single MEFV pathogenic variant together with clinical symptoms is sufficient to warrant the initiation of a trial of colchicine; therefore, manifesting heterozygotes should be treated [Booty et al 2009]. However, for asymptomatic heterozygotes there is no indication for treatment.

Complications of colchicine use occasionally include myopathy and toxic epidermal necrolysis-like reaction.

Treatment of affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine. Some individuals appear to be unresponsive to colchicine treatment. In one study this was associated with inadequate colchicine concentration in mononuclear cells, possibly resulting from a genetic defect underlying FMF [Lidar et al 2004] or from poor compliance.

Canakinumab is an anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody that binds human IL-1β and neutralizes its pro-inflammatory effects. Canakinumab has been recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of CAPS. Canakinumab differs from anakinra and rilonacept in that it has high specificity for IL-1β, it has a longer half-life than anakinra (26 days), it can be administered every two months, and its effectiveness lasts longer. In one individual with FMF with longstanding destructive arthritis, canakinumab, given as a first-line agent, induced a complete clinical remission [Mitroulis et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Mitroulis et al 2011, Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Canakinumab was effective in an individual with FMF who was unresponsive to colchicine and anakinra [Hacihamdioglu & Ozen 2012]. Alpa & Roccatello [2015] reported continued efficacy after two years of treatment.

Rilonacept, an IL-1 receptor fusion protein, reduced the fever episodes by 76%, and improved quality of life [Hashkes et al 2012], but failed to reduce the duration of the attacks. Results were confirmed in a subsequent study extended to 14 colchicine-resistant individuals [Hashkes et al 2014]. Hentgen et al [2013b] recommended that rilonacept, which is a long half-life molecule, should be considered only if anakinra, a short half-life molecule, has been proven to be effective.

Anakinra, an IL-1-receptor inhibitor with a short half-life, has been shown to have a therapeutic advantage in persons with FMF who are resistant to colchicine. Several reports indicate that this offers a relatively safe and effective treatment (100 mg daily or every other day) for persons who do not respond to colchicine [Belkhir et al 2007, Bhat et al 2007, Gattringer et al 2007, Kuijk et al 2007, Calligaris et al 2008, Roldan et al 2008, Moser et al 2009, Petropoulou et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Ozen et al 2011, Ozturk et al 2011, Hentgen et al 2013b]. Anakinra has been found to stop the attacks in 75% of individuals who did not respond to colchicine. Anakinra is expensive and has mild side effects, such as painful local reactions at the site of injections and possible risk of bronchopulmonary infection, especially in persons with other risk factors for pulmonary infections. Further studies are needed to investigate the long-term effects of this drug if it is to be taken continuously as required in severely affected individuals with FMF. Anakinra treatment should be considered in the presence of secondary amyloidosis, in candidates for renal transplantation due to end-stage renal amyloidosis, individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine, and individuals developing major side effects from colchicine.

Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), was studied in a few individuals and found to be effective in the treatment of one individual with FMF who was resistant to colchicine, resulting in the complete remission of febrile abdominal episodes [Ozgocmen et al 2006]. In another individual, infliximab ameliorated the proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis and the recurrent attacks of arthritis and abdominal pain [Metyas et al 2004].

Weekly intravenous colchicine (1.0 mg) to supplement oral colchicine resulted in a 50% reduction (except joint attacks) in attack frequency in one study of 13 individuals [Lidar et al 2003]. This is not a long-term solution.

Thalidomide has been used successfully in sporadic cases [Seyahi et al 2002, Seyahi et al 2006] but is not frequently used.

Etanercept, a TNF dimeric fusion protein, has been shown to decrease the disease severity in colchicine-resistant individuals; three of the 14 individuals included in the study had adverse effects and switched to IL-1-receptor inhibitor [Sakallioglu et al 2006, Seyahi et al 2006, Mor et al 2007].

Interferon alpha is another therapeutic agent that has shown signs of promise in a few reports for affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine [Tunca et al 2004, Tweezer-Zaks et al 2008, Vandecasteele et al 2011]. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that included 34 individuals given interferon alpha or placebo, the authors could not demonstrate a definitive effect. Interferon alpha was effective in suppressing the acute inflammation of FMF only if administered at the earliest phase [Tunca et al 2004]. The possibility of interferon alpha side effects (e.g., chills and fatigue) should also be considered.

Sulphasalazine. The use of sulphasalazine has been reported in a girl age eight years with a five-year history of typical FMF attacks. She was homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val and for several months had had arthritis of one knee that was unresponsive to NSAIDs or colchicine. Resolution was achieved after the addition of sulphasalazine at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day [Bakkaloglu et al 2009].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment with colchicine 1.0 mg/day prevents renal amyloidosis even if the FMF attacks do not respond to the medication.

Surveillance

All individuals with FMF including those not currently being treated, those being treated with colchicine, and those receiving medication other than colchicine should undergo an annual physical examination, a urine spot test for protein, and an evaluation for hematuria [Twig et al 2014]. Kosan et al [2013] additionally recommended monitoring acute-phase reactants (ESR and fibrinogen levels) at regular intervals during attack-free periods, particularly in those with the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Cisplatin. One report suggests that cisplatin worsens symptoms of FMF [Toubi et al 2003].

Cyclosporin A appears to adversely affect renal transplant graft survival in individuals with FMF [Shabtai et al 2002]. It has also been reported to trigger FMF attacks, which responded well to colchicine in a previously asymptomatic individual with myelodysplastic syndrome who was heterozygous for the MEFV pathogenic variant p.Met694Ile [Sasaki et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing should be offered to all first-degree relatives and other at-risk family members as early as possible whether or not they have symptoms. This is especially important when the p.Met694Val allele is present because other affected family members may not have inflammatory attacks, but nevertheless remain at risk for amyloidosis (FMF type 2) and thus need to be treated with colchicine (1.0 mg/day) to prevent the development of renal amyloidosis. Note: About 15% of individuals with autosomal dominant FMF develop amyloidosis and end-stage renal failure if untreated.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Ben-Chetrit et al [2010] conducted a survey to evaluate the outcome of 179 pregnancies of women taking colchicine to treat FMF. No differences were found between the treated group and the control group regarding early abortions, late abortions, or congenital malformations. Similar findings were reported by Diav-Citrin et al [2010]. Nevertheless, it is still important to discuss the option of amniocentesis for every pregnancy in mothers treated with colchicine.

Therapies Under Investigation

The decrease of blood nitric oxide (NO) levels in individuals with FMF may trigger fever by initiating the production of IL-6. Plasma NO levels in those with FMF were significantly increased during attack-free periods following treatment with ImmunoGuard®, which has a normalizing effect both on NO and IL-6 blood levels in persons with FMF during attacks [Panossian et al 2003]. However, further studies are needed to confirm a single report of successful treatment of FMF with ImmunoGuard® (Andrographis paniculata Nees) [Amaryan et al 2003].

The role of biologics such as other anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) agents (adalimumab and golimumab) in the treatment of FMF has recently been investigated [Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Anti-TNF agents have shown efficacy in rheumatic diseases, and there are many reports of persons with FMF responding favorably to treatment with these agents [Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011].

One study showed that the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine significantly decreased the number of acute attacks in individuals with colchicine-resistant FMF, several of whom also suffered from depression. The authors suggested that the depression may have triggered the attacks, and that treatment of the depression had the effect of suppressing the attacks [Onat et al 2007].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with focal dermal hypoplasia, the following evaluations are recommended.

Ectodermal manifestations. Evaluation by a dermatologist for identification of dermal aplasia or erosive skin that may benefit from treatment with dressings or lotion

Papillomatosis

Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for evidence of laryngeal or peri-tonsillar verrucoid papillomas, which can cause obstructive sleep apnea.

Sleep study to evaluate for obstructive sleep apnea (often due to airway papillomas).

Limb and skeletal manifestations. Chest x-ray to evaluate for costovertebral defects and evidence of diaphragmatic hernia

Eye findings. Eye examination to evaluate for iris colobomas, chorioretinal colobomas, nystagmus, strabismus or cataracts

Oral and dental findings

Evaluation by a cleft palate team if relevant

Examination by a dentist beginning with the first teeth around age one year

Gastrointestinal and nutrition

Consideration of abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for diaphragmatic hernia

Evaluation by a gastroenterologist if gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is an issue

Renal and urogenital

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for structural anomalies of the kidneys and urinary collecting system

Evaluation by a pediatric gynecologist prior to puberty. Imaging studies of the reproductive tract should be considered as anomalies can affect fertility.

Cognitive and psychological. Hearing evaluation

Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Skin. For individuals with significant areas of dermal aplasia, regular care by a dermatologist and use of occlusive dressings and antibiotic creams may help prevent secondary infections as erosive lesions may be painful and pruritic, and therefore prone to infection. Some individuals report that lotion is helpful in managing pruritic erosions. Pulsed dye laser or other photodynamic therapy has been successful in managing excessive granulation tissue [Alster & Wilson 1995, Liu et al 2012].

An individual with refractory exophytic granulation tissue received significant benefit from a combination of curettage and photodynamic therapy [Mallipeddi et al 2006].

An adult individual with multiple cutaneous basal cell carcinomas has been reported. Whether this is more prevalent in FDH is currently unknown, but heightened surveillance and appropriate treatment for such lesions may be indicated [Patrizi et al 2012].

Papillomatosis. Verrucoid papillomas can cause significant morbidity, including breathing problems (which could reflect the presence of laryngeal and/or tracheal papillomas) and GERD symptomatology (which could reflect the presence of esophageal papillomas). When possible, individuals should be referred to an otolaryngologist or gastroenterologist depending on the anatomic location of the papillomas.

Symptomatic papillomas of the esophagus can be removed endoscopically [Kashyap et al 2011] or with balloon-assisted radiofrequency ablation [Bertani et al 2014]. Airway (hypopharyngeal, tonsillar, and tracheal) papillomas can be managed with surgery or laser therapy.

Skeletal. Impaired functionality associated with syndactyly, oligodactyly, and split-hand/foot malformation may improve with occupational therapy, assistive devices, or surgical intervention.

Reduction defects of the long bones, such as transverse deficiency of distal radius/ulna or tibia/fibula, may be managed with prostheses as appropriate.

Camptodactyly often improves with physical and occupational therapy.

Individuals with scoliosis secondary to costovertebral defects should be referred to an orthopedist for routine monitoring and management.

Management of pain related to diastasis pubis with anti-inflammatory medications and/or physical therapy usually resolves the pain. Individuals with pain refractory to these interventions should consult an orthopedist.

Eye. Colobomas of the eyelid may be repaired by an oculoplastic surgeon.

Iris colobomas can be aesthetically treated with colored contact lenses to give the appearance of a round pupil.

The photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas can be reduced by use of tinted glasses.

Because retinal detachment leading to blindness is a potential complication of retinal coloboma, any acute changes in vision should be evaluated urgently by an ophthalmologist.

In patients with microphthalmia, an ocularist using prosthetic intervention can work to expand the palpebral fissures. Additional surgical corrections can be discussed with an oculoplastic surgeon.

Children with reduced vision may benefit from visual aids or other visual resources as part of an early intervention program to increase visual-spatial development.

Dental. Regular care of a dentist and promotion of good oral hygiene, diet counseling, and consideration of fissure sealants are important to minimize the risk of dental caries [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Abnormalities in the structure and number of teeth may cause dental malocclusion and dissatisfaction with the appearance of the teeth. Orthodontic care may be indicated when dental malocclusion is present. Composite veneers and other aesthetic procedures may be used to improve the appearance of abnormal teeth [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Other. Consultation with:

A pediatric surgeon for the treatment of diaphragmatic hernia and abdominal wall defects.

A urologist or nephrologist for treatment of structural malformations of the kidneys and urinary collecting system and their sequelae. In individuals with structural renal malformations, standard measures are used to reduce risk for urinary tract infections.

A developmental pediatrician for evaluation and management of behavioral problems, emotional lability, or withdrawn behaviors. Those with intellectual impairment or developmental delay should receive early intervention in occupational, speech, and physical therapies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Preoperative evaluation by an otolaryngologist for hypopharyngeal and tonsillar papillomas [Rhee et al 2006] is indicated prior to general anesthesia. Any papillomas that would complicate endotracheal intubation should be surgically removed or communicated to the anesthesiologist prior to the procedure.

Note: These lesions may change significantly over time, so the evaluation should be within a few months of the procedure. The papillomas may be friable and prone to bleeding; when papillomas are present, the airway must be handled as gently as possible (which may include fiberoptic bronchoscopy for intubation rather than direct laryngoscopy) [Rhee et al 2006].

Surveillance

The following should be considered as part of routine medical care for individuals with focal dermal hypoplasia:

Skin. Routine follow-up with a dermatologist to anticipate and manage common skin problems

Papillomatosis

Monitoring for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease and swallowing difficulties at routine health visits. When present, refer to an otolaryngologist for evaluation of possible verrucoid papillomas and management with surgical or laser therapy as needed.

Routine monitoring for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea (snoring, gasping, breathing pauses). If present, a sleep study should be performed [Bostwick et al 2016].

Skeletal. Routine physical examinations and/or spine radiographs to evaluate for scoliosis, particularly in individuals with costovertebral segmentation abnormalities

Dental. Regular examinations

Other

Routine monitoring of growth and body composition to determine if early nutritional intervention is needed [Motil et al 2016]

Regular eye examinations to monitor for changes in visual acuity and risks for retinal detachment in individuals with retinal colobomas. Any acute changes in vision should be considered a medical emergency as retinal detachment can lead to total blindness.

Routine screening of cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and adaptive ability, with appropriate referrals to therapeutic interventions as indicated [Deidrick et al 2016]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because some individuals with severe skin manifestations may have hypohidrosis (and thus be at increased risk for heat intolerance), care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For affected women, management of pregnancy should be guided by standard obstetric principles taking into account potential complications of FDH. Skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis or diastasis pubis may be present in some affected women, and may affect delivery management. Women with significant scoliosis will benefit from evaluation of respiratory status and feasibility of epidural analgesia. Obstetricians should be aware that verrucous papillomas in genital areas in women with FDH are unlikely to be viral in origin and thus, there is no risk for transmission to the newborn during vaginal delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in a child diagnosed with hereditary folate malabsorption (HFM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment by a pediatric neurologist to determine baseline neurologic status

Baseline (and follow-up) formal cognitive testing

Note: Appropriate monitoring of neurologic/cognitive response to treatment is recommended to ensure that the CSF folate levels achieved with treatment are adequate.

Initial evaluation and follow up by a metabolic genetic specialist

Treatment of Manifestations

The goal of treatment is to prevent hematologic, immunologic, and neurologic deficits and to optimize the cognitive development of children with this disorder. Complete reversal of the systemic consequences of folate deficiency is easily achieved. While correction of the neurologic consequences is more difficult, favorable neurologic outcomes are possible when adequate treatment is initiated promptly.

“Folates” refers to a family of B9 vitamin compounds that are interconvertible in a series of intracellular biochemical reactions. Folate can be effective when administered by oral or parenteral routes; however, much higher oral than parenteral doses are required to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The parenteral route is probably more effective in achieving CSF folate levels appropriate to the age of the affected individual. In either case, achieving CSF folate levels in the normal range for the age of the affected individual is challenging [Torres et al 2015].

Folate Formulations

Based on the current understanding of folate transport and metabolism, the following reduced folates can be used to treat HFM:

5-formyltetrahydrofolate (5-formylTHF), also known as folinic acid or Leucovorin®, is a racemic stable form of folate. The active isomer is found in low quantities in normal human tissues. Leucovorin is available in oral and parenteral formulations. There is considerable experience in dosing with this folate form (see Folate Dosing).

The active isomer of 5-formylTHF, (6S)5-formylTHF (also known as Isovorin® or Fusilev®), is available for parenteral administration. Anecdotal observations suggest that the active isomer may be more effective for treatment when there is refractory neurologic disease. The biologic impact of the active isomer is twice that of the racemic mixture when the dose is the same.

The physiologic folate predominant in blood and tissues, (6S)5-methyltetrahydrofolate or (6S)5-methylTHF, is now available commercially as Metafolin® and Deplin®. Neither drug is available for parenteral administration. Published information on the use of (6S)5-methylTHF for the treatment of HFM is not available, although the dosing should be comparable to that of (6S)5-formylTHF. The formulation of Metafolin® is too low (800 µg) to make this agent feasible for the treatment of HFM. Deplin® is available as a 15-mg tablet.

Note: If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Folate Dosing

Because HFM is rare, controlled studies to establish optimal treatment have not been possible. The oral dose of 5-formylTHF required to overcome the loss of PCFT-mediated intestinal folate absorption appears to vary from individual to individual. The dose required to obviate the neurologic consequences is much higher than that needed to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The dose should be guided by its effect on trough CSF folate concentrations. The end-point is CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to the normal range for the affected individual’s age:

The reported oral dose of 5-formylTHF associated with a “good” outcome is approximately 150-200 mg daily [Geller et al 2002]. Much higher doses have been used as well [personal communication to Author]. A reasonable starting oral dose of 5-formylTHF in an infant could be 50 mg or 10-15 mg/kg given daily as a single dose.

Note: Normal CSF folate is approximately 100 nmol/L for infants to age two years, decreasing to approximately 75 nmol/L by age five years and to approximately 65 nmol/L by age 19 years [Verbeek et al 2008].

The parenteral dose required to achieve adequate blood folate levels is much lower than the oral dose. With intramuscular injections of approximately 1.0 mg/day of 5-formylTHF, the anemia will fully correct; however, the endpoint for treatment is based on the CSF folate level, which will require much higher folate doses [Torres et al 2015].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Infants diagnosed by genetic testing before signs and symptoms appear should be treated immediately to prevent the onset of folate deficiency and the metabolic and clinical consequences of the disorder.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If transfusion is required, care should be taken to administer blood products that are appropriate given the immunologic status of the affected individual (e.g., washed packed red blood cells for those who have IgA-deficienciency).

Surveillance

The following should be monitored periodically to assess the adequacy of treatment, and more frequently following initial diagnosis when treatment is being optimized:

Complete blood count

Serum and CSF folate concentrations. In particular, monitoring the trough CSF folate concentration is critical to assure that the dose of folate is sufficient to achieve CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to what is normal for the affected individual’s age.

Neurologic/cognitive status to ensure that CSF folate levels are adequate

Serum and CSF homocysteine concentrations. A high homocysteine concentration is the most sensitive indicator of folate deficiency.

Serum immunoglobulin concentrations until they are within the normal range and the hemoglobin and serum folate levels are normal and stable

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM. Although folic acid is very stable and inexpensive, and is the most common pharmacologic source of folate, it is not a physiologic folate. Folic acid binds very tightly to folate receptors, which transport the physiologic folate, 5-methylTHF, into cells by an endocytic mechanism [Kamen & Smith 2004]. Thus, folic acid may interfere with the interaction between 5-methylTHF and folate receptors required for 5-methylTHF transport across the choroid plexus into the cerebrospinal fluid [Grapp et al 2013, Zhao et al 2017].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Molecular genetic testing of younger at-risk sibs who have not undergone prenatal testing should be performed immediately after birth. Those with biallelic SLC46A1 pathogenic variants should be treated with 5-formyltetrahydrofolate immediately.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known and genetic testing is not possible, assessment of blood and CSF folate levels and, if warranted, intestinal absorption of folate in at-risk sibs immediately after birth, or as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed in the proband

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no systematic information on the outcome of pregnancy in women with HFM.

Although the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) is highly expressed in the placenta [Qiu et al 2006], a woman with homozygous pathogenic variants in SLC46A1 that resulted in no PCFT protein production had two normal pregnancies and delivered two healthy infants. The affected woman’s parenteral 5-formylTHF dose was increased when pregnancy was planned [Poncz et al 1981; Poncz & Cohen 1996; Min et al 2008; Goldman, personal communication to Author].

Women with HFM who wish to become pregnant should increase their dose of 5-formylTHF intake above the maintenance dose well in advance of attempting to conceive. Prenatal vitamins are available containing 5-methylTHF rather than folic acid.

Of note, infants with HFM do not appear to be at an increased risk for malformations (e.g., neural tube defects) typically associated with maternal folate deficiency during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and management needs for an individual with a FOXP2-related speech and language disorder, the following evaluations conducted by a trained and specialized speech-language pathologist are recommended:

Detailed developmental history including early oral motor and feeding abilities, speech sound development, motor milestones, and cognitive development

Family history of speech disorder

Oral-facial structural examination to determine if any structural abnormalities are present

Assessment of oral motor function including:

Examination of cranial nerve function for evidence of asymmetry, reduced or increased tone, and/or poor coordination of neuromuscular movements

Examination for evidence of oral motor dyspraxia (e.g., can the patient perform oral movements on command in isolation [e.g., ‘bite’ or ‘blow’] or in sequence [e.g., ‘kiss and blow’; ‘kiss, blow, and bite’])

Speech sound assessment including a test of single words, sounds in isolation, and connected speech to determine the child’s phonetic inventory (i.e., has the child acquired age-appropriate speech sounds) and to determine if the child has articulation errors, phonologic errors, apraxic errors, dysarthric errors, or a combination of these errors. The presence of resonance or nasality deficits signals the need to consider whether such structurally based velopharyngeal port incompetence is present by referral to an ear, nose, and throat specialist and possibly videopalatography.

Language assessment to determine the presence of receptive and/or expressive language impairments across the domains of semantics, syntax, and morphology

Literacy assessment or pre-literacy (phonologic awareness) for evidence of reading and spelling difficulties

Social skills assessment for the presence of autistic features

Additional evaluations:

Referral to a neuropsychologist or clinical psychologist to determine the extent of any coexisting cognitive and learning impairments and to examine for the presence of behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder

Referral to a physiotherapist if gross motor movement difficulties are reported and an occupational therapist if fine motor movement difficulties are observed

Consideration of MRI to evaluate for the presence of a neurologic lesion if indicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Speech and language deficits. A speech pathologist will utilize treatments targeted to the specific findings in an affected individual; hence, the importance of a thorough initial assessment to establish the extent of disease and management needs for an individual. No single recommended treatment exists.

The optimal approach should be determined based on the individual’s findings regarding:

CAS [American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 2007, Morgan & Vogel 2008, Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists 2011];

Dysarthria [Pennington et al 2009];

Language deficits [Law et al 2003];

Literacy impairments [Snowling & Hulme 2012].

Cognitive deficits. A clinical psychologist or neuropsychologist may provide strategies to help manage deficits in specific cognitive or social skill domains.

Fine and gross motor deficits. An occupational therapist and physiotherapist can provide strategies to help with these issues.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine care by a general pediatrician

Follow-up evaluations with standardized tests by a speech and language pathologist

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the FOXP2 genetic alteration in the family to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt evaluation and initiation of treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A number of therapies for childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) are under investigation [Morgan & Vogel 2008, Murray et al 2014, Murray et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Fragile X syndrome. To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fragile X syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete developmental and educational assessments (including speech and language evaluation and occupational/physical therapy evaluation) for educational planning

Behavioral and psychological assessment to determine the presence of concentration/attention problems, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, aggression, and depression

In infants, feeding assessment (including attention to possible gastroesophageal reflux)

Physical examination to evaluate for hypotonia and/or connective tissue findings, primarily joint hyperextensibility and pes planus

Cardiac auscultation for mitral valve prolapse. If indicated by a murmur or click, consider echocardiography (usually in adulthood).

Assessment for hypertension

History for possible seizure activity

Ophthalmologic evaluation for possible strabismus

In young children, history and physical examination for evidence of recurrent otitis media

FXTAS. To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FXTAS, the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Behavioral and psychological assessment

Neuroradiologic evaluation

POI. To establish the extent of disease in a woman diagnosed with POI, gynecologic evaluation including hormonal and/or ultrasonographic assessment is appropriate.

Note: The diagnosis of POI does not eliminate the possibility of subsequent conception. A premutation carrier woman had a child with fragile X syndrome after being diagnosed with POI [Corrigan et al 2005, Nelson et al 2005]. It is estimated that 5%-10% of women with POI may conceive after the diagnosis [Nelson et al 2005].

Treatment of Manifestations

Fragile X syndrome. No specific treatment is available. Supportive therapy for children and adults with fragile X syndrome currently consists of the following [Hagerman et al 2009, Utari et al 2010]:

Recognition of the need for special education and anticipatory management such as the avoidance of excessive stimulation whenever possible may ameliorate some of the behavioral difficulties.

Early educational intervention, special education, and vocational training should be aimed specifically at the known impediments to learning. Parents and teachers of children with fragile X syndrome have recognized the need for individual attention, small class size, and the avoidance of sudden change. More specific guidelines are available through education resources (see Resources).

Pharmacologic management of behavioral issues that significantly affect social interaction is appropriate. No particular pharmacologic treatment has been shown to be uniquely beneficial; therapy must be individualized and closely monitored. A closely monitored and integrated program of behavioral management and pharmacologic treatment with an experienced developmental team may prove to be beneficial.

Routine medical management of strabismus, otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, seizures, mitral valve prolapse, and hypertension is appropriate.

FXTAS. No specific treatment is available. Supportive care for problems with gait and/or cognitive deficits may require assistance with activities of daily living.

POI. No specific treatment is available. Gynecologic or reproductive endocrinologic evaluation can provide appropriate treatment and counseling for reproductive options.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Folic acid should be avoided in individuals with poorly controlled seizures [Hagerman 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the following evaluations are recommended, if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis:

Neurologic assessment

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment of strength and balance, need for adaptive aids, and the home and work environment

Speech and swallowing assessment

Assessment for significant scoliosis; assessment by an orthopedic surgeon, as needed

ECG and echocardiogram for evidence of cardiomyopathy; assessment by a cardiologist if abnormal

Bladder function with referral to a urologist if severe symptoms are present

Assessment for obstructive sleep apnea and referral for formal assessment and management if present

Random blood glucose concentration for evidence of diabetes mellitus

Ophthalmologic assessment if ophthalmologic symptoms are present

Hearing assessment and referral for amplification apparatus if required

Psychological assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There is little objective evidence regarding management of FRDA. A multidisciplinary approach is essential for maximal benefit because FRDA affects multiple organ systems:

Prostheses, walking aids, wheelchairs, and physical therapy as prescribed by a physiatrist (rehabilitation medicine specialist) to maintain an active lifestyle

In-patient rehabilitation, which has been shown to improve physical function as measured by the Functional Independence Measure [Milne et al 2012]

Occupational therapy assessment to ensure a safe home and work environment

To manage spasticity: physical therapy including stretching programs, standing frame and splints, pharmacologic agents such as baclofen and botulinum toxin. Intrathecal baclofen can be beneficial where oral administration is unsuccessful or side effects are excessive [Berntsson et al 2013]. Orthopedic interventions, both operative and non-operative, for scoliosis [Milbrandt et al 2008] and foot deformities [Delatycki et al 2005] may be necessary.

Speech therapy to maximize communication skills

Management of dysphagia that may include dietary modification and, in the late stages of disease, use of nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding

Treatment of cardiac disease to reduce morbidity and mortality, including antiarrhythmic agents, anticardiac failure medication, anticoagulants, and pacemaker/implantable cardioverter defibrillator insertion [Lynch et al 2012a]. Cardiac transplantation is more controversial but has been used particularly when there is severe cardiac disease in the setting of mild neurologic symptoms [Sedlak et al 2004, Yoon et al 2012, McCormick et al 2017].

Antispasmodic agents for bladder dysfunction, with some individuals requiring botulinum toxin for the bladder and some requiring intermittent or permanent catheterization

Treatment of sleep apnea by continuous positive airway pressure

Treatment of diabetes mellitus with diet and, if necessary, oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin

Hearing aids, microphone, and receiver as needed [Rance et al 2010] (see also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview)

Psychological (counseling and/or pharmacologic) support for affected individuals and family

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Measures include the following:

Active management of spasticity with physiotherapy and botulinum toxin to prevent permanent contracture and the need for surgery

Treatment of scoliosis with physiotherapy, botulinum toxin, and surgery to prevent cardiopulmonary complications that can result from severe scoliosis

Treatment of diabetes mellitus to prevent complications that can arise from untreated/inadequately treated diabetes

Treatment of cardiac complications of FRDA to prevent arrhythmias that can result in mortality

Treatment of sleep apnea to prevent neurologic and cardiopulmonary complications that can result from untreated sleep apnea

Surveillance

Published clinical management guidelines provide detailed discussion of recommended surveillance [Corben et al 2014, www.curefa.org].

The following are appropriate.

If ECG and echocardiogram performed at the time of initial diagnosis are normal, annual repeat testing

Annual fasting blood sugar to monitor for diabetes mellitus

Hearing assessment every two to three years or more often if symptoms are present. This should include testing of hearing in background noise, as it is more often abnormal than the common audiogram assessed in a quiet environment [Rance et al 2008]

Sleep study to investigate for obstructive sleep apnea if concerns are raised by clinical history or a screening test such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol can exacerbate ataxia and should be consumed in moderation. Illicit drugs may well affect neuronal well-being and may exacerbate FRDA and thus should be avoided. Environments that place an ambulant individual at risk for falls (e.g., rough surfaces) should be avoided.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with FRDA comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

Close cardiac monitoring is recommended in any woman with FRDA during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

A summary of therapies under investigation can be found online.

Deficiency of frataxin results in abnormal accumulation of intramitochondrial iron, defective mitochondrial respiration, and overproduction of oxygen free radicals with evidence of oxidant-induced intracellular damage (see Molecular Genetics).

Antioxidant therapy by free radical scavengers (coenzyme Q10, vitamin E, and idebenone, a short-chain analog of coenzyme Q10) and chelation therapy have been considered potential treatments for slowing the progression of FRDA.

Antioxidant Therapy

Coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E

Following three to six months' antioxidant treatment with coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E, Lodi et al [2001] showed improved ATP production in the heart and skeletal muscle of individuals with FRDA. An open-label trial of these agents in ten individuals for 47 months resulted in sustained improvement in bioenergetics and improved cardiac function, as assessed by increased fractional shortening [Hart et al 2005].

A study that compared low-dose coenzyme Q10 (30 mg/day) to high-dose coenzyme Q10 (600 mg/day) and vitamin E (2100 IU/day) over two years found no difference in the change in International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) score between the two groups [Cooper et al 2008]. A significant proportion of individuals with FRDA had low serum coenzyme Q10 levels.

Idebenone has shown promise as a treatment for FRDA:

A reduction in left ventricular hypertrophy has been found in some studies [Hausse et al 2002, Buyse et al 2003, Mariotti et al 2003] but not in others [Lagedrost et al 2011].

A Phase II clinical trial of three doses of idebenone (5, 15, and 45 mg/kg) compared to placebo suggested a dose-related neurologic benefit as measured by the ICARS [Di Prospero et al 2007]. However, no significant neurologic benefit was shown in a Phase III study of idebenone conducted on 70 individuals with FRDA age eight to 18 years [Lynch et al 2010].

The results of another Phase III study from Europe are expected to be published shortly.

A0001 (α-tocopheryl quinone) is an antioxidant with superior bioavailability to idebenone. It showed promise in a small one-month placebo controlled study [Lynch et al 2012b].

EPI-743. A0001 is no longer being developed but a related compound, EPI-743, is being evaluated in placebo-controlled studies in adults and children with FRDA. Results from this study have not yet been published.

Chelation Therapy

Iron chelators have been proposed as a possible therapy for lowering the intramitochondrial iron overload. Nonspecific iron chelators (e.g., desferrioxamine) for the specific reduction of mitochondrial iron overload may not be effective; a clinical trial was terminated for lack of efficacy.

The oral iron chelator deferiprone showed promise as a treatment for FRDA in an open-label study [Boddaert et al 2007]. Iron in the cerebellar dentate nucleus was reduced as measured by MRI; neurologic benefit was suggested. However, a Phase II placebo-controlled study of deferiprone demonstrated worsening of ataxia in those treated with 40 mg/kg/day with reduced left vertricular mass index in those on 20 and 40 mg/kg/day [Pandolfo et al 2014].

An 11-month open-labeled study of combined low-dose deferiprone and low-dose idebenone (both given at 20 mg/kg/day) found a significant reduction in intraventricular septum thickness and left ventricular mass index over the course of the study [Velasco-Sánchez et al 2011]. Although there was no significant change in the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale score, some subscale scores showed significant increases and others showed significant decreases over the course of the study.

Desferrioxamine along with pyridoxal isonicotinoyl hydrazone, a mitochondrial permeable ligand, limited cardiac hypertrophy in a conditional Fxn knockout mouse model [Whitnall et al 2008].

Increasing Frataxin Levels

Because the abnormal GAA repeat expansion results in reduced quantities of normal FXN transcript and frataxin protein, a number of studies have been conducted to identify compounds that increase their levels. This is achieved mainly by increasing FXN expression and stabilizing the FXN transcript and frataxin protein. In some cases the exact mechanism underlying the increase in frataxin levels is not yet understood. Agents that have been found to increase frataxin levels in cellular models include hemin, butyric acid [Sarsero et al 2003], and erythropoietin [Sturm et al 2005].

An open-label study of erythropoietin resulted in increased frataxin levels and significant decrease in the levels of urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine and serum peroxides, which are markers of oxidative stress [Boesch et al 2007].

An in vitro study showed that carbamylated erythropoietin, which does not bind to the erythropoietin receptor and therefore is non-erythropoietic, increased frataxin to levels similar to native erythropoietin [Sturm et al 2010]. A Phase II study of carbamylated erythropoietin did not identify any clinical benefit nor evidence of increase in frataxin levels after 43 days’ treatment [Boesch et al 2014].

A small six-month placebo-controlled study of erythropoietin did not identify any biochemical or clinical benefit of treatment [Mariotti et al 2012].

A placebo-controlled study of epoetin alfa did not identify benefit for peak oxygen uptake in an exercise test, frataxin levels nor neurologic outcomes [Saccà et al 2016].

Specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors show much promise as treatments for FRDA through upregulation of FXN expression [Herman et al 2006, Libri et al 2014, Soragni et al 2014]. A Phase I human trial of RG2833, a class I HDAC inhibitor molecule that is known to reverse the epigenetic silencing in FRDA [Soragni et al 2014, Chutake et al 2016], was shown to be well tolerated and resulted in increased production of FXN transcript in vivo [Soragni et al 2014]. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3), a class III HDAC inhibitor, was shown to increase frataxin expression in FRDA cell and mouse models [Chan et al 2013]. An open-label dose escalation study of nicotinimide in FRDA showed a dose-dependent increase in FXN transcript and protein, achieving levels seen in asymptomatic carriers [Libri et al 2014]. However, no changes were observed in clinical measures in this short eight-week trial.

Interferon gamma was found to upregulate frataxin in cell and mouse models of FRDA [Tomassini et al 2012]. It also prevents pathologic changes in dorsal root ganglia and improves motor performance in a FRDA mouse model. An open-label study of interferon gamma showed evidence of neurologic improvement as assessed by FARS score, without any increase in frataxin levels [Seyer et al 2015]. A placebo controlled study was subsequently performed and failed to meet its primary end point [Author, personal communication].

Resveratrol has also been shown to upregulate frataxin expression in vitro and in vivo [Li et al 2013]. An open-label study of 1 g/day and 5 g/day of resveratrol for three months did not result in increased lymphocyte frataxin levels [Yiu et al 2015]. Those on 5 g/day had significant improvement in a number of neurologic tests and in the oxidative stress marker F2-isoprostanes. A placebo-controlled study is to commence shortly.

Other Therapies

Varenicline, an agent used to assist with smoking cessation, was identified as a possible therapy for ataxia [Zesiewicz et al 2009]; however, a Phase II study was prematurely terminated due to concerns about safety and tolerability of the drug.

PPAR gamma agonists have been suggested as therapies for FRDA because they increase frataxin levels in vitro [Marmolino et al 2009] and improve antioxidant responses [Marmolino et al 2010]. A Phase II study of one PPAR gamma agonist, pioglitazone, is underway.

An open-label study of thiamine (vitamin B1) in 34 individuals with FRDA (100 mg intramuscular 2x/week for between 80 and 930 days) revealed improvement of neurologic symptoms as measured by SARA, reappearance of deep tendon reflexes in 57%, and reduction in intraventricular septal thickness [Costantini et al 2016].

Gene therapy to supplement the loss of function of frataxin is also under consideration. The cardiomyopathy of a conditional cardiac FXN deletion mouse model was both prevented and reversed by intravenous FXN delivered by an adeno-associated virus vector [Perdomini et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Fryns syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Chest and abdominal radiographs

Cranial ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Examination for dysmorphic features and digital anomalies by a clinical geneticist

Depending on the clinical situation, further evaluation with a cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, a complete radiographic skeletal survey, and a detailed ophthalmologic examination should be considered to evaluate for other physical findings that could be present.

Treatment of Manifestations

The physical manifestations of Fryns syndrome are treated by surgery and/or supportive measures in the same way that the same manifestations are treated when they are not part of a syndrome. However, treatment of the diaphragmatic hernia often takes precedence over the management of other anomalies present.

For congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), the neonate is immediately intubated to prevent inflation of herniated bowel.

Medical therapies are used to stabilize the infant prior to surgical repair. High-frequency oscillatory ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) have achieved recent popularity in the treatment of CDH [Fallon et al 2013] but proof of improved survival with ECMO has not been established [Losty 2014]. Nitric oxide and surfactant have also been trialed as therapies for persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN).

In Fryns syndrome, additional anomalies may dictate further consultations; management by a pediatric neurologist, pediatric cardiologist, pediatric gastroenterologist, pediatric nephrologist, and a craniofacial team may be appropriate.

See also Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Overview.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The diaphragmatic defects in Fryns syndrome may be amenable to surgical repair in the prenatal period. Survival in a controlled trial of open hysterotomy-guided fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion versus conventional care was not improved; an experimental, minimally invasive approach called percutaneous fetal endoluminal tracheal occlusion is still being evaluated [Losty 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For those with prenatally detected CDH, it is important to prevent lung injury that can result from inflation of bowel that has herniated into the chest and immediate intubation at birth has been recommended as above.

Surveillance

There are no specific surveillance guidelines for Fryns syndrome. In those who survive the neonatal period, surveillance depends on the types of malformations present and is specific to the individual.

Infants with successful CDH repair should be followed by a multidisciplinary team at a specialized center, with periodic evaluations by a pediatric surgeon, nurse specialist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, and nutritionist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing of sibs at risk for Fryns syndrome requires an evaluation for physical anomalies (see Diagnosis and Management, Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis). If chromosome studies were not obtained on the proband, CMA to evaluate for the possibility of a chromosome disorder (see Differential Diagnosis) could be performed in the sib(s) at risk. A high index of suspicion for a chromosome aberration should prompt evaluation for deletions of the chromosomal loci associated with a Fryns syndrome-like phenotype.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies are managed according to the malformations that have been diagnosed. One literature review concluded that fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) used as a prenatal interventional strategy can increase survival in cases with severe CDH [Cundy et al 2014], although this technique has most frequently been used for isolated CDH rather than Fryns syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Many different treatments are currently being evaluated for the management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to assess strength and functional limitations

Evaluation for physical therapy and need for assistive devices

Assessment of hearing if the individual has symptomatic hearing loss

Ophthalmologic evaluation for the presence of retinal telangiectasias

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Standards of care and management of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy were agreed upon at the 171st ENMC International Workshop. A consensus on the following topics and the recommendations from that conference [Tawil et al 2010] are outlined below:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation

Consultation with a physical therapist is indicated.

Establishment of follow-up frequency is important at the time of diagnosis. Individuals with FSHD should be seen at a frequency based on their disease severity, which for some will be frequent initially, and may include occupational and speech therapy in infantile onset forms of FSHD. For others with mild involvement, annual visits would be appropriate.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation consultations can help establish appropriate exercise regimens and assistive devices that may enhance mobility and reduce the risk of falls in home environments.

Exercise in FSHD

Exercise with moderate weights is not detrimental to individuals with FSHD [Milner-Brown & Miller 1988, van der Kooi et al 2004].

Aerobic training (when possible) has been beneficial to affected individuals [Olsen et al 2005].

Any type of exercise regimen should be instituted under the guidance of a physical therapist and personalized according to the individual’s disease symptoms, age, and cardiovascular status.

Pain. Chronic pain should be managed by physical therapy and medication as necessary.

Respiratory dysfunction. Ventilatory support such as BiPAP should be considered as necessary for those with hypoventilation.

Hearing loss. Standard therapies for hearing loss, including amplification if necessary, are appropriate.

Ophthalmologic disease. Exposure keratitis may occur in individuals who sleep with their eyes partially open. Use of lubricants to prevent drying of the sclera or in more severe cases taping the eyes shut during sleep may be required.

Orthopedic intervention

Ankle/foot orthoses can improve mobility and prevent falls in individuals with foot drop.

Surgical fixation of the scapula to the chest wall often improves range of motion of the arms, although this gain can be short-lived in individuals with rapidly progressive disease [Diab et al 2005, Krishnan et al 2005, Giannini et al 2006]. Evaluation of such individuals prior to surgery is warranted to assure a functional and sustained benefit.

Surveillance 

For those with a confirmed diagnosis of FSHD, the following surveillance applies:

Pain. Pain should be assessed at regular visits to primary care physicians and physical therapists.

Respiratory dysfunction

Affected individuals with moderate to severe FSHD, defined as those with proximal lower extremity weakness, should be routinely screened for hypoventilation.

Yearly forced vital capacity (FVC) measurements should be monitored for all affected individuals who are wheelchair bound, have pelvic girdle weakness and superimposed pulmonary disease, and/or have moderate to severe kyphoscoliosis, lumbar hyperlordosis, or chest wall deformities.

Hearing loss

As in children who are at risk for hearing loss for other reasons, hearing can be followed routinely by periodic assessment as part of school-based testing.

Hearing screens are particularly important in severe infantile onset forms of FSHD, as hearing loss can result in delayed language acquisition.

Adults should have a formal hearing evaluation based purely on symptoms. No additional audiometry screening of asymptomatic individuals is necessary.

Ophthalmologic disease

Annual dilated ophthalmoscopy in childhood is indicated.

In adults, a dilated retinal exam should be performed at the time of diagnosis; if vascular disease is absent, follow-up exams are only necessary if visual symptoms develop.

In children known to be at risk for FSHD (because of family history) but for whom the diagnosis has not yet been confirmed, annual dilated ophthalmoscopy is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Outcome of 105 pregnancies in 38 women with FSHD was generally favorable [Ciafaloni et al 2006]. However, rates for low birth-weight infants, augmented extraction procedures such as forceps and vacuum assisted deliveries, delivery by Cesarean section, and anesthetic complications were higher than for the general population. Worsening of weakness occurred in 24% of the pregnancies, beginning during the pregnancy and generally not resolving after delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

MYO-029, an antibody designed to inhibit the activity of myostatin and enhance the growth and strength of muscles, has been developed. Because results in animal models of muscular dystrophy indicated that this could result in increased strength, a clinical trial was initiated in 2005 and completed in 2007. The study was designed primarily as a safety study for antibody injection into humans and identification of side effects. The study had four treatment groups on increasing doses of MYO-029 and a group that received a placebo for comparison. Side effects from the highest dose of MYO-029 caused that group to be discontinued from the study. The injections were fairly well tolerated; hypersensitivity reactions (rashes, itching, and occasionally more systemic reactions) limiting the dose that could be injected were the most common reactions. Such reactions are generally expected for the injection of biologically active proteins into the blood stream.

With respect to FSHD, 22 people who received MYO-29 injections of various doses finished the study. A total of five withdrew voluntarily and four were in the high-dose cohort and were discontinued from the study. People who received the MYO-029 injections and placebo injections were evaluated for muscle strength (6 months of dosing and 3 months of follow-up for a total of 9 months). Using a number of both quantitative and subjective parameters, no difference in strength was measured or perceived by subjects in the study regardless of dose. The study authors [Wagner et al 2008] did state that many more subjects would have been necessary (160 with FSHD) to demonstrate a significant difference in strength, thus it cannot be concluded that the treatment was completely unsuccessful; further, the primary goal of the study was determination of safety rather than demonstration of increase in strength.

Muscle biopsies from subjects who received MYO-029 showed no significant adverse effect by several measures. A dose-dependent increase in fiber size diameter (essentially an increase in muscle size) was observed (low dose: 2% increase; medium dose: 2.2% increase; high dose: 5.3% increase in size). Thus, the MYO-029 appeared to have an effect on muscle.

The study also indicated that more potent inhibitors of myostatin are being developed [Wagner et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

A 24-week trial of dilitazem did not improve findings in individuals with FSHD [Elsheikh et al 2007].

Steroids, albuterol, and creatine have not proven effective [Tawil & van der Maarel 2006].

Two controlled studies of oral albuterol in FSHD [Kissel et al 2001, van der Kooi et al 2004] did not show significant global improvement in strength despite a modest increase in muscle mass. A Cochrane review concluded that further study of albuterol in FSHD is needed [Rose & Tawil 2004].

Corticosteroids have been used in individuals who have evidence of inflammation on muscle biopsy. Although transient improvement in strength has been reported, a natural history-controlled study in eight individuals with FSHD revealed no improvement after 12 weeks of treatment with prednisone [Tawil et al 1997].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with chromosome 3-linked frontotemporal dementia (FTD3), the following evaluations are recommended:

A general medical history and family history

Physical and neurologic examination

Evaluation of the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance by neuropsychological examination

Genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTD3 often present a considerable burden for caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

The behavioral and psychological symptoms (BPSD) should be treated as in other types of FTD. There is no consensus treatment guideline for FTD3. In clinical practice those affected individuals who present with very aggressive symptoms have proven quite difficult to treat and have in some cases required high doses of antipsychotics and/or antidepressants in order to relieve the physical aggressiveness.

Surveillance

Members of the Danish family with FTD3 are followed in the Copenhagen Memory Disorders Clinic, a multidisciplinary clinic involving neurologic and psychiatric services, genetic counseling, molecular genetic testing, and clinical diagnostic and follow-up medical service.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Experimental studies with gene therapy are ongoing [Nielsen et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GRN-related frontotemporal dementia (FTD-GRN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed general, neurologic, and family history

Physical, neurologic, and cognitive examination

Medical genetics consultation

When clinical cognitive assessments are not informative enough, a neuropsychological assessment may be performed to provide a more comprehensive and objective view of a patient's cognitive function. Formal neuropsychological assessment requires comparison of the patient's raw score on a specific test to a large general population normative sample which is usually drawn from a population comparable to the person being examined. This allows for the patient's performance to be compared to a suitable control group, adjusted for age, gender, level of education, and/or ethnicity. While much more sensitive than bedside clinical cognitive examination, such assessment is resource intensive and time consuming.

Treatment of Manifestations

There is currently no known treatment for FTD-GRN or FTD in general. However, some behavioral symptoms such as apathy, impulsivity, and compulsiveness may respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

Symptoms of roaming, delusions, and hallucinations may respond to antipsychotic medications.

Although reports have suggested potential benefits with certain pharmacotherapy on management of FTD in general, evidence from randomized controlled trials is limited [Freedman 2007]. All of the following findings require confirmation with larger clinical trials.

One double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over trial suggests that trazodone, a serotonergic agent, may be beneficial in treating the symptoms of irritability, agitation, depression, and eating disorders in FTD [Lebert et al 2004].

While an open-label study suggested some benefits on behavioral symptoms with paroxetine, a double-blind placebo-controlled trial of ten subjects found worsening of performance on paired associates learning, reversal learning, and delayed pattern recognition [Moretti et al 2003, Deakin et al 2004].

A study of galantamine in FTD-bv and primary progressive aphasia (PPA) found significant benefits in subjects with PPA but not in those with FTD-bv [Kertesz et al 2005]. A follow-up study of 36 individuals who were on galantamine therapy for 18 weeks revealed stabilization but not improvement on language scores in the PPA group [Kertesz et al 2008].

A 12-month open-label rivastigmine trial showed improvement of behavioral symptoms and decreased caregiver burden in individuals with FTD but the treatment did not prevent cognitive decline [Moretti et al 2004].

A double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over study of methylphenidate found attenuation of risk-taking behavior but worsening of spatial span [Rahman et al 2006].

A small clinical trial of dextroamphetamine treatment on eight individuals with FTD-bv revealed improvement of behavioral symptoms [Huey et al 2008].

A few open-label studies of memantine, a partial NMDA agonist, demonstrated an improvement on the frontal battery inventory (FBI) in individuals with FTD-bv after a six-month trial, but a decline in other cognitive performance was observed [Diehl-Schmid et al 2008]. Among the three subtypes of FTD, PPA-PNFA remained stable on cognitive and functional measurements when treated with memantine [Boxer et al 2009]. A study using [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) as a surrogate outcome in individuals with semantic dementia found that cortical metabolic activity in salience network hubs were sustained when treated with memantine over a six-month period [Chow et al 2013].

Note: Donepezil treatment has been associated with exacerbation of disinhibition and compulsion symptoms [Mendez et al 2007].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Limited epidemiologic studies suggest that head injury may be a risk factor for FTD in general, although this finding requires confirmation [Rosso et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical trial on a formulation of methothioninium (TRx0237), a compound that has been shown to inhibit tau aggregation in preclinical studies and may also have effect on TDP-43, is currently underway for individuals with FTD-bv.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a MAPT-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

A structured general medical history and family history

Physical examination and neurologic examination

Evaluation of the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance by neuropsychological examination

Treatment of Manifestations

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations.

Individuals with seizures are treated with antiepileptic drugs.

The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment.

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTDP-17 often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in FTD patients treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A Phase II trial with davunetide, a neuroactive peptide believed to stabilize microtubules, is investigating safety and tolerability of this drug in patients with tauopathies such as PSP, CBD, and FTDP-17.

Several trials with memantine are underway in patients with FTD in general, as well as a trial with oxytocin and its effect on social cognition.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for more information on FTD studies and for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of other disorders and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fumarate hydratase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist. This evaluation will likely include a brain MRI study.

Feeding assessment and evaluation of nutritional status

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Seizures in individuals with fumarate hydratase deficiency are often difficult to control. Individuals with seizures need to be evaluated and treated by a qualified specialist (usually a pediatric neurologist) in order to improve clinical outcome. Recommendation of particular medications or interventions is beyond the scope of this review. However, it should be noted that the ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Nutritional intervention (e.g., feeding gastrostomy) may be appropriate in hypotonic and/or lethargic children with feeding difficulties and/or aspiration.

Physical therapy and orthopedic management is appropriate to minimize contractures and prevent scoliosis. Wheelchairs can be useful for some individuals.

In individuals with significant developmental deficits (including impairment of motor, language, and social development) special needs services are a required component of care.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There are no recognized therapies to ameliorate or reverse the metabolic abnormalities resulting from decreased activity of fumarate hydratase. A brief therapeutic trial of a low-protein diet in one mildly affected individual with fumarate hydratase deficiency did not alter urinary excretion of fumaric acid or improve clinical signs [Kimonis et al 2012].

Surveillance

Specific recommendations should be provided after evaluating the individual needs of each affected person. However, the authors would recommend at least annual visits with pediatric neurology (most importantly, to monitor for and/or treat epilepsy) and physical medicine (most importantly, to monitor for equipment needs and to monitor for and/or treat manifestations of spasticity). As part of a special needs program, periodic visits with genetics, ophthalmology, and orthopedic surgery will also be required.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the fumarate hydratase-causing allelic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to consider offering molecular genetic testing to relatives who may be at risk of developing multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas (MCUL) or papillary renal cell carcinoma with leiomyomatosis (HLRCC).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation

Increasingly sophisticated models of mitochondrial function are being used to study the metabolic derangements associated with identified defects of intermediary metabolism, including fumarate hydratase deficiency [Smith & Robinson 2011]. These models may suggest treatment interventions with supplements or dietary changes that are not presently established.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No significant clinical or biochemical improvement was noted by treatment with a protein-restricted diet [Shih et al 1991; Campeau et al, personal communication (2008)].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with G6PC3 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Full blood count to look for evidence of other hematologic involvement (i.e., intermittent thrombocytopenia and/or lymphopenia)

Immunologic evaluation for T-cell subsets in individuals with a more severe presentation and unusual non-bacterial infections

Consultation with a cardiologist to evaluate for congenital heart disease

Renal and pelvic ultrasound examination to look for urogenital malformations

Growth parameters in children and pubertal development in adolescents

Age appropriate endocrine assessment for evidence of the hormone deficiencies reported (i.e., growth hormone, gonadotropins, thyroid hormone)

Biochemical investigations to look for abnormalities in the lipid profile

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Neutropenia. Treatment with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves neutrophil numbers, reduces the number of infections, and improves the quality of life [Boztug et al 2009, McDermott et al 2010, Boztug et al 2012]. Of note, the dose required to keep absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L can vary greatly among patients. In some patients G-CSF -- even in large doses -- may fail to control infections [Smith et al 2012].

A few mildly affected individuals have been reported to be adequately managed with prophylactic antibiotics alone [Banka et al 2013]. However, prophylactic antibiotics have a limited use for preventing severe infections or bronchiectasis and inflammatory bowel disease.

Fevers and infections require prompt treatment with antibiotics.

Other

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Good dental hygiene, including careful brushing and flossing and regular visits to the dentist, helps decrease the potential for infection. Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered with dental procedures, including routine dental repair and cleaning, especially in individuals with heart defects.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine management of congenital heart disease, renal and urinary tract malformations

Routine management of hormone deficiencies

Consideration of oral steroids for inflammatory bowel disease [Desplantes et al 2014] or anti-TNF treatment [Bégin et al 2013]. Some complications of IBD such as bowel stenosis may require appropriate surgical intervention.

Consideration of pancreatic enzyme supplementation if steatorrhea is present [Desplantes et al 2014]

Chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for acute myelogeneous leukemia

Frequent follow up by a hematologist or immunologist to monitor infection frequency and neutrophil counts to ensure an adequate response to G-CSF (i.e., absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L)

Monitoring of growth in children and pubertal development in adolescents

Biochemical profile including lipid profile

Monitoring for development of varicose veins, especially in adults

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the following evaluations can be used to help clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs: full blood count, bone marrow examination (if persistent severe neutropenia is detected on full blood count), directed general examination for prominence of superficial veins, echocardiogram, and a renal and pelvic ultrasound examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early diagnosis and management of the hematologic, cardiac, renal, and endocrine abnormalities of G6PC3 deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical genetics consultation

Physical examination with particular attention to blood pressure and peripheral pulses, as well as presence of bowing of the long bones (i.e., evidence of autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets)

Metabolic workup including serum creatinine, serum phosphorus, urine phosphorus, urine creatinine, and alkaline phosphatase to evaluate for evidence of hypophosphatemic rickets by measuring the tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP) and the ratio of the renal tubular maximum reabsorption rate of phosphate to the glomerular filtration rate (TmP/GFR)

Serum levels of cardiac-specific troponin T or troponin I to evaluate for evidence of ischemia

Pediatric cardiology consultation including:

ECG to assess for signs of left ventricular hypertrophy or ischemia

Echocardiogram to monitor left ventricular systolic function and to assess for the presence of calcifications, left ventricular hypertrophy, or pericardial effusion

CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis (if possible with runoff to lower extremities) to evaluate the extent and distribution of vascular calcification

Skeletal survey to assess for either periarticular calcification or findings typical of rickets such as widening of the growth plate, bowing of the long bones, or metaphyseal widening, cupping, or fraying. Include cervical films to evaluate for cervical spine fusion.

Audiologic assessment for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss

Pediatric nephrology consultation in the setting of refractory hypertension

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of arterial calcification

Bisphosphonate therapy. In a non-randomized, retrospective study, Rutsch et al [2008] compared 43 infants who survived their first day of life (including 17 treated with bisphosphonates) to 26 who did not receive bisphosphonates. Infants treated with bisphosphonates showed significantly increased survival (p=0.026, log-rank test).

Etidronate, a non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate, is the most commonly used based on its potent antimineralization effect. Etidronate doses vary from 5 mg/kg/d [Corbatón Blasco et al 1991] to as high as 35 mg/kg/d [Van Dyck et al 1989], with a usual dose of 20 mg/kg/d [Edouard et al 2011].

Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates such as pamidronate and risedronate were originally formulated to be more potent antiresorptive drugs and, thus, to have a less potent antimineralization effect at therapeutic levels [Otero et al 2013]. The dose of pamidronate has varied from 0.1 mg/kg/week to as high as 5 mg/kg/d IV [Rutsch et al 2008]; the dose of risedronate is 1 mg/kg/week PO [Ramjan et al 2009]. Of note, death can occur even if treatment is started early with etidronate [Stuart et al 1990, Stuart 1993, Galletti et al 2011] or pamidronate [Kalal et al 2012]. After initiation of therapy, vascular calcifications have been reported to disappear as early as 2.5 weeks (as assessed by x-rays, a relatively insensitive method) [van der Sluis et al 2006] and as late as two years [Meradji et al 1978]. Vascular calcifications do not reappear after discontinuation of treatment [Meradji et al 1978], even after ten years [van der Sluis et al 2006]. However, arterial stenosis has been known to persist despite resolution of calcification [Thiaville et al 1994]. Periarticular calcifications have disappeared in some individuals [Meradji et al 1978], whereas in others they have persisted despite treatment, disappearing only after treatment was discontinued [Otero et al 2013].Prolonged etidronate use in patients with GACI has been associated with severe skeletal toxicity, including radiographic findings resembling hypophosphatasia (pan craniosynostosis, bowing of long bones, metaphyseal cupping and fraying, radiolucent tongues) or osteopetrosis (osteosclerosis and femoral Erlenmeyer flask deformity) [Otero et al 2013]. The optimal duration of treatment remains unclear, with reports of children being treated for almost 18 months [van Dyck et al 1989], two years [Edouard et al 2011], three years [Ramjan et al 2009], and almost seven years (in 1 child) [Otero et al 2013]. Given the risk of severe adverse skeletal effects with prolonged bisphosphonate treatment and the failure of calcifications to reappear after discontinuation of treatment, some authors recommend close monitoring for resolution of arterial calcifications during treatment so that use of bisphosphonates can be discontinued as soon as possible [Otero et al 2013]. From current available data (which are limited by small sample size and lack of randomized control data) it is difficult to determine if bisphosphonate treatment is truly protective or if resolution of findings reflects the natural history of the disease.

Cardiovascular treatment

Anti-hypertensive therapy. Since standard anti-hypertensive therapy is warranted for hypertension and since hypertension in GACI is likely caused by renal artery stenosis, in theory it may be beneficial to use medications that act on the renin-angiotensin system, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs).

In one case, severe hypertension refractory to conventional treatment responded to prostaglandin infusion (PGE1) at a dose of 0.017-0.068 μg/kg/min [Ciana et al 1997].

Prevention of coronary thrombosis. Aspirin therapy is warranted in patients with severe coronary stenosis, who are at increased risk for coronary thrombosis.

Treatment of hearing loss. Patients with sensorineural hearing loss may benefit from hearing aids.

Treatment of hypophosphatemic rickets involves calcitriol and oral phosphate supplements in standard doses of 15 ng/kg/d (calcitriol) and 40-60 mg/kg/d (phosphate) [Lorenz-Depiereux et al 2010], with doses adjusted according to serum phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase levels.

Hypercalciuria should be avoided in patients with hypophosphatemic rickets treated with calcitriol or other vitamin D analogs. Freychet et al [2014] reported one patient with biallelic ENPP1 mutations with calciuria of 5 mg/kg/d after institution of alfacalcidol who developed new-onset nephrocalcinosis; cardiac, hepatic, and pancreatic calcifications as evaluated by ultrasound; and recurrence of previously regressed periarticular calcifications as assessed by x-ray. While most of these calcifications regressed when the calciuria was maintained at less than 4 mg/kg/d, the nephrocalcinosis remained unchanged. Thus, it seems prudent to monitor calciuria in order to maintain it at levels below 4 mg/kg/d.

Orthopedics consultation should be obtained if bone deformities develop as a consequence of hypophosphatemic rickets, as surgical interventions may be necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients with GACI are predisposed to periarticular calcifications, and at least two individuals with cervical spine fusion have been reported [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008, Nitschke et al 2012]. Thus, it seems prudent to perform a lateral cervical spine x-ray when elective endotracheal intubation is necessary, for example, prior to surgery. In persons with cervical spine fusion, fiberoptic intubation is recommended and, if hypertension is also present, a nasal route may be preferred over an oral route since it produces a less prominent pressor response [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008].

Surveillance

No specific guidelines address the issue of surveillance. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical findings, and need to be more frequent in those with a more severe presentation.

One individual reported in the literature was followed with clinical evaluation and assessment of mineral homeostasis every three months; echocardiography, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), and low-dose radiation CT every six months; and x-rays of the wrists and knees every year [Edouard et al 2011].

Another individual was followed with weekly assessment of mineral homeostasis and troponin, monthly echocardiograms, and CT every three to four months [Michael A Levine, personal communication].

When individuals with GACI develop hypophosphatemic rickets that requires treatment with calcitriol and phosphorus supplementation, urine calcium should be followed regularly so as to avoid hypercalciuria.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although there have been no clinical studies, it seems prudent to avoid the use of warfarin if possible because matrix Gla protein (MGP), a potent anti-mineralization factor, needs to be activated by a vitamin K-dependent enzyme, and warfarin interferes with the vitamin K cycle. Warfarin has also been shown to accelerate ectopic mineralization in Abcc6 knockout mice [Li et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the younger sibs of a proband with GACI in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, imaging studies can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Pregnancy needs to be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician.

Bisphosphonates have been tried antenatally, with both unsuccessful [Stuart 1993] and successful results [Michael A Levine, personal communication].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Intravenous sodium thiosulfate 25% diluted in D5W has been tried in at least two individuals at a dose of 12.5 mg/m2/day [Michael A Levine, personal communication]. Therapy was discontinued at age one year in one and at age three years in the other. Although both children are still alive at the ages of one and three years, it is not known if this is due to the natural course of the disease or a beneficial effect of the sodium thiosulfate. Of note, the daily administration of sodium thiosulfate requires the insertion of a central venous catheter.

No individuals with GACI have been reported to have received a heart transplant. One patient listed for transplant had a left ventricular assist device placed, but expired before she could receive the transplant [Glatz et al 2006].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with epimerase deficiency galactosemia the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

Nutrition and feeding assessments

Neurologic examination

Developmental assessment

Liver function testing (serum AST, ALT, albumin, total protein, total and conjugated bilirubin, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time)

Ophthalmology consult to evaluate for cataracts

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

Generalized Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

The acute and potentially lethal symptoms of generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia are prevented or corrected by a galactose/lactose-restricted diet. This means switching infants from breast milk or a milk-based formula to a formula with only trace levels of galactose or lactose, such as soy formula. Of note, some infants with classic galactosemia are prescribed elemental formula, which has even lower galactose content than soy formula. Elemental formula should not be prescribed for infants with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia because the GALE enzyme is required for the endogenous biosynthesis of UDP-galactose; that is, persons with epimerase deficiency galactosemia may require trace environmental sources of galactose. However, the galactose intake needed for optimum outcome remains unknown.

For older children with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia, dietary restriction of galactose/lactose involves continued restriction of dairy products.

Note: Some, but not all, physicians recommend that individuals with classic galactosemia also abstain from non-dairy foods that contain more than trace levels of galactose/lactose (e.g., some fruits and vegetables, organ meats); this more rigorous dietary restriction may not be advisable for persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia.

In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia restriction of dietary galactose/lactose appears to correct or prevent the acute signs and symptoms of the disorder: hepatic dysfunction, renal dysfunction, and mild cataracts. Presumably, as in classic galactosemia, dietary treatment would not correct profound tissue damage resulting from prolonged galactose exposure (e.g., hepatic cirrhosis or mature cataracts). Mature cataracts that do not resolve with dietary restriction of galactose/lactose may require surgical removal.

Peripheral Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia do not require any dietary restriction.

Intermediate Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia are typically treated with dietary galactose/lactose restriction, at least in infancy. They may be an (as-yet unknown) increased risk for long-term complications including learning impairment and/or cataracts. Continued breastfeeding or exposure to a milk-based formula containing high levels of galactose/lactose may therefore be inadvisable for these infants; however, insufficient data exist to make firm recommendations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia dietary restriction of galactose/lactose prevents early feeding problems, vomiting, poor weight gain, hepatic dysfunction, and cataracts.

The challenge in treating an asymptomatic newborn with epimerase deficiency galactosemia is that it may take months to obtain the results of tests used to distinguish peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia from intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Additional Testing); furthermore, such tests may not be available. The most conservative approach, therefore, is to advise dietary restriction of galactose/lactose for all infants with epimerase deficiency galactosemia, relaxing the restriction as warranted once a more accurate diagnosis has been confirmed.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitor hemolysate gal-1P or urinary galactitol, especially if the diet is to be normalized. Acceptable levels of gal-1P in GALE deficiency are not known but are estimated from experience with classic galactosemia to be <3.5 mg/100 mL in red blood cells.

Follow growth.

Monitor developmental milestones; propose supportive intervention as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia should be on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, certainly as infants and perhaps for life.

Persons with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia may be placed on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, either transiently or long-term. Assessment of hemolysate gal-1P and/or urinary galactitol following a galactose challenge (e.g., 2 weeks on a normal diet) may help determine if an individual should remain on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet for longer periods of time.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If prenatal testing has not been performed (see Genetic Counseling), each at-risk newborn sib should be treated from birth until results of diagnostic testing are available. Diagnostic evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurement of GALE enzyme activity in red blood cells if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. Note: If there are concerns about the reliability of the prenatal testing, soy-based formula may be given while the diagnostic testing is being performed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with giant axonal neuropathy (GAN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of development/cognitive abilities to establish the extent of disease and monitor progression or attempted intervention

Medical genetics consultation

The following investigations may be used to confirm clinically apparent problems but also to uncover subclinical involvement of PNS and CNS lesions which are not clinically apparent:

Clinical and electrophysiologic (sensory and motor NCVs, electromyography) examination of the peripheral motor and sensory nervous system (including assessment of the function of cranial nerves) to establish the extent of disease and monitor progression

Neuroophthalmologic examination to look for nystagmus resulting from cerebellar dysfunction or strabismus caused by involvement of cranial nerves III, IV, or VI

EEG, somatosensory and motor evoked potentials, and brain MRI to determine the degree of CNS involvement

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment, focused on managing the clinical findings, often involves a team including (pediatric) neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, physiotherapists, psychologists, and speech and occupational therapists. Major goals are to optimize intellectual and physical development and, later in life, to slow the inevitable deterioration of these capacities.

Note: Early intellectual development is nearly normal in many affected children, enabling them to attend a normal school initially; however, significant intellectual impairment usually occurs before the second decade of life.

Treatment includes the following:

Speech and occupational therapy to improve communication and activities of daily living

Early intervention and special education directed to the individual's disability. Frequent reassessment is needed because of the progressive nature of the disorder. Special education often becomes necessary between ages five and 12 years.

Physiotherapy (typically for distal weakness, ataxia, and spasticity) to preserve mobility as long as possible

Orthopedic surgery as required for foot deformities (Note, however, that most affected individuals become wheelchair bound between ages ten and 20 years for other reasons.)

Appropriate ophthalmologic treatment (e.g., surgery or glasses), especially if diplopia occurs

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Wheelchair-bound or bedridden patients require frequent examination for decubitus ulcers and appropriate prophylaxis.

Surveillance

The following should be monitored in persons with GAN:

Intellectual development/deterioration

Progression of the peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, spasticity, and cranial nerve dysfunction

The frequency of the monitoring should depend on disease progression; annual or more frequent evaluation is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GATA1-related cytopenia, the following are recommended:

Complete blood count and examination of the peripheral smear to assess the degree of cytopenia(s)

Detailed history of age at which hematologic disease was manifest

Documentation of abnormal/unexpected bleeding episodes and platelet counts obtained at the time of the episodes to help determine whether platelet function is abnormal and whether disease severity has changed over time

Note: Platelet aggregation studies may also be useful to identify functional abnormalities that predict a greater risk of bleeding for any given platelet count, but studies can be difficult to interpret when platelet counts are lower than 100,000/μL.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with GATA1-related cytopenia are treated supportively.

Thrombocytopenia. Individuals with moderate to severe epistaxis, gingival bleeding, or gastrointestinal bleeding should receive platelet transfusions. Transfusion requirements vary from person to person as bleeding can be related to quantitative and/or qualitative platelet defects.

For individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects, DDAVP treatment may be helpful for short-term management of mild to moderate bleeding.

Individuals who are only mildly symptomatic (easy bruisability without mucosal or more severe bleeding) do not require specific treatment.

There is no evidence that splenectomy is beneficial in people with GATA1-related disease, although this treatment may be considered if splenomegaly is severe. Although splenectomy may improve the cytopenias, platelet dysfunction will not be improved.

Anemia. Erythrocyte transfusions are indicated when anemia is symptomatic (fatigue, tachycardia).

Iron overload and the development of alloantibodies may limit chronic transfusion therapy.

Extended pre-transfusion red blood cell phenotyping and matching for minor erythrocyte antigens in individuals receiving frequent transfusions can reduce the risk of alloimmunization.

Neutropenia. Individuals with neutropenia who present with fever should be evaluated promptly with a physical examination, complete blood count, and blood culture and should receive appropriate parenteral antibiotics.

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). For severe cases, BMT can be curative [Hollanda et al 2006, Phillips et al 2007, Parrella et al 2014].

BMT should be considered in individuals with severe phenotypes of GATA1-related cytopenia, particularly if an HLA-matched donor is available.

While BMT may offer a cure, clinical experience with BMT in this disease is limited and families must be counseled on the significant risks and morbidity associated with BMT.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The only definitive cure for GATA1-related cytopenia is bone marrow transplantation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should receive a platelet transfusion prior to surgical or invasive dental procedures.

Individuals with neutropenia should be counseled regarding their increased risk of infection. They should avoid crowds and contact with individuals who have communicable diseases. When febrile, those who are severely neutropenic (absolute neutrophil count <500/µL) should seek medical attention; typically blood cultures are obtained and parenteral antibiotics are administered to avoid the possibility of life-threatening sepsis.

Surveillance

Depending on the phenotype of the disease, complete blood counts should be monitored so that supportive care can be provided as needed. Individuals with mild cytopenias require infrequent monitoring (yearly), while those with severe cytopenias who require transfusions should have complete blood counts monthly or as indicated by clinical signs and symptoms.

Individuals undergoing repeated erythrocyte transfusions should be monitored for iron overload and managed appropriately with iron chelation therapy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with thrombocytopenia should avoid antiplatelet agents including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., ibuprofen).

Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should be advised to avoid contact sports or activities with a high risk of trauma.

Individuals with significant neutropenia should avoid crowds and close contact with persons who have a communicable disease to minimize risk of infection.

Individuals with significant splenomegaly should avoid contact sports, which involve increased risk for traumatic splenic rupture.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing for the familial GATA1 pathogenic variant;

A screening complete blood count to evaluate for thrombocytopenia, anemia, or neutropenia.

Note: Platelet, erythrocyte, and neutrophil counts can vary significantly in individuals with GATA1 pathogenic variants; normal results do not rule out the possibility that the relative has a GATA1 pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Unlike immune-mediated platelet disorders such as immune thrombocytopenic purpura, GATA1-related thrombocytopenia does not respond to steroid or immunoglobulin therapy.

Supplemental erythropoietin therapy is unlikely to be effective because the anemia is secondary to ineffective erythropoiesis, not erythropoietin deficiency.See Surveillance for evaluations used to establish disease severity in an individual diagnosed with Gaucher disease (GD).

Baseline (pre-treatment) assessments may be useful in selecting treatment modality and regimen (i.e., enzyme dose and frequency of infusion).

Factors that may influence the extent of clinical testing at the time of diagnosis:

Age

Mode of ascertainment (e.g., family screening vs disease signs and symptoms)

Presence/absence of primary neurologic involvement

Treatment of Manifestations

Management by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in treating GD is available at Comprehensive Gaucher Centers (see National Gaucher Foundation).

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has changed the natural history of GD and eliminated the need for splenectomy in individuals with hypersplenism, persons not receiving ERT and certain other individuals may require symptomatic treatment, including the following:

Partial or total splenectomy for individuals with massive splenomegaly with significant areas of infarction and persistent severe thrombocytopenia with high risk of bleeding

Transfusion of blood products for severe anemia and bleeding. Anemia and clotting problems unresponsive to ERT should prompt investigations for an intercurrent disease process. Evaluation by a hematologist is recommended prior to any major surgical or dental procedures or parturition [Hughes et al 2007].

Analgesics for bone pain. Persistent bone pain in individuals receiving ERT should prompt evaluations to exclude the possibility of a mechanical problem (e.g., pathologic fracture or joint collapse secondary to osteonecrosis, degenerative arthritis).

Joint replacement surgery for relief from chronic pain and restoration of function (i.e., improved joint range of motion). Bone pain in individuals who have undergone joint replacement may indicate a problem with the prosthesis and the need for surgical revision.

Supplemental treatment. Oral bisphosphonates and calcium/vitamin D may benefit individuals with GD and low bone density [Wenstrup et al 2004].

Persons with GD with findings suggestive of multiple myeloma and parkinsonism should be referred to the appropriate specialists.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been undertaken in individuals with severe GD, primarily those with chronic neurologic involvement (type 3 GD). Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver volume. In a few individuals, stabilization of neurologic and bone disease has occurred. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT limit its use in individuals with type 1 and type 3 GD. Therefore, this procedure has been largely superseded by enzyme replacement therapy (see ERT).

Individuals with chronic neurologic GD and progressive disease despite ERT may be candidates for BMT or a multi-modal approach (i.e., combined ERT and BMT).

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is based on the provision of sufficient exogenous enzyme to overcome the block in the catabolic pathway and effect the clearance of the stored substrate, GL1.

Global availability may differ, but there are three recombinant glucocerebrosidase enzyme preparations currently available. All are based on the human gene sequence, but are distinguished according to the cell type involved in their production: imiglucerase (Cerezyme®) generated in Chinese hamster ovary cells; velalglucerase alfa (VPRIV®) from human fibroblast-like cell line; and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso®) from a carrot cell line. Each formulation is modified to expose the alpha-mannosyl (carbohydrate) residues for enhanced uptake by the macrophage.

Regular intravenous infusions of the recombinant enzymes imiglucerase and velaglucerase have been demonstrated to be safe and effective in reversing those features resulting from hematologic and visceral (liver/spleen) involvement [Weinreb et al 2002, Zimran et al 2010]. Experience with taliglucerase alfa appears comparable [Zimran et al 2011, Ben Turkia et al 2013].

It is likely that end-stage histologic changes (e.g., fibrosis, infarction) influence the response to ERT. Thrombocytopenia may persist in individuals with residual splenomegaly and/or the presence of splenic nodules [Stein et al 2010].

ERT is well tolerated. Approximately 10%-15% of individuals develop antibodies to infused imiglucerase; whereas antibody formation has been reported in 1% of persons receiving velaglucerase. In most cases these individuals remain asymptomatic [Rosenberg et al 1999, Starzyk et al 2007]. Adverse effects (e.g., pruritus, hives) are relatively well controlled with premedication using antihistamines.

Individuals with type 1 GD report improved health-related quality of life after 24-48 months of ERT [Damiano et al 1998, Masek et al 1999, Weinreb et al 2007]. After prolonged treatment, ERT reduces the rate of bone loss in a dose-dependent manner [Wenstrup et al 2007], improves bone pain, and reduces bone crises [Charrow et al 2007].The effectiveness of ERT for the treatment of neurologic disease remains to be established, although a few reports have suggested some benefit [Poll et al 2002].

Individuals with type 2 GD and pyramidal tract signs are not likely to respond to ERT, perhaps because the underlying neuropathology is cell death rather than lysosomal storage of GL1 [Takahashi et al 1998]. These individuals and those with hydrops fetalis are not appropriate candidates for BMT, ERT, or substrate reduction therapy (SRT) [Campbell et al 2003, Migita et al 2003].

Individuals with type 3 GD appear to derive some benefit from ERT, although long-term prognosis remains to be defined for this heterogeneous group [Vellodi et al 2001]. Onset of progressive myoclonic seizures while on ERT appears to indicate a poor prognosis [Frei & Schiffmann 2002]. Brain stem auditory evoked responses have deteriorated in individuals with type 3 GD on ERT [Campbell et al 2003]. SRT used in combination with ERT for type 3 GD with progressive neurologic disease does not appear to alter ultimate prognosis.

Consensus recommendations exist for ERT and monitoring of children with type 1 GD [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). The optimal dose and frequency of recombinant enzyme administration is not certain, mostly because of limited information regarding tissue half-life and distribution and the limitations associated with the modalities used for assessing clinical disease course. Intravenously infused enzyme may not reach adequate concentrations in certain body sites (e.g., brain, bones, and lungs). In the majority of individuals, treatment is initiated with a dose of 15-60 units of enzyme per kg of body weight administered intravenously every two weeks. The enzyme dose may be increased or decreased after initiation of treatment and during the maintenance phase, based on response – i.e., hematopoietic reconstitution, reduction of liver and spleen volumes, and stabilization or improvement in skeletal findings [Pastores et al 2004].

Affected individuals may require assistance with insurance-related issues and reimbursement because of the high cost of ERT.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT). SRT aims to restore metabolic homeostasis by limiting the amount of substrate precursor synthesized (and eventually subject to catabolism) to a level that can be effectively cleared by the mutant enzyme with residual hydrolytic activity [Dwek et al 2002]. A potential concern regarding the use of SRT is its nonspecificity; i.e., the substrate whose production is blocked or limited is a precursor in the formation of other glycosphingolipids (ganglio- and lacto- series).

Miglustat, the first oral agent for the treatment of individuals with mild to moderate Gaucher disease for whom ERT is not a therapeutic option (e.g., because of constraints such as allergy, hypersensitivity, or poor venous access). Miglustat has been approved in Canada, countries of the European Union, Israel, Switzerland, and the US. In at least three studies, involving more than 30 individuals with GD type 1, miglustat treatment resulted in a significant decrease in liver and spleen volume after six to 18 months, with clinical improvement noted over 24 months. Bone involvement and platelet and hemoglobin values remained stable or were modestly improved [Cox et al 2000, Elstein et al 2004a, Pastores et al 2005]. An increase in bone density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck was reported to occur as early as six months after the initiation of miglustat monotherapy [Pastores et al 2007]. The most common adverse reactions noted in the clinical trials were weight loss (60% of individuals), and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea (80%), which resolved or diminished with longer use of the product.

Eliglustat, an alternative inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthetase recently approved by the FDA, has been shown in clinical trials to be a safe and effective treatment for individuals with Gaucher disease type 1 who are not on any therapy as well as those previously treated with ERT.

In a placebo-controlled phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients not previously on any therapy, those who were given eliglustat for nine months showed a 28% decrease in spleen volume and a 7% decrease in liver volume as well as a 1.2 gm/dL increase in hemoglobin level and 42% increase in platelet count [Mistry et al 2015].

In a separate phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients previously on ERT, eliglustat demonstrated outcomes similar to imiglucerase for the composite primary endpoint of stability in spleen and liver volume, hemoglobin level, and platelet count from baseline to 12 months [Cox et al 2015].

An effect on GD-related bone disease was suggested by a significant increase in lumbar spine T-scores (mean of -1.6 to -0.9) in 19 patients enrolled in the pivotal phase 2 study who were on eliglustat therapy for up to four years [Kamath et al 2014].

Note: (1) Reported side effects of eliglustat were generally mild. (2) The use of eliglustat requires cytochrome P450 2D6 genotyping and avoidance of drugs that may interact through this metabolic pathway. (3) Drug distribution studies indicate that eliglustat, a P-glycoprotein ligand, is not transported across the blood-brain barrier and, thus, not indicated for neuronopathic forms of GD. Preclinical studies involving analogs that may be efficacious for primary CNS involvement are ongoing [Larsen et al 2012].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The use of anticoagulants in individuals with severe thrombocytopenia and/or coagulopathy should be discussed with a hematologist to avoid the possibility of excessive bleeding.

Surveillance

Physicians who are the US regional coordinators for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry (ICGG) and other groups have published recommendations for comprehensive serial monitoring of the severity and rate of disease progression [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004, Vom Dahl et al 2006]:

Medical history (at least every 6-12 months) including weight loss, fatigue, depression, change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities, bleeding from the nose or gums, menorrhagia, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, early satiety as a result of abdominal pressure, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (at least every 6-12 months) including: heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, evidence of bleeding (bruises, petechiae). In children, attention should be given to growth (height, weight, and head circumference using standardized growth charts) and pubertal changes (using the Tanner staging system). Neurologic evaluation is particularly important in the early detection of type 2 and type 3 disease in children. A severity scoring tool has been developed to evaluate neurologic features of neuronopathic GD [Davies et al 2007].

Assessment of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count (with frequency based on symptoms and treatment status). Hemoglobin, platelet count, and coagulation indices should also be assessed prior to surgical or dental procedures.

Other blood tests at the physician's discretion may include measurement of the following:

Serum concentrations of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferanse or alanine amino transferase), iron, ferritin, and vitamins B12 and D.

Plasma activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage-derived chitin-fragmenting hydrolase, and plasma concentration of PARC/CCL18. Levels are typically elevated, and are felt to correlate with body-wide burden of disease. An enzyme dose-dependent decrease in plasma chitotriosidase activity has been observed in affected individuals on ERT; however, up to 40% of affected individuals of European origin are homozygous or heterozygous for a common null variant, confounding interpretation of test results [Grace et al 2007].

Assessment of spleen and liver volumes by MRI or volumetric computed tomography (CT). Parenchymal abnormalities can be identified as well. In situations in which access to an MRI or CT is problematic, abdominal ultrasonography (US) may be performed. Abdominal US may provide information on organ volume and parenchymal abnormalities and also call attention to the presence of gallstones [Patlas et al 2002]. MRI or US are the preferred modalities in the pediatric population.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension. EKG and echocardiography with Doppler studies to identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure

Skeletal assessment

Plain radiographs of the femur (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view), and any symptomatic sites. Radiographs can reflect the status of both the compact/mineralized compartment and medullary compartment. In children, particularly those with signs of growth and pubertal delay, x-ray of the left hand and wrist to determine bone age is appropriate.

Coronal T1- and T2-weighted MR images of the hips to the distal femur. T1-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for following bone marrow infiltration. T2-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for detecting active bone infarcts, osteonecrosis, and osteomyelitis [Maas et al 2002b]. The developmental transition from cellular (red) to fatty (yellow) bone marrow, which normally occurs from childhood to early adulthood, may confound interpretation of the extent of long bone infiltration by Gaucher cells (lipid-engorged macrophages) in affected children younger than age 15 years [McHugh et al 2004]. Semiquantitative methods (BMB score and S-MRI score) have been developed to facilitate serial assessments [Robertson et al 2007, Roca et al 2007].

Other methods include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to identify osteoporosis and risk for pathologic fractures, technetium Tc-99 sulfur colloid nuclear scanning to assess location and extent of infiltration [Mariani et al 2003], and quantitative chemical-shift MRI or spectroscopy to quantify decrease in bone marrow fat content as a marker of bone marrow infiltration [Maas et al 2002a].

Assessment of disease severity. Two recent reports have delineated a means for scoring disease severity, incorporating standard assessments of disease severity [Di Rocco et al 2008, Weinreb et al 2010]. With increasing therapeutic options, the ability to benchmark response may inform the modality of choice and selected regimen [Weinreb et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to offer testing to asymptomatic at-risk relatives so that those with glucocerebrosidase enzyme deficiency or two disease-causing alleles can benefit from early diagnosis and treatment to reduce morbidity.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy may affect the course of GD both by exacerbating preexisting symptoms and by triggering new features such as bone pain. Women with severe thrombocytopenia and/or clotting abnormalities may have an increased risk of bleeding around the time of delivery [Elstein et al 2004b].

Therapies Under Investigation

Chaperone-mediated enzyme enhancement therapy. Pharmacologic chaperones, competitive reversible active site inhibitors, serve as a folding template for the defective enzyme during its transit to the ER. Such agents may restore enzyme activity within the lysosome and clear stored substrate. The drug isofagamine, which has been shown to exhibit these properties in studies of cultured fibroblasts in vitro, is currently in clinical trials to establish its safety and efficacy when given to adults with type 1 GD [Steet et al 2007].

Ambroxol, a mucolytic agent, is also a potential pharmacologic GBA chaperone [Zimran et al 2013].

Histone deacetylase inhibitors increase the quantity and activity of glucocerebrosidase by limiting the deacetylation of heat shock protein 90. As a consequence, there is less enzyme degradation [Yang et al 2013].

Gene therapy. Gene therapy involves the introduction of GBA into hematopoietic stem cells [Enquist et al 2006]. In limited trials, some enzyme has been produced by transduced cells, but enzyme production does not appear to be sustained and therefore does not result in a permanent cure. It is anticipated that transduced cells would not have a proliferative advantage over uncorrected cells. Furthermore, it is unlikely that significant metabolic cross-correction would occur as only small amounts of enzyme are secreted into the circulation.

In a murine model of GD (D409V/null) intravenous administration of a recombinant AAV8 serotype vector bearing human glucocerebrosidase resulted in sustained hepatic enzyme secretion, preventing GL-1 accumulation in presymptomatic mice and normalizing GL-1 levels in older mice [McEachern et al 2006].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The elevation of the serum concentration of several serologic markers (e.g., D-dimer, CCL18/PARC, CD163) in persons with GD is considered a possible surrogate indicator of disease burden that could be used in monitoring treatment response [Shitrit et al 2003, Boot et al 2004, Møller et al 2004]. However, the prognostic value of these markers, their role in patient stratification according to clinical disease severity, and/or determination of the optimum time to initiate therapy are unknown.Most individuals diagnosed with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) have the craniofacial and limb anomalies only. As for all individuals with malformations, a dysmorphology examination is appropriate to exclude other anomalies.

Sophisticated imaging, especially of the CNS, is not routinely indicated unless the clinician detects findings or symptoms that specifically indicate such an evaluation.

Similarly, as most individuals with GCPS have normal development, screening beyond the standard Denver Developmental Screening test is not recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations *

The author is not aware of craniofacial reconstructive surgery being performed on individuals with GCPS as the widely spaced eyes and macrocephaly are generally not sufficiently severe to warrant surgery.

Repair of polydactyly should be undertaken on an elective basis. Preaxial polydactyly of the hands is considered to be a higher priority for surgical correction than postaxial polydactyly of the hand or any type of polydactyly of the foot because of the importance of early and proper development of the prehensile grasp.

Cutaneous syndactyly of the fingers is usually repaired if it is more than minimal.

As is true for any malformation of the feet, surgical correction must be carefully considered. Cosmetic benefits and easier fitting of shoes can be outweighed by potential orthopedic complications.

Seizures are treated symptomatically.

*As with the diagnostic criteria (see Diagnosis), no published data support these recommendations, which are those of the author.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The only recognized preventable secondary complication may be developmental delay, which may be preventable or ameliorated by early intervention.

Surveillance *

Individuals with an OFC that is increasing faster than normal, signs of increased intracranial pressure, developmental delay, loss of milestones, or seizures should undergo appropriate CNS imaging studies to exclude hydrocephalus, other CNS abnormalities, or cerebral cavernous malformations (seen in some individuals with GCPS and large deletions [Bilguvar et al 2007; Author, unpublished observations]).

*As with the diagnostic criteria (see Diagnosis), no published data support these recommendations, which are those of the author.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an SCN1A-related seizure disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Cognitive neuropsychological evaluation

Behavioral neuropsychological evaluation

Electroencephalogram (EEG), including video EEG telemetry where ictal onset or semiology is unclear

Clinical genetics evaluation [Pal et al 2010]

Treatment of Manifestations

Care is best provided by a physician (e.g., pediatric epileptologist) familiar with the pharmacotherapy for this disorder. Seizure control is critical because children with SCN1A-related seizure disorder are at high risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP). In addition, prolonged acute seizures may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010].

Pharmacologic treatment focuses on the observations that abnormal SCN1A channels disproportionately affect GABA neurons [Yu et al 2006] and that the associated seizures respond optimally to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that bind to the GABA receptor:

Clobazam (0.2-1 mg mg/kg/day), part of the standard of care in Europe, is now approved by the FDA in the US. Clobazam is FDA approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009].

Stiripentol (30-100 mg/kg/day) is accepted by epileptologists as an effective therapeutic agent in SCN1A-related seizure disorders. It is part of the early standard of care in Europe, and is used in the US after other conventional anticonvulsants have failed. It is not approved by the FDA for use in the US, but the evidence of effectiveness in SCN1A-related epilepsy is more specific than for any other agent (based on double-blind evaluation of seizure reduction in severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) [Chiron et al 2000]). As a result, stiripentol is not considered an “investigational” therapy. Thanh et al [2002] demonstrated efficacy of the drug when compared with placebo; only moderate side effects including drowsiness, loss of appetite, and occasional neutropenia in infants and young children were observed. In a recent US survey of 82 children with Dravet syndrome, stiripentol was found to be effective in reducing prolonged seizures [Wirrell et al 2013].Stiripentol, which acts directly on GABAA receptors [Quilichini et al 2006], is also a potent inhibitor of the hepatic enzymes CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. As a result, it increases the serum concentration of several common AEDs, including valproic acid, clobazam, and its metabolite nor-clobazam [Thanh et al 2002]. Doses above 50 mg/kg/day are usually not tolerated when used in conjunction with valproic acid and clobazam.Children older than age 12 years may not tolerate stiripentol because of digestive tract side effects and nausea [Thanh et al 2002].

Benzodiazepines. Individuals taking stiripentol must exercise caution in the use of benzodiazepines [Thanh et al 2002]. A single infusion of diazepam and clonazepam appears to be safe [Thanh et al 2002].

Topiramate [Coppola et al 2002]

Valproic acid (10-30 mg/kg/day) [Thanh et al 2002]

Ethosuximide. Can be effective for absence seizures. The dose is usually limited by gastrointestinal side effects, which can be minimized by more frequent dosing.

Levetiracetam (20-80 mg/kg/day). Often effective, but may make seizures worse in some individuals [Caraballo et al 2010].

Potassium bromide. Not FDA-approved in the US, but widely used in Japan with reasonable effectiveness [Tanabe et al 2008].

Phenobarbital. Although effective, phenobarbital is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition. When it is taken in combination with stiripentol, the serum concentration of phenobarbital is increased because stiripentol slows the metabolism and excretion of barbiturates.

Ketogenic diet.

Dressler et al [2010] report that seizures were reduced by more than 50% in 62.5% of persons with Dravet syndrome who stayed on the diet for six months. The findings of Nabbout et al [2011] in 15 individuals also support the use of the ketogenic diet in Dravet syndrome.

Sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN1A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected.

Due to the sedating effects of seizure medications and the possibility of respiratory depression (especially with benzodiazepines and barbiturates), parents are advised to take a CPR course. Routine seizure and personal safety counseling is indicated.

Seizures are not always responsive to conventional AEDs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective for SCN1A-related SMEI seizures [Dravet et al 2002]:

Ethosuximide and high-dose piracetam for myoclonic seizures

Corticosteroids

Immunoglobulins

Non-medical interventions that families have reported to be helpful include the following [Nolan et al 2008]:

Placement of an indwelling venous access device

Creating a portable microenvironment

Having a written emergency department protocol

Establishing emergency routines for the family

Assigning a parent on call to lessen the effect on the siblings

Creating personal time to decrease parent stress

Finding respite care

Contacting an internet support group

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals experiencing atonic seizures or myoclonic-astatic epilepsy should be advised to wear a protective helmet.

Although immunization may trigger a seizure, it does not affect the natural course of the disorder. McIntosh et al [2010] looked retrospectively at a cohort of 14 individuals with Dravet syndrome, and found no effect of immunization on cognitive outcome. These authors suggest that the immunization schedule not be altered and that the risk for fever following immunization could be reduced by providing a scheduled, long-acting NSAID (e.g., naproxen). The treating neurologist may also consider increasing the anticonvulsant dose(s) temporarily around the time of the immunization.

Surveillance

Serial neuropsychological evaluation for neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral deterioration is appropriate.

EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Several antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) which are effective for most forms of epilepsy can make seizures due to heterozygous SCN1A pathogenic variants worse:

Carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and vigabatrin, which can induce or increase myoclonic seizures [Horn et al 1986, Guerrini et al 1998, Ceulemans et al 2004a]

Phenytoin, which may worsen seizures and can induce choreoathetosis [Saito et al 2001]

Rufinamide, which has a pharmacologic mechanism similar to carbamazepine and phenytoin and may exacerbate seizures as well

Acetaminophen, which is hepatotoxic in overdose. Given the possibility of interaction with anticonvulsant medications, especially valproate and topiramate [Nicolai et al 2008], acetaminophen should be avoided. Any of the NSAIDs are effective as antipyretics, and represent much lower risk.

Activities in which a sudden loss of consciousness could lead to injury or death should be avoided (e.g., bathing, swimming, driving, or working/playing at heights).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In addition to the considerations described in Genetic Counseling, other pregnancy-related considerations include the following:

Risk of major malformations (especially due to valproic acid exposure in utero [Samrén et al 1997]) and minor anomalies

Advantages and disadvantages of increasing maternal periconceptional folic acid supplementation to 4000 µg daily, particularly when women are taking valproic acid or carbamazepine during pregnancy

Effect of in utero exposure to anticonvulsants on future cognitive development [Meador et al 2009]

Effect of anticonvulsants on hormonal methods of birth control

Effects of anticonvulsants on conception; the risk for complications in mothers who are on anticonvulsants

Effect of pregnancy on anticonvulsant metabolism

Effect of pregnancy on maternal seizure control

Pregnancy, family planning, and contraception are issues that should be raised with every female near childbearing age who has epilepsy. These considerations are not unique to or (aside from medication selection) significantly influenced by the presence of an SCN1A-related seizure disorder.

Therapies Under Investigation

Cannabis-derived compounds (including cannabidiol [CBD], tetrahydrocannabinol [THC], and marijuana oils), collectively called “cannabinoids,” have received much attention from the media based on anecdotal experiences; however, there is currently no scientific evidence that they are effective. As a result, they should never be used in place of treatments that are known to be effective. A randomized clinical trial is required to determine whether cannabinoid treatment is effective. There has been rapid progress in starting such a trial, and it is expected to begin in 2014. Cannabinoids are bioactive and may have psychotropic and/or systemic side effects; they also may act as an immunosuppressant and an anti-inflammatory in animal models and thus should be studied carefully in immature humans before widespread use is considered [Rieder et al 2010, Bergamaschi et al 2011].

Thalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS) was reported by Andrade et al [2010] in two children with Dravet syndrome with ten-year follow up. One showed “marked improvement” after implantation, whereas the other received no benefit.

Lacosamide has not been studied in SCN1A-related seizure disorders; however, there are theoretic reasons why it may be effective [Curia et al 2009].

Verapamil was reported to help two girls with severe epilepsy resulting from mutation of SCN1A [Iannetti et al 2009]; however, it has not been formally studied.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Persons with epilepsy should be made aware of local motor vehicle driving laws and physician reporting laws.

Hippocampal sclerosis can occur as a secondary feature of SCN1A-related seizure disorders [Livingston et al 2009], but there is no proven role for surgery given the widespread epileptogenic potential in this disorder. Of note, Scheffer et al [2007] reported good outcomes after temporal lobe surgery in two persons with mutation of SCN1B.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with geleophysic dysplasia, the following assessments are recommended if they were not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation:

Height

Joint range of motion by an orthopedist/physiotherapist

Echocardiography to evaluate for evidence of valvular stenosis and/or arterial narrowing

Clinical history for evidence of tracheal stenosis and respiratory compromise

Liver size by clinical assessment and/or ultrasound examination

Eye examination for to evaluate for evidence of glaucoma

Hearing assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Joint manifestations: regular physiotherapy to prevent joint limitation

Heart: valve replacement

Tracheal stenosis: tracheostomy when severe

Surveillance

Annual multidisciplinary examination to assess:

Height

Joint range of motion by an orthopedist/physiotherapist

Heart by echocardiography for evidence of valvular stenosis and/or arterial narrowing

Trachea for evidence of stenosis and respiratory compromise

Liver size for evidence of hepatomegaly

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), examination under anesthesia or sedation is warranted to make a complete assessment of both eyes. The examination includes the following:

Measurement of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the first few minutes of anesthesia

Measurement of corneal diameter

Examination of the anterior segment

Direct gonioscopy to rule out secondary glaucoma

Dilated fundus examination to evaluate for optic nerve damage

If the cornea is opaque, ultrasound biomicroscopy or optical coherence tomography to aid in evaluating the anterior segment structures

Measurement of axial length

If the child is examined under anesthesia, consent may be obtained to perform the appropriate surgical procedure after evaluation under anesthesia.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

The primary goal of treatment is to decrease IOP to prevent vision-threatening complications including corneal opacification and glaucomatous optic atrophy. Early treatment to control IOP will reverse some of these complications in children. A Cochcrane review analyzed the literature that addressed the surgical management of congenital glaucoma but could not draw any conclusions from the analysis [Ghate & Wang 2015].

Surgical treatment. The following approach is based on the work of deLuise & Anderson [1983], Ho & Walton [2004], Bowman et al [2011], Sharaawy & Bhartiya [2011], and Al-Obeidan et al [2014].

PCG is almost always managed surgically. The primary goal of surgery is to eliminate the resistance to aqueous outflow caused by the structural abnormalities in the anterior chamber angle. This goal may be accomplished through an internal approach (goniotomy) or an external approach (trabeculotomy or trabeculectomy).

In goniotomy, the surgeon visualizes the anterior chamber structures through a special lens (goniolens) to create openings in the trabecular meshwork. The goal of the procedure is to eliminate any resistance imposed by the abnormal trabecular meshwork. A clear cornea is necessary for direct visualization of the anterior chamber structures during this procedure.

In trabeculotomy, the trabecular meshwork is incised by cannulating Schlemm's canal with a metal probe or suture via an external opening in the sclera.

In trabeculectomy, a section of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal is removed under a partial thickness sclera flap to create a wound fistula [Morales et al 2013, Chen et al 2014a].

In deep sclerectomy the dissection of a deep scleral flap, deroofing of Schlemm's canal, and preserving the structural integrity of the trabecular meshwork results in improved aqueous outflow outside the anterior chamber.

Note: In contrast to goniotomy, deep sclerectomy, trabeculotomy, and trabeculectomy can be performed in individuals with advanced glaucoma and cloudy corneas.

Glaucoma drainage implants or cyclodestruction may be used to control IOP when initial surgical procedures have failed.

More than one surgical intervention may be necessary to control IOP; thus, significant morbidity is associated with both PCG and the currently available surgical treatment options. Individuals with milder forms of disease who present later in childhood often do well with a single surgical procedure and have an excellent visual prognosis later in life.

Clarity of the cornea and other ocular media, control of the ocular dimensions (corneal diameters and axial lengths), and optic nerve damage are important indicators of the course of the disease following surgery. Reported success rates for each (initial) procedure are approximately 80%. Infants with elevated IOP and cloudy corneas at birth have the poorest prognosis. The most favorable outcome is seen in infants in whom surgery is performed between the second and eighth month of life. With increasing age, surgery is less effective in preserving vision.

Medications. Beta-blockers (e.g., timolol), parasympathomimetics (e.g., pilocarpine), sympathomimetics (e.g., adrenergic agonists and alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandin agonists have all been used. These medications, particularly the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists, may have severe side effects and must be used with caution in infants and children [Maris et al 2005, Papadopoulos & Khaw 2007].

Surgery should not be delayed in an attempt to achieve medical control of IOP.

Medication may be used preoperatively to lower the IOP to prevent optic nerve damage, to reduce the risk of sudden decompression of the globe, and to clear the cornea for better visualization during examination and surgery.

Postoperatively, medication may help control IOP until the success of the surgical procedure is established.

Medical therapy is also used when surgery may be life threatening or has led to incomplete control of the glaucoma [deLuise & Anderson 1983].

Treatment of refractive errors. Amblyopia from uncorrected refractive errors often associated with PCG must be treated to obtain optimal visual function.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Medications such as Phospholine Iodide® (echothiophate) need to be discontinued before surgery, especially if succinylcholine is used because of the danger of prolonged apnea.

Surveillance

Lifelong monitoring is necessary to ensure control of IOP to preserve remaining vision and to prevent further loss of vision; the intervals at which monitoring needs to be performed vary depending on the severity of disease and control of IOP.

Once IOP is controlled and the child is visually rehabilitated, follow up is typically every three months to keep IOP at the "target" level, which depends on the severity of the glaucomatous optic nerve damage and the age of the individual. Standard clinical follow-up tests include optic nerve photography and visual field testing. The complete ophthalmic evaluation often requires examination under anesthesia or sedation in infants and in young and uncooperative children. This process may be challenging to the individual, the family, and the treating physician [deLuise & Anderson 1983, Ho & Walton 2004].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alpha-2 agonists should be avoided in children in the treatment of elevated IOP because of the risk for apnea and bradycardia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing at-risk sibs in the neonatal period may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis of PCG early and in avoiding repeated examinations under anesthesia in at-risk young children.

Molecular genetic testing alone is appropriate in sibs of affected individuals in whom the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified.

If the PCG-related pathogenic variant(s) have not been identified in an affected family member (i.e., no definitive exclusion of the disease is possible by molecular genetic testing), screening including IOP measurements under anesthesia/sedation may be necessary.

Note: The literature is unclear as to timing of the onset of glaucoma, especially in families in whom pathogenic variants have been identified. In this high-risk group, it may be appropriate to perform yearly glaucoma screening into young adulthood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1-DS), the following evaluations are recommended:

EEG (pre-prandial and post-prandial tracings)

Brain imaging, including FDG-PET in selected individuals

Neuropsychological assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Ketogenic diet. Diffusion of ketone bodies across the blood-brain barrier is facilitated by the monocarboxylic transporter 1(MCT1). The ketogenic diet, introduced as a treatment for Glut1-DS in 1991, primarily provides an alternative fuel for brain metabolism. The ketogenic diet creates chronic ketosis by largely replacing carbohydrates and proteins with lipids in varying ratios.

Experience over the past two decades indicates that the ketogenic diet is well tolerated in most cases and is highly effective in controlling the seizures and improving gait disturbance. Of note, seizures may recur even with good dietary compliance [Klepper et al 2005]. Even when seizures are controlled, affected individuals may continue to have neurobehavioral deficits involving cognition and social adaptive behavior [Klepper et al 2002].

In the authors’ experience, the neurologic outcome is influenced by the age at which treatment is initiated: affected individuals treated at a younger age have a better outcome [Alter et al 2015].

Note: Because the ketogenic diet is deficient in L-carnitine, a co-factor that is essential for the metabolism of fats, dietary supplementation with 50 mg/kg/day of L-carnitine is recommended [De Vivo et al 1998].

Affected individuals develop a mild compensated metabolic acidosis when ketotic.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are generally ineffective or afford only limited improvement in the absence of a ketogenic diet. Certain AEDs may be relatively contraindicated as adjunctive treatment in children on the ketogenic diet (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Phenobarbital and valproic acid can inhibit Glut1 transport.

Valproic acid may partially inhibit beta-oxidation of fatty acids.

Acetazolamide, topiramate, and zonisamide inhibit carbonic anhydrase and may potentiate the metabolic acidosis. These agents also can cause kidney stones.

Alpha-lipoic acid (thioctic acid) also has been shown to facilitate glucose transport in Glut4-dependent cultured skeletal muscle cells. Preliminary in vitro studies with Glut1 transport systems have shown similar results. Thus, alpha-lipoic acid supplements have been recommended, without supportive clinical evidence, as a treatment for Glut1-DS. Response has been modest at best; however, the dose taken by mouth may be insufficient to approximate experimental conditions [Kulikova-Schupak et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Clinical observations suggest that early diagnosis and treatment with a ketogenic diet is associated with improved neurologic outcome by nourishing the immature brain during this critical period of growth and development [Alter et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For those who are treated with the ketogenic diet:

L-carnitine supplementation to avoid carnitine deficiency

Proper hydration and avoidance of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors to minimize likelihood of kidney stones.

Avoid carbohydrate-containing foods, intravenous fluids, and medications that will interrupt the state of ketosis. Family care providers often need to serve as the “watch dogs” to intercept these indiscretions.

Valproic acid treatment may be dangerous in individuals on a ketogenic diet because it increases the risk of a Reye-like illness. Additionally, valproic acid may inhibit glucose transport.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Blood ketone concentrations should be monitored daily, weekly or as needed to document the state of ketosis. A blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 3-5 mmol/L is recommended to insure a proper ketotic state.

Urinary measurement of ketonuria is only qualitative, and may be falsely reassuring as a strongly positive urine test for ketones may correlate with hypoketonemia. Blood measurement of ketone concentration is the preferred method.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Barbiturates. Generally, children with infantile-onset seizures are treated with phenobarbital, the most commonly used antiepileptic drug in this age group. In vitro studies indicate that barbiturates aggravate the Glut1 transport defect in erythrocytes of individuals with Glut1-DS [Klepper et al 1999a]. On occasion, parents have reported that phenobarbital did not improve their child’s seizure control or may have worsened their child's clinical condition.

Methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine), which are known to inhibit transport of glucose by Glut1 [Ho et al 2001b], also have been reported to worsen the clinical state of individuals with Glut1-DS [Brockmann et al 2001]. Thus, it is advisable for affected individuals to avoid coffee and other caffeinated beverages.

Valproic acid. The following studies suggest that valproic acid effects in vitro are mixed and the clinical consequences of valproic acid usage in patients with Glut1-DS cannot be predicted.

Valproic acid inhibited Glut1 transport activity in normal and Glut1-deficient erythrocytes by 20%-30%. In primary astrocytes as well as in normal and Glut1-deficient fibroblasts, sodium valproate inhibited glucose transport by 20%-40%, accompanied by an up to 60% down-regulation of GLUT1 mRNA expression [Wong et al 2005].

A study using cultured astrocytes from the Glut1-DS mouse model showed an upregulation of Glut1 activity at lower valproic acid concentrations presumably from the valproic acid associated inhibition of histone deacetylase activity [Kim et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk newborns, infants, and other relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Triheptanoin is a specially designed synthetic triglyceride compound of three, seven-carbon (C7) fatty acids intended to provide affected individuals with the medium-length, odd-chain, fatty-acid heptanoate. Triheptanoin is metabolized rapidly in the liver to form a series of energy-containing metabolites, including heptanoate, which is further metabolized to 4-carbon (C4) and 5-carbon (C5) ketone bodies. Ketone bodies cross the blood-brain barrier via the monocarboxylate transporter, bypassing the deficient Glut1 transporter and providing alternative energy sources to the brain. The metabolites also have the ability to resupply intermediates of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (i.e., anaplerosis) . A pilot study of the effects of ingestion of triheptanoin as a dietary supplement in individuals with Glut1 deﬁciency was conducted and the preliminary results of this trial showed increased oxygen cerebral metabolic rate (CMRO2), decreased seizures, and improved neuropsychological performance [Pascual et al 2014]. A Phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the triheptanoin effects in those with Glut1-DS is currently enrolling affected persons who are currently not fully compliant with the ketogenic diet and continue to have seizures. The primary efficacy objective is reduction in seizure frequency.

Gene therapy. Murine Glut1 was packaged into adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) and systemically introduced into a neonatal mouse model of Glut1 deficiency. Injected mutant mice and relevant controls were assessed during adult life. In AAV9-Glut1 treated mutants, Glut1 RNA and protein levels rose, CSF glucose levels were restored, brain size was normalized and motor defects corrected [Monani et al 2014].

These results provide important proof-of-concept data of the therapeutic effects of restoring Glut1protein function in Glut1-DS and represent an important step toward finding a disease-modifying treatment for the human disease.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a GLB1-related disorder (GM1 gangliosidosis or MPS IVB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental history and assessment to document past and current motor and cognitive function, as a baseline in the event of future psychomotor and/or cognitive regression

Physical examination for evidence of hepatosplenomegaly

Ophthalmologic examination, especially for evidence of corneal clouding and cherry red spot of the macula

Evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist (including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram) to assess for cardiac involvement

Skeletal survey to determine the extent of skeletal involvement

Flexion and extension x-rays of the cervical spine to assess for atlanto-axial instability

Electroencephalogram to assess for seizure disorder, if indicated

Clinical genetics consultation with genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment and quality of life can be optimized when care is provided by specialists in biochemical genetics, cardiology, orthopedics, and neurology, and therapists knowledgeable about GLB1-related disorders.

Surgery is best performed in centers with surgeons and anesthesiologists experienced in the care of individuals with lysosomal storage disorders.

Occupational therapy to optimize activities of daily living (including adaptive equipment)

Physical therapy to optimize gait, comfort, and mobility including orthotics and bracing to improve mobility and flexibility

Early and ongoing interventions to optimize educational and social outcomes are recommended.

GM1 gangliosidosis

For patients with GM1 gangliosidosis type I or II, physiatry for appropriate mobility interventions, such as strollers and wheelchairs

Speech therapy to optimize oral motor skills and manage aspiration risk

Maintenance of adequate hydration and adequate calories for growth. Consider gastrostomy (G-) tube or naso-gastric (NG) tube placement as needed.

Routine management of secretions and risk of aspiration with attention to risk for pulmonary sequelae

Routine management of chronic urinary tract infections secondary to incontinence and chronic dehydration

Aggressive seizure control

Medical management of cardiac involvement

When disease is advanced, provide access to hospice services for supportive in-home care

MPS IVB

Since MPS IVA and IVB are clinically indistinguishable, details of interventions are based on those recommended for MPS in general or specifically MPS IVA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Immunizations. All individuals with GLB1-related disorders should receive routine immunizations. Influenza and pneumococcal immunizations should be administered on schedule because of the low pulmonary reserve of individuals with MPS IVB and the risk for secondary infections due to chronic disease in children with GM1 gangliosidosis.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for all high-risk patients, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].

Anesthesia. Because children with MPS IVB and those with GM1 gangliosidosis with skeletal involvement (spine anomalies, short neck, large head, and atlantoaxial instability) are at increased risk for complications of anesthesia, the following are recommended [Walker et al 2013]:

Preoperative evaluation should include a history of complications with previous anesthetics, as well as any ongoing problems with airway obstruction, the heart, and respiratory function.

Obtain flexion/extension x-rays of the lateral cervical spine [Muhlebach et al 2011; Tomatsu et al 2011; Author, unpublished observations].

Fiber-optic bronchoscopy and smaller than expected endotracheal tubes are often required [Muhlebach et al 2011].

For procedures lasting greater than 45 minutes, intraoperative spinal cord monitoring may be necessary to detect exacerbation of pre-existing spinal stenosis.

Post-operative management may be complicated by pre-existing sleep apnea and/or pulmonary edema [Morgan et al 2002].

Surveillance

GM1 Gangliosidosis

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist; yearly and before/after major medical events

Musculoskeletal

Yearly history and physical examination to evaluate for new skeletal abnormalities that might lead to decreased quality of life

Yearly evaluation for cervical spine instability including detailed physical examination and assessment for new neurologic findings, followed by imaging if indicated

Monitoring of hip joint stability re risk of hip dislocation. Obtain straight and frog-leg imaging if there is pain with movement or a change in mobility (which in neurologically compromised patients can present as inability to ambulate, unexplained crying, or pain).

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years, if there is a history of cardiac dysfunction and/or new symptoms

Growth. Monitoring of growth and nutrition by a nutritionist with knowledge of neurodegenerative or metabolic disease

Eye. Evaluation for visual acuity and corneal clouding every 1-3 years

Seizures. Yearly evaluation by a neurologist; consideration of EEG if there is an acute change in mental status, a sudden decline in activity/milestones, or abnormal movements

MPS IVB

Note: The recommendations for MPS IVA are appropriate for MPS IVB since MPS IVA and MPS IVB are clinically indistinguishable.

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist:

Yearly: track progress and optimize ambulation

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, and as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) and three-minute stair climb test (3MSC) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal and nervous systems

Musculoskeletal. Assessment for the following:

Lower-extremity misalignment: yearly clinical examinations to assess lower extremity alignment

Hip dysplasia/subluxation: yearly radiographs of the hips, as clinically warranted

Cervical spine instability

Note: Solanki et al [2013] recommend the following guidelines for monitoring spinal involvement in those with MPS IVA:

Neurologic examination every six months

Plain x-rays of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion/extension) every six months

Plain x-rays of the spine (AP and lateral thoracolumbar) every two to three years if there is evidence of kyphosis and/or scoliosis

MRI neutral position: whole spine every year

MRI: flexion/extension of the cervical spine every one to three years

These guidelines can be modified as appropriate.

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Respiratory. Assessment for the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea: yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Polysomnography if any clinical suspicion exists.

Restrictive lung disease: assessment of pulmonary function when age-appropriate at diagnosis and then yearly. Note: The benefit of non-invasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use of MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Eye

Yearly: measurement of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination of cornea; examination of the posterior segment

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy: Retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions at onset, then every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Dental. Evaluation every six months

Hearing. Yearly audiogram

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because psychotropic medications have been associated with worsening neurologic disease in adults with Tay-Sachs disease (which is caused by deficiency of the second enzyme in the β-galactosidase pathway) [Shapiro et al 2006], use of these medications in individuals with a GLB1-related disorder should be avoided whenever possible [Shapiro et al 2006].

For persons with MPS IVB, excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the ability to ambulate independently. Thus, it is important that nutrition optimize growth while maintaining a lean habitus.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

No FDA-approved treatments for GLB1-related disorders exist.

While there is currently no effective treatment for GM1 gangliosidosis, multiple interventions are promising, based on in vitro studies and animal models.

Although many lysosomal storage diseases have positive outcomes with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), in one individual with the juvenile form of GM1 gangliosidosis diagnosed prior to onset of symptoms, HSCT did not prevent the development of manifestations. This failure was attributed to the inability of sufficient stem cells to cross the blood-brain barrier rapidly enough to affect lipid accumulation in the central nervous system (CNS) [Shield et al 2005].

Due to the inability of large molecular-weight enzymes to cross the blood-brain barrier, investigators have been studying small molecules as possible chaperones for partially functioning β-galactosidase in the CNS. These chaperones are thought to stabilize the residual endogenous enzyme and facilitate transport to the lysosome.

In an in vitro study using fibroblasts from an affected individual, N-octyl-4-epi-B-valienamine stabilized β-galactosidase, reduced lipid accumulations, and improved lipid trafficking [Higaki et al 2011]. Furthermore, oral administration of this compound to mice with GM1 gangliosidosis led to increased enzyme activity and reduced substrate levels [reviewed in Brunetti-Pierri & Scaglia 2008].

A second chaperone compound, the imino sugar N-butyl deoxynojirimycin (miglustat), also showed promising outcomes in a murine model of GM1 gangliosidosis [Elliot-Smith et al 2008]. Miglustat, which is FDA approved for the treatment of Gaucher disease, has been used in a few individuals with the juvenile form of GM1 gangliosidosis of whom some showed improvement [Author, unpublished observation].

In addition, other imino sugar derivatives have shown increased enzyme activity, facilitated localization of β-galactosidase to lysosomes in fibroblasts of affected individuals [Fantur et al 2012], and shown improved enzyme activity in a mouse model of GM1 gangliosidosis [Takai et al 2013].

Considerable progress has been made in gene therapy in a murine model of GM1 gangliosidosis. See animal model.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Clinical practice guidelines for the evaluation and treatment of individuals with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome have been published [Bassett et al 2011] (full text).

To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with 22q11.2DS, the following evaluations are recommended (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis):

A baseline cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist that includes a chest x-ray, ECG, and echocardiogram; a chest MRI may be required if a vascular ring is suspected.

Measurement of serum ionized calcium concentration and intact parathyroid hormone level to assess for hypoparathyroidism, followed by a formal endocrinology evaluation if abnormal

TSH level

Complete blood cell count with differential. A low absolute lymphocyte count necessitates evaluation of T- and B-cell subsets and referral to an immunologist.

Immunologic evaluation, which may include flow cytometry, immunoglobulins, and T-cell function

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for structural renal defects

Consideration of ophthalmology evaluation

Audiology evaluation

Chest x-ray to evaluate for thoracic vertebral anomalies

Cervical spine films (six views: flexion, extension, AP, lateral, open mouth, skull base) in all individuals over age four years (the age that the cervical spine becomes better ossified)

Clinical evaluation of the palate to screen for palatal anomalies which may affect feeding and speech development

Assessment for possible feeding problems including significant gastroesophageal reflux; difficulty with sucking/swallowing, advancing feeds, addition of textured foods; vomiting and constipation

Speech and language assessment by age one year given that almost all children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome have delay in emergence of language and would benefit from early intervention strategies. In addition, such an evaluation aids in the diagnosis of a palatal abnormality/VPI.

As needed:

Evaluation of children with short stature (height below the 2nd percentile) by an endocrinologist for possible growth hormone deficiency

Evaluation by a psychologist or psychiatrist of any person with evidence of anxiety, mood disorder, behavioral differences, or frank psychosis

Evaluation by a hematologist of any person with a history of a bruising/bleeding disorder

Treatment of Manifestations

Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: allergy, audiology, cardiology, cardiac surgery, child development / psychology, dental, endocrine, ENT, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, general surgery, immunology, clinical genetics, neurology, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, psychiatry, pulmonary, rheumatology, speech, and urology.

Low serum calcium concentration warrants calcium supplementation in a standard manner and, when possible, referral to an endocrinologist/nephrologist because of the increased risk of renal calculi in individuals on long-term calcium supplementation.

Feeding difficulties should be evaluated by a gastroenterologist to assess for possible structural abnormalities such as intestinal malrotation/nonrotation, Hirschsprung disease, and late-onset diaphragmatic hernia [McDonald-McGinn et al 2004].

Strategies for addressing feeding difficulties include: modification of spoon placement when eating; treatment for gastroesophageal reflux with acid blockade, prokinetic agents, postural therapy; and medication to treat gastrointestinal dysmotility and to facilitate bowel evacuation [Dinulos & Graf 1998, Eicher et al 2000].

Early intervention (occupational therapy, physical therapy) and speech therapy/the introduction of sign language should be instituted by age one year or at presentation in childhood because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay. Later, educational and behavioral therapy are often warranted.

Growth hormone deficiency, if present, should be treated as in the general population.

Immune deficiency generally requires no specific intervention except treating infections aggressively. Rarely, prophylactic antibiotics, IVIG therapy, or thymic transplantation are required.

Early diagnosis and early intervention for psychiatric illnesses improve long-term prognosis in individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder [Clarke & O’Callaghan 2003] and other disorders including autism, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder/attention deficit disorder (ADHD/ADD) [Vorstman et al 2006, Bassett et al 2011].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infants with lymphocyte abnormalities should not be immunized with live vaccines (i.e., oral polio, MMR). Their immune status should be reevaluated in childhood before receiving live vaccines.

Antibody studies to assess results of immunizations are warranted.

Irradiated blood products are recommended until normalization of the immune system can be confirmed.

Serum ionized calcium concentration should be measured pre- and postoperatively to avoid hypocalcemic seizures due to physical stress.

Consider the following:

Assessment of carotid arteries prior to surgical procedures involving the pharynx

Possible effects on speech prior to adenoidectomy

Assessment of cervical spine anomalies prior to hyperextension of the neck during surgical procedures/athletic pursuits, such as tumbling

Pre- and postoperative sleep studies when performing pharyngeal procedures

Assessment of platelet volume and function prior to surgical procedures

Surveillance

Affected individuals require follow up as needed on a "system by system" basis:

Monitoring for hypocalcemia, including ionized calcium level every three to six months in infancy, every five years through childhood, and every one to two years thereafter

Monitoring of calcium levels preoperatively and postoperatively, and regularly during pregnancy

Thyroid studies annually

Reevaluation of immunologic status between age nine and 12 months; consideration of repeat immunologic evaluation prior to any live virus vaccine

Annual complete blood count and differential

Repeat ophthalmologic evaluation between age one and five years, or as needed based on symptoms

Evaluation of nasal speech quality after language emersion to screen for VPI

Repeat audiology evaluation in infancy and prior to school enrollment

Routine surveillance for the development of scoliosis

Routine dental care with consideration of sealants in those individuals with enamel hypoplasia/increased incidence of caries

Regular developmental assessments benefit the child and assist the school in providing appropriate remediation.

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist can apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Carbonated drinks and alcohol consumption may exacerbate hypocalcemia. Caffeine intake may contribute to or worsen anxiety.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women must be monitored medically, taking into account any preexisting conditions including congenital heart disease, scoliosis, and asthma. Additional surveillance should include calcium, thyroid, and platelet levels. In addition, changes in mental status/behavior should be referred for immediate evaluation by a mental health care provider.

A fetus at high risk of having the condition should undergo a level II ultrasound with fetal echocardiogram to evaluate for the following anomalies : congenital heart disease; airway, palate, swallowing, and gastrointestinal differences possibly leading to polyhydramnios (congenital diaphragmatic hernia, tracheoesophageal fistula, subglottic stenosis, vascular ring, laryngeal web, and cleft palate/cleft lip/palate); renal anomalies; skeletal differences such as club foot and craniosynostosis; and umbilical and inguinal hernia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Phelan-McDermid syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

A complete physical and neurologic examination

Determination of head circumference, height, weight, and other anthropometric measurements

A medical history, focusing on feeding problems, increased incidence of infection, evidence of kidney malfunction and/or gastroesophageal reflux, and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for ureteral reflux, dysplastic kidney, multicystic kidneys, and other renal problems

Liver function tests may be warranted given that two individuals had autoimmune hepatitis and liver failure [Tufano et al 2009, Bartsch et al 2010]

Brain imaging studies (MRI, CT scan) in individuals with microcephaly and in individuals with symptoms suggestive of increased intracranial pressure from arachnoid cysts, including irritability, incessant crying, severe headache, cyclic vomiting, and seizures

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation to assess motor, cognitive, social, and vocational skills

Comprehensive speech/language evaluation including an audiologic examination

A clinical genetics consultation to discuss clinical manifestations, prognosis, natural history, therapies, and recurrence risks

Neurologic consultation to evaluate delays secondary to hypotonia and to monitor acquisition of major milestones

An EEG in individuals with seizures to help determine the appropriate antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). An EEG may also be used to detect subclinical seizure activity.

Evaluation of feeding problems (usually consisting of swallowing or sucking difficulties) by a feeding specialist and/or occupational therapist and speech pathologist

Evaluation of a child with autistic-like features by a child development specialist to identify early intervention programs to meet the child's developmental needs and to minimize atypical behaviors such as tactile defensiveness, anxiety, and self-stimulation

Evaluation for hypothyroidism in individuals who experience changes in behavior including lethargy, decreased activity, cognitive regression, and loss of coordination

Evaluation by an audiologist experienced in testing severely delayed children if hearing deficits are suspected because of recurrent ear infections and lack of expressive speech

Ophthalmologic examination in individuals with strabismus or other indications of visual impairment; assessment of cortical visual impairment by a team including physical therapists, occupational therapists, orientation and mobility specialists, pediatric neurologists, and pediatric ophthalmologists

Sleep study to evaluate for sleep apnea if sleep disturbance is present

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Regular professional dental hygiene, routine brushing, and fluoride treatment

Oral-motor therapy to alleviate chewing and swallowing problems

Consultation with a pediatric orthodontist regarding malocclusion and need for orthodontic intervention

Routine protocols to alleviate sleep apnea. If other sleep disturbances are present, establishing a bedtime routine can calm and soothe the child. Melatonin has been used to treat insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders with 85% of parents reporting improved or normal sleep [Andersen et al 2008]. Although no controlled studies have been performed in Phelan-McDermid syndrome, melatonin treatment has been used to improve sleep in some children.

Tympanostomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections. If hearing is impaired, management with hearing aids should be considered.

Resolution of cardiac, renal, respiratory, immunologic, thyroid, and other medical issues according to standard protocols

Surgical removal of ingrown toenails to prevent infection

Use of pressure stockings and elevation of the foot of the bed for lymphedema.

Early intervention programs, intensive physical and occupational therapies, adaptive exercise and sports programs, and other therapies to improve coordination and strength

Therapies to improve verbal and nonverbal communication because perceptive language is often more advanced than expressive language. Sign language, picture exchange systems, and computer touch screens may augment communication.

Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified

Walkers or other assistive walking devices

Nutritional assessment for individuals with persistent gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and/or cyclic vomiting. GER may be treated in infants by thickening formula, smaller feedings, and positioning, and in older children by avoiding spicy food and refraining from eating within two to three hours of bed time. In some cases, medication is required to control GER. In the most persistent cases, surgery (fundoplication) may be required.

As in the general population, medication as indicated to help reduce hyperactivity, anxiety, and self-stimulatory behavior

Intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration in individuals with recurrent vomiting; neurologic evaluation to assess cyclic vomiting, particularly to address issues of increased intracranial pressure. If increased intracranial pressure is caused by an arachnoid cyst, surgery may be warranted.

Vigilance by parents or caregivers in monitoring children, particularly those who can walk or run independently, as children may be impulsive and unaware of the consequences of their behavior

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations

Evaluation by a neurologist for changes in behavior or regression of skills

Monitoring for symptoms (e.g., vomiting, incessant crying, irritability, severe headaches) that may indicate increased intracranial pressure secondary to a subarachnoid cyst

Routine monitoring of cardiac abnormalities

Monitoring for lymphedema that may occur in teenage or adult years; in severe cases, monitoring by a vascular surgeon

Routine dental examinations to monitor problems such as malocclusion, crowding, and accelerated tooth decay caused by poor enamel formation attributable to recurrent antibiotic therapy, acid reflux, and extended use of bottle feeding

Ophthalmologic examination at routine intervals by a specialist trained in evaluating individuals with developmental delay

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposure to high temperatures and extended periods in the sun should be avoided because individuals with 22q13.3 deletion have reduced perspiration and tend to overheat easily.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Intranasal insulin (INIT).

Schmidt et al [2009] reported improved motor skills, cognition, and behavior in five of six children with Phelan-McDermid syndrome given INIT.

Risperidone.

Pasini et al [2010] reported that low-dose risperidone treatment improved behavior, mood, and sleep in an 18-year-old female with Phelan-McDermid syndrome. Risperidone has been shown to exert a dose-dependent effect on glutamate receptors in animal models. These authors suggest that the therapeutic effects they observed may be related to the dose-dependent effects on a subset of glutamate receptors altered by SHANK3 haploinsufficiency.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with 3-M syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of joint mobility by physical examination

Assessment of gonadal function in pubertal males by physical examination and serum concentrations of FSH, LH, and testosterone

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The predominant management issues are ultimate adult stature and growth:

Surgical bone lengthening may be an option for some.

Adaptive aids for people with short stature are appropriate. Significant joint laxity should prompt orthopedic evaluation and measures to control the development of arthritis. Males with 3-M syndrome should be referred for endocrinologic evaluation regarding gonadal function at puberty.

Treatment with growth hormone is indicated in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency, but treatment of children with normal serum concentration of growth hormone is experimental. GH treatment should be carried out in a center with experience in managing growth disorders.

Note: (1) Although most children with 3-M syndrome are evaluated for growth hormone deficiency, only one individual has been reported with an incomplete response to growth hormone (GH) stimulation, suggesting partial deficiency of GH [Miller et al 1975]. (2) Several individuals with short stature have been treated with exogenous GH without positive result [Miller et al 1975]. One report suggested that high-dosage GH treatment may be effective in 3-M syndrome [van der Wal et al 2001]. No obvious demonstration of growth hormone efficiency has been published to date [Huber et al 2011].

Hip dislocation has been reported, probably secondary to joint laxity [Badina et al 2011, Huber et al 2011].

Surveillance

Monitoring of growth every six to 12 months on standard growth charts with special attention to growth velocity is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs allows for early orthopedic evaluation and measures to control the development of arthritis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Management of pregnancy for affected women is identical to that for women with other forms of dwarfism or small stature, which is mainly to reduce the risk of premature birth.

When a fetus is diagnosed prenatally (usually as the result of molecular genetic testing of an at-risk sib), no special surveillance during the pregnancy is warranted and no special issues regarding delivery have been identified.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a GRIN2A-related speech disorder and epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a speech and language pathologist

Epilepsy consultation (if not done at the time of initial assessment)

Sleep-deprived or sleep EEG with monitoring to capture slow-wave sleep (if not done at the time of initial assessment), as this is essential to diagnosing or excluding continuous spike-and-wave in sleep (CSWS).

Neuropsychological assessment

Hearing testing

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Speech/language deficits. Individuals with significant speech/language deficits may benefit from therapy by a speech pathologist. The therapies, which are individualized to the specific speech disorder, often include linguistic approaches and augmentative and alternative communication [Murray et al 2014].

Seizures, if present, should be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Many different AEDs may be effective, and no one medication has been demonstrated to be effective specifically for GRIN2A-related disorders.

In one individual a good response to refractory epilepsy was achieved with topiramate [Venkateswaran et al 2014].

In one individual seizure burden was reduced with the addition of memantine; however, cognitive function did not improve [Pierson et al 2014].

Ketogenic diet and vagal nerve stimulator may also be considered in patients with refractory epilepsy.

Treatment for epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS) and Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) includes AEDs such as valproic acid, benzodiazepines, and corticosteroids. Sulthiame, ethosuximide, and levetiracetam may also be effective.

Of note, intravenous immunoglobulin has not been proven to be efficacious [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

AEDs are associated with possible adverse reactions (e.g., sedation, gastrointestinal symptoms, changes in appetite [increase or decrease], weight gain or loss, and rash) which vary according to the specific medication. Patients on AEDs should be monitored closely for adverse reactions and, if they develop, a change to an alternate AED should be considered.

Corticosteroids are associated with a wide variety of possible adverse reactions, including weight gain with cushingoid appearance, skin thinning and purpura, alopecia, acne, posterior subscapular cataract, glaucoma, exophthalmos, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, gastrointestinal upset, pancreatitis, hypokalemia, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, myopathy, behavioral/psychiatric disturbance, diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, and increased infection risk. If complications of corticosteroid therapy become of concern, gradual tapering and alternate therapy should be considered.

Surveillance

Routine monitoring of speech and language by a speech pathologist should be considered for all children, particularly those diagnosed before reaching school age.

Developmental surveillance should be conducted in all affected children.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In individuals with epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS), phenytoin, barbiturates and carbamazepine should be avoided as they are rarely effective, may worsen the EEG, and have negative effects on neuropsychological outcomes [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the GRIN2A pathogenic variant found in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment. Of note, some individuals heterozygous for a GRIN2A pathogenic variant who have only relatively mild speech dysfunction may benefit from early evaluation and intervention by a speech and language pathologist.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type I (GSDI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Serum/plasma concentration of glucose, lactic acid, uric acid, 25(OH)-vitamin D, and lipids including cholesterol and triglycerides

Complete blood count to evaluate for neutropenia in individuals with GSDIb and those with GSDIa due to homozygosity for the p.Gly188Arg pathogenic variant in G6PC

Measurement of length or height and weight and calculation of body mass index

Evaluation of nutritional status

Liver imaging to evaluate for hepatomegaly

Liver function tests

Kidney imaging to evaluate for renomegaly

Kidney function tests

Platelet function assay to evaluate platelet function

Measurement of bone density (after the first decade)

Screening to detect systemic and pulmonary hypertension

Metabolic specialist consultation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Guidelines for management have been published by the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2014] (full text).

Treatment includes care by a metabolic team familiar with the medical issues associated with long-term management of persons with GSD. At a minimum, such a team should include the following:

Metabolic specialist familiar with the multisystem nature of GSDI. This individual should monitor current medical issues while providing anticipatory guidance and feedback regarding potential future medical issues (e.g., malignant transformation of liver adenomas, kidney stone management).

Metabolic nutritionist who monitors nutritional adequacy, weight management, food choices, and timing of cornstarch and food intake, and who works with the individual and/or family to assure understanding of the parameters of compliance at different life stages

Health care provider (nurse, genetic counselor, physician assistant) familiar with the inheritance of GSDI who can address questions related to implications of this diagnosis for other family members and future childbearing of the affected person. Such an individual may focus on health care compliance by assisting affected children to transition to independent understanding and management of their GSDI-related health care issues.

Care teams often establish relationships with additional health care workers including:

Medical social worker to assist with formula acquisition and access to community-based services (e.g., access to regular exercise and physical activity plans) and provide early intervention for long-term health management and wellness;

Psychologist with experience in helping affected individuals cope with eating disorders and chronic illness.

Medical Nutrition Therapy Goals

Maintain

normal glucose levels and prevent hypoglycemia:

Frequent daytime feedings. Small frequent meals and snacks high in complex carbohydrates with additional feedings between meals and before bedtime are recommended (monitoring of blood glucose concentration may help adjust feeding schedules to meet individual needs).

Nighttime intragastric continuous glucose infusion through a nasogastric tube or a gastrostomy tube. An optimal infusion should provide 8-10 mg/kg/min glucose in an infant and 6-8 mg/kg/min glucose in an older child.

Uncooked cornstarch orally can be started during infancy [Wolfsdorf & Crigler 1999, Weinstein & Wolfsdorf 2002]. Cornstarch should be given between meals or before bedtime so as not to interfere with appetite at meal time.

Argo® is the preferred brand in the United States in terms of both taste and sustainability. Other brands should be used with caution, and randomly switching between brands is not recommended. A modified cornstarch, waxy maize extended-release cornstarch, Glycosade®, is available in Europe and the United States for overnight treatment [Ross et al 2016].

There is no consensus on the age at which cornstarch therapy should be initiated but a trial is often introduced between ages six months and one year. Amylase is required to digest cornstarch and may not be present until age two years.

The severity and recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes determines the timing of cornstarch therapy initiation via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube in infancy and childhood and oral ingestion in teenagers and adults.

Note: Recommendations for uncooked cornstarch dosing are: 1.6 g/kg body weight every four hours for infants, 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight every six hours for young children through puberty, and 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight given before bed time for adults. Dosing for modified cornstarch should be decided under the guidance of a metabolic treatment team using frequent glucose monitoring.

Provide

optimal nutrition for growth and development:

Complex carbohydrates (60%-70% of recommended total energy intake) including cornstarch and starches from whole-grain bread, rice, and potatoes for children and adolescents and rice cereals for infants

Note: (1) Intake of sucrose and fructose should be restricted for infants and older children. Avoid sugar, fruits, fruit juice, high-fructose corn syrup, sorbitol, cane juice, and other foods that cannot be broken down into glucose. (2) Intake of lactose and galactose should be limited. One serving per day for an older child usually entails 1.5 ounces of cheese OR 1 cup of yogurt OR 1 cup of skim milk. (3) Blood glucose monitoring for hypoglycemia is important so that overtreatment with cornstarch may be avoided. If excess weight gain occurs, consider decreasing the amount of cornstarch gradually over time and mixing cornstarch in water instead of Prosobee® or Tolerex®.

Protein (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) of high quality, high biologic value (e.g., protein low in fat). Soy formula (Prosobee®) and soy milk (lactose/galactose free) can be used both in infancy and childhood for carbohydrate and protein needs.

Note: (1) Avoid soy milks that are sweetened with sucrose; the ones with rice syrup or brown rice syrup can be taken. (2) Soy milk mixed with cane sugar should be avoided.

Fat (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) as part of a low-fat diet that includes heart-healthy fats such as canola oil and olive oil. Note: Families need explicit guidelines on fat intake as part of monitoring total energy intake and avoiding excessive weight gain.

Calcium and vitamin D supplements to support bone growth and mineralization. If the individual is not on calcium-fortified soy milk, calcium citrate or calcium carbonate with vitamin D is recommended to meet RDA for age needs and to prevent nutritional deficiencies.

Iron supplements in complete multivitamins with minerals (100% RDA iron and zinc) to avoid anemia and iron deficiency

Treatment of Other Manifestations

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is used to prevent gout when dietary therapy fails to completely normalize blood uric acid concentration, especially after puberty.

Lipid-lowering medications, such as HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and fibrate (e.g., Lipitor®, gemfibrozil), are used when lipid levels remain elevated despite good metabolic control, especially after puberty.

Citrate supplementation may help prevent or ameliorate nephrocalcinosis and the development of urinary calculi.

In young children, an initial dose of 1 mEq/kg/day in liquid form divided into three doses should be instituted. The dose should be increased based on urinary citrate excretion.

In older children and adults, potassium citrate tablets can be started at a dose of 10 mEq/3x/day. Citrate use should be monitored as it can cause hypertension and life-threatening hyperkalemia in affected individuals with renal impairment. Sodium levels should also be monitored.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as captopril are used to treat microalbuminuria, an early indicator of renal dysfunction.

Kidney transplantation can be performed for ESRD.

Hepatic adenomas can be treated with surgery or other interventions including percutaneous ethanol injections and radiofrequency ablation.

Liver transplantation can be considered when other interventions have failed.

Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can be used to treat recurrent infections:

G-CSF may increase the number and improve the function of circulating neutrophils.

G-CSF may improve the symptoms of Crohn's-like inflammatory bowel disease in individuals with GSDIb.

G-CSF should be administered subcutaneously starting at 1.0 μg/kg given daily or every other day. The G-CSF dose should be increased stepwise at approximately two-week intervals until the target absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of greater than 500 to up to 1.0 x 109/L is reached.

Standard management of individuals with platelet dysfunction/von Willebrand disease include antifibrinolytics and deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP), which acts by stimulating factor VIII from endothelial cells and improving von Willebrand factor activity and the platelet release reaction. However, DDAVP should be used with caution due to the risk for fluid overload and hyponatremia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Improve hyperuricemia and hyperlipidemia and maintain normal renal function to prevent the development of renal disease.

Maintain lipid levels within the normal range to prevent atherosclerosis and pancreatitis.

Surveillance

Follow GSDI guidelines published recently through a group of experts in the field [Kishnani et al 2014].

Annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys for nephrocalcinosis should be initiated after the first decade of life.

Surveillance of the liver may include the following:

In younger children (age <16 years), liver ultrasound performed at diagnosis and thereafter every 12 to 24 months. In affected individuals who are 16 years and older, liver computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning using intravenous contrast should be done every six to 12 months to monitor for hepatic adenoma formation [Franco et al 2005].

Hepatic profile: serum AST, ALT, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR, and aPTT, and creatinine every six to 12 months to monitor for liver damage

When hepatic adenoma is detected. Abdominal CT/MRI with contrast should be performed in older individuals or individuals within the pediatric age group once adenomas are detected on ultrasound. Imaging should be repeated every 6-12 months or more often depending on laboratory and clinical findings. Liver imaging studies (MRI/CT scan) should evaluate liver size, adenomas, evidence of portal hypertension, or features suggestive of liver carcinoma (nodules, heterogeneous echogenic shadows) [Franco et al 2005].

Note: Serum AFP and CEA levels are not reliable markers of hepatocellular carcinoma [Shieh et al 2012].

For those individuals treated with G-CSF serial blood counts should be performed approximately every three months to assess response to treatment and, although the risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is low, to evaluate for the presence of myeloblasts in the blood. Any imaging performed for liver surveillance (e.g., ultrasound, CT, or MRI) should include measurements of the spleen to identify and monitor splenomegaly.

Cardiovascular surveillance

Systemic blood pressure measurements should be obtained at all clinic visits beginning in infancy.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension by echocardiography every three years beginning at age ten years (or earlier if symptoms are present) is appropriate.

25(OH)-vitamin D levels should be monitored routinely and treated as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Maintain a low-sucrose, low-fructose diet.

Limit galactose and lactose intake to one serving per day.

Due to potential negative effects of sex hormones on hepatic adenomas, combined oral contraception must be avoided in women with GSDI, especially those with adenomas [Sechi et al 2013, Austin et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of sibs of a proband as early as possible allows for prompt diagnosis and treatment with much-improved outcome. Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Evaluation by a metabolic physician soon after birth for symptoms pertaining to GSDI if the family-specific pathogenic variants are not known or if molecular genetic testing is not available.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although successful pregnancies have been reported in women with GSDI, certain precautions should be taken:

Pre-pregnancy counseling regarding diet to avoid low blood glucose and to stress the importance of blood glucose monitoring prior to and during pregnancy

Baseline ultrasound of liver and kidneys prior to pregnancy

Consideration of referral to high-risk obstetrician

Review of medications prior to conception to weigh risks and benefits:

Exposure to ACE inhibitors in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can cause fetal damage and death.

No data on the use of allopurinol during pregnancy in humans exist; however, high doses have been shown to interfere with embryo development in animal models.

Lipid-lowering drugs may also lead to adverse fetal effects and should be avoided during pregnancy.

Metabolic control should be followed closely throughout the pregnancy. Because carbohydrate requirements may increase with pregnancy, glucose levels should be monitored closely and treated accordingly [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Abdominal ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 weeks. Sechi et al [2013] reported an increase in the size of pre-existent adenomas and the development of new adenomas during pregnancy and recommended monitoring by imaging before, during, and after pregnancy. Resection of large (≥5 cm) or growing adenomas before pregnancy has been recommended [Terkivatan et al 2000].

Renal function should be followed closely, as this may worsen during pregnancy [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010]. Development of renal calculi has been reported in pregnant women with GSDIb [Dagli et al 2010].

Glucose infusion during labor has been used [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Platelet count, hemoglobin, and clotting studies should be performed because of the potential for increased bleeding at delivery [Lewis et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Current dietary treatment prevents hypoglycemia and greatly improves the life expectancy of individuals with GSDI. However, long-term complications, such as development of hepatic adenomas that progress to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and progressive renal failure, still occur. The development of new therapies for GSDI has focused on correcting the primary cause of these disorders and avoiding long-term complications. Pilot studies of hepatocyte transplantation have shown that donor cells persist. However, further studies are needed to investigate the long-term efficacy of this approach [Lee et al 2007, Ribes-Koninckx et al 2012]. Gene therapy strategies for GSDIa and GSDIb have focused, most recently, on recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors. These studies have shown promising results in animal models [Chou & Mansfield 2011, Chou et al 2015]. Increased hepatic G6Pase and G6PT activity and improvement of metabolic parameters has been observed using rAAV-mediated G6PC gene transfer in animal models. However, transgene expression decreased over time, indicating that repeated administration may be necessary for long-term treatment in humans. Strategies to integrate the G6Pase transgene into the genome are being investigated, with promising results [Landau et al 2016]. Of note, a relatively low level (3% of normal) of hepatic G6Pase activity is needed for survival and to prevent formation of hepatocellular adenomas [Lee at al 2015]. Correction of renal G6Pase deficiency by gene therapy has been less well studied, and the most efficient methods for transducing kidney cells continue to be investigated [Chou et al 2015]. Identification of AAV serotypes that effectively transduce all affected tissue types (including liver, kidney, and hematopoietic stem cells) would be beneficial [Chou et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Pompe disease, guidelines have been published for the initial evaluation of individuals with:

Infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) [American College of Medical Genetics expert panel; see Kishnani et al 2006b];

Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) [Cupler et al 2012].

Chest radiography

IOPD. Nearly all affected infants have cardiomegaly on chest x-ray [van den Hout et al 2003]. Further, evaluation of apparent lung volume reduction, areas of atelectasis, and any pulmonary fluid may be helpful in directing other therapies.

LOPD. Baseline radiographic evaluation of the lungs and heart silhouette is indicated but only rarely reveals cardiomegaly.

Electrocardiography (ECG)

IOPD. The majority of affected infants have left ventricular hypertrophy and many have biventricular hypertrophy [van den Hout et al 2003].

LOPD. Based on findings of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD, Sacconi et al [2014] recommended Holter monitoring at initial evaluation.

Echocardiography

IOPD. Typically echocardiography demonstrates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with or without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in the early phases of the disease process. In later stages, dilated cardiomyopathy may be seen.

LOPD. Echocardiographic assessment for dilatation of the ascending thoracic aorta has been recommended [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

Pulmonary

IOPD. Most infants have varying degrees of respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory status should be established with regard to cough, presence of wheezing or labored breathing, and/or feeding difficulties. Diaphragmatic weakness caused by excessive glycogen deposits results in mild to moderate reduction of vital capacity; however, objective assessment of pulmonary functions in infants is difficult at best. Most infants display respiratory difficulty with feeds or sleep disturbance [Kravitz et al 2005].

LOPD. Affected individuals should be evaluated for cough, wheezing, dyspnea, energy level, exercise tolerance, and fatigability. Formal pulmonary function tests show pulmonary insufficiency. An attempt to assess ventilatory capacity in the supine position can detect early ventilatory insufficiency. Pulse oximetry, respiratory rate, and venous bicarbonate and/or pCO2 should be obtained to assess for alveolar hypoventilation [van der Beek et al 2011, Cupler et al 2012].

Nutrition/feeding

IOPD. Patients should be evaluated for possible feeding difficulties (e.g., facial hypotonia, macroglossia, tongue weakness, and/or poor oromotor skills) [Jones et al 2010, van Gelder et al 2012].

Assessment of growth (i.e., height, weight, head circumference), energy intake, and feeding (including video swallow study) is appropriate.

All infants should be evaluated for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

LOPD. Assessment of nutritional status as baseline is recommended. Assessment of swallowing difficulty by video swallow study may identify barriers to adequate nutrition and risk for aspiration. Gastrointestinal symptoms similar to those reported in patients with irritable bowel syndrome may be underreported in this population and may undermine quality of life.

Audiologic –

IOPD

Baseline hearing evaluation including tympanometry is appropriate. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for a discussion of age-related methods of hearing evaluation.

Sensorineural hearing loss is now documented in children with IOPD, and hearing aids may be of benefit [van Capelle et al 2010].

Disability inventory –

IOPD and LOPD

All patients should undergo assessment of motor skills and overall functioning to guide subsequent therapies and monitor progression of the disease.

Assessment of risk for falls is recommended.

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

Guidelines for the management of IOPD have been put forth by an expert panel from the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2006b]:

Cardiomyopathy. Medical intervention needs to be individualized as use of standard drugs may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease process (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) [Kishnani et al 2006b].

Arteriopathy. Treatment does not differ from that in the general population.

Conduction disturbances. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are at high risk for tachyarrhythmia and sudden death [Tabarki et al 2002]; 24-hour Holter monitoring is useful in characterizing the type and severity of rhythm disturbance. Management includes avoidance of stress, infection, fever, dehydration, and anesthesia. Medical therapy, if indicated, often necessitates a careful balance of ventricular function and should be undertaken by a cardiologist familiar with Pompe disease.

Muscle weakness. Physical therapy is appropriate to maintain range of motion and assist in ambulation.

Proximal motor weakness can result in contractures of the pelvic girdle in infants and children, necessitating aggressive management including surgery [Case et al 2012].

Scoliosis is frequent, particularly in individuals with infantile- or childhood-onset disease [Roberts et al 2011].

Difficulty with communication is common, and speech therapy as well as the use of augmented communication devices may be helpful.

Nutrition/feeding. Infants may need specialized diets and maximal nutrition, with some requiring gastric feedings.

Persons with LOPD may also develop feeding concerns and are often managed on a soft diet, with a few requiring gastric or jejunal feedings.

Respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory support including CPAP and BiPAP may be required. Inspiratory/expiratory training has improved respiratory muscle strength in adults with LOPD [Jones et al 2011].

Macroglossia and severe respiratory insufficiency in the infantile form may necessitate tracheostomy.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

CRIM Status

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it may be appropriate to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce cross-reactive immunologic material (i.e., who are CRIM-negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment course, optimally before the first infusion [Winchester et al 2008, Kishnani et al 2010, Messinger et al 2012]. Multiple immunomodulation protocols are in use, most of which use rituximab with additional drugs (including mycophenylate mofetil, methotrexate, and sirolimus) [Messinger et al 2012, Elder et al 2013].

Geographic areas in which CRIM-negative status is common include the US and the Middle East [Messinger et al 2012].

Two ways to determine the CRIM status of an individual with Pompe disease are:

Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation performed by an antibody-based method in cultured fibroblasts;

Molecular genetic testing to determine if the pathogenic variants result in total absence of enzyme activity (i.e., are CRIM-negative) [Bali et al 2012].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Myozyme® (alglucosidase alfa) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for IOPD infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Lumizyme® was approved by the FDA in 2010 for use in individuals older than age eight years with LOPD. Age restrictions on Lumizyme were removed in 2014.

Myozyme® and Lumizyme® are administered by slow IV infusion at 20-40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks. Many individuals are now treated with the higher dose.

Complications of ERT

Infusion-associated reactions. In clinical studies, infusion reactions were observed in half of those treated with Myozyme®.

The majority of treated children developed IgG antibodies to Myozyme® within the first three months of treatment. Infusion reactions appear to be more common in individuals with IgG antibodies. Some affected individuals with high sustained IgG titers may have a poor clinical response to treatment (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation).

Development of IgE antibodies is less common but may be associated with anaphylaxis requiring life support measures.

Most infusion-associated reactions can be modified by slowing the rate of infusion or administration of antipyretics, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids. For these reasons – and because many individuals with IOPD have preexisting compromise of respiratory and cardiac function – initiation of therapy in centers equipped to provide emergency care is recommended.

Other. Children with IOPD may have difficulty with anesthesia for procedures related to placement of devices for venous access.

Prognosis

IOPD. The rationale for newborn screening (NBS) is that cardiac status and motor development in infants with IOPD treated early with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are better than in controls [Chien et al 2009]; initiation of ERT before age two weeks is associated with significantly improved gross motor function at age 12 months [Yang et al 2016]. Long-term follow-up data are not yet available on this cohort.

In those in whom ERT was initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory assistance, a majority had improved survival, improved ventilator-independent survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor skills compared to an untreated cohort.

Longer-term survivors who underwent early ERT may show sustained improvement in cardiac and motor function [Prater et al 2012]. ERT reduces cardiac mass to varying degrees and improves the ejection fraction, although there may be a transient decrease in the ejection fraction after the first several weeks of ERT [Levine et al 2008]. ERT results in an increase of the PR interval and a decrease in the left ventricular voltage [Ansong et al 2006].

While the long-term prognosis is as yet unknown, available studies suggest better cognitive outcomes than had been predicted. Of note, assessment of cognitive abilities is difficult in children younger than age five years with IOPD; typical assessment tools frequently underestimate the cognitive abilities of these children [Kishnani et al 2009, Nicolino et al 2009, Ebbink et al 2012]. Estimates of cognitive abilities at age 24 months using the Bayley scales showed preservation of cognitive abilities in infants ascertained by NBS and treated early with ERT [Lai et al 2016].

Pivotal trials of ERT on IOPD show convincing delay in the onset of dependence on ventilator support, but most patients who are ventilator dependent remain so . This finding is consistent with experimental evidence demonstrating relative resistance of skeletal muscle (especially type II fibers) to effective glycogen depletion with administered alpha glucosidase. Predictors of a poor response to ERT include increase in muscle glycogen during therapy, high IgG titers to alpha glucosidase, and CRIM negativity.

LOPD. The major morbidities are motor disability and respiratory insufficiency. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of 90 affected individuals age eight years and older who were ambulatory and free of invasive ventilatory support at baseline, those receiving the active agent had better preservation of motor function and forced vital capacity at the 78th week evaluation point [van der Ploeg et al 2010]. Similar findings were demonstrated in an open-label trial [Strothotte et al 2010].

Quality of life, assessed with the Rand Corporation 36-Item Short Form Survey Instrument (SF-36), had declined in adults with LOPD before initiation of ERT and improved in the first two years of ERT [Güngör et al 2016].

Note: Although the timing of initiation of ERT in infants predicted to have LOPD who have been ascertained by newborn screening is not well established, the Taiwan group uses clinical severity to identify those for whom ERT is warranted before age three years [Chien et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infections need to be aggressively managed.

Immunizations need to be kept current.

Patients and household members should receive annual influenza vaccinations.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) prophylaxis (palivizumab) should be administered in the first two years of life.

Anesthesia should be used only when absolutely necessary because reduced cardiovascular return and underlying respiratory insufficiency pose significant risks.

Surveillance

Close follow up is indicated. Management and surveillance guidelines have been proposed by the ACMG Work Group on Management of Pompe Disease [Kishnani et al 2006b]. Given the wide age range in individuals with LOPD, most of the recommendations can be applied to both IOPD and LOPD.

Twice-yearly clinical review of development, clinical status, growth, and use of adaptive equipment

Assessment of respiratory status with each visit with regard to cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise tolerance:

Chest x-rays at regular intervals

Pulmonary function tests; yearly or more frequently as indicated

Periodic sleep evaluation, which may include regular capnography and pulse oximetry

Monitoring of overall musculoskeletal and functional status to guide therapies aimed at preventing or minimizing physical impairment and its complications. This may include assessment for scoliosis and bone densitometry.

Regular nutritional and feeding assessment

At least annual renal function studies to monitor for secondary complications related to cardiac and/or pulmonary impairment as well as medication effects

Annual cardiology evaluation in those with LOPD and as needed for those with IOPD:

Periodic echocardiography. Aortic dilatation has been detected by echocardiography in late-onset Pompe disease [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring) at regular intervals [Cook et al 2006]. Sacconi et al [2014] noted that enzyme replacement therapy did not prevent development of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD.

Screening for cerebral arteriopathy with aneurysmal dilation and rupture leading to cerebral infarcts (strokes) and death, which have also been reported [Laforêt et al 2008, Sacconi et al 2010]. Screening strategies for these findings are being developed, but care teams should have a high index of suspicion for cerebral arteriopathy if an individual with late-onset Pompe disease develops unexplained stroke-like symptoms [Sacconi et al 2010].

Note: Individuals with LOPD may not be able to tolerate supine positioning in an MRI scanner due to diaphragmatic weakness.

Annual hearing evaluation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Use of standard drugs for treatment of cardiac manifestations may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease. The use of digoxin, ionotropes, diuretics, and afterload-reducing agents may worsen left ventricular outflow obstruction, although they may be indicated in later stages of the disease.

Hypotension and volume depletion should be avoided.

Exposure to infectious agents is to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment with ERT.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the GAA pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Testing of GAA enzyme activity if the GAA pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Most individuals with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) have not reproduced.

Many adults with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) have reproduced. At least one woman treated with ERT during pregnancy and lactation with no adverse effects on the fetus has been reported [de Vries et al 2011]. As would be expected in a woman with a myopathy and respiratory insufficiency, the growing fetus may pose additional complications to the mother’s health. Close respiratory and cardiac surveillance should be initiated in consultation with maternal fetal medicine specialists.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy to correct the underlying enzyme defect is under investigation [Raben et al 2002, DeRuisseau et al 2009, Mah et al 2010]. A Phase I/II trial to investigate the ability of AAV-alpha glucosidase to improve ventilation reported outcomes of children with IOPD treated with ERT. In this trial of phrenic nerve injected AAV-alpha glucosidase and ventilatory training, the rate of ventilatory decline was attenuated in a subset of children, particularly those who were not already dependent on ventilatory assistance full time at the time of intervention [Smith et al 2017].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Experience with bone marrow transplantation in both humans and cattle with acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency is limited; to date, such treatment is not considered successful [Hirschhorn & Reuser 2001].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III), the following are recommended:

Liver ultrasound examination to determine the size of the liver and to identify adenomas if present

Baseline electrocardiogram and echocardiogram

Consultation with a biochemical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

The mainstay of management of GSD III is a high-protein diet with cornstarch supplementation to maintain euglycemia.

In infancy, feeds every three to four hours are recommended. Unlike the diet used to treat infants with GSD I, the diet used to treat infants with GSD III can include fructose and galactose, as individuals with GSD III can utilize these sugars; special formulas are not required.

Toward the end of the first year of life, cornstarch is tolerated and can be used to prevent hypoglycemia. Initially one to three doses per day may be required with typical starting dose of 1 g/kg every six hours. The doses can be titrated based on the results of glucose and ketone monitoring.

A protein intake of 3 g/kg is recommended as gluconeogenesis is intact and protein can be used as a source of glucose. For those who cannot make it through the night on cornstarch and protein, Glycosade® extended-release cornstarch can be used [Ross et al 2015].

A high-protein diet prevents breakdown of endogenous muscle protein in times of glucose need and preserves skeletal and cardiac muscles.

Periods of suboptimal metabolic control can be identified by measuring blood glucose and blood ketone several times per month.

Although hypoglycemia upon awakening is uncommon in older children and adults since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations, monitoring blood glucose concentrations between 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Elevated ketones reflect poor metabolic control as ketones are produced when glucose is unavailable and instead fatty acid oxidation is used as a source of energy. Monitoring blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended; the goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations in the normal range (<0.3 mmol/L). Additionally, morning urine ketone measurements can be monitored with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

Existing skeletal and cardiac myopathies can be improved with high-protein diet and avoidance of excessive carbohydrate intake [Slonim et al 1982, Slonim et al 1984, Dagli et al 2009, Valayannopoulos et al 2011, Sentner et al 2012].

Titration of protein and cornstarch in the diet is the primary treatment for elevated cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, which usually result from suboptimal metabolic control.

Emergency protocol. An emergency protocol to avoid dangerous hypoglycemia should be established. An intravenous (IV) infusion of 10% dextrose with 0.5 normal saline administered at 1.5 times the maintenance rate should be given immediately on admission to the emergency room. Serum concentrations of electrolytes, glucose, and ketones should be monitored. Efforts should be made to correct ketosis as it can induce vomiting and worsen the catabolic state.

Liver transplantation. In GSD III hepatic complications are not the main cause of morbidity. Also, modern treatment strategies and good metabolic control can prevent major complications. Liver transplantation should therefore be viewed as a treatment of last resort for individuals with GSD III. Liver transplantation will prevent hypoglycemia in both GSD IIIa and GSD IIIb; the muscular defect, however, will remain present in individuals with GSD IIIa.

Because liver transplantation does not cure the heart and muscle problems and because transplantation has been associated with worsening myopathy and cardiomyopathy, liver transplantation is only indicated in affected individuals with severe hepatic cirrhosis, liver dysfunction, and/or hepatocellular carcinoma [Davis & Weinstein 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Most of the primary manifestations of GSD III can be diminished or avoided with good metabolic (dietary) control.

When euglycemia is maintained and ketosis is avoided, hepatomegaly regresses and other abnormal laboratory values (e.g., elevated AST and ALT, increased serum concentration of triglycerides) normalize or come close to baseline [Bernier et al 2008].

Myopathy and cardiomyopathy may be partially avoided by good dietary control. New evidence suggests that skeletal muscle metabolism is impaired during exercise in GSD III. Consumption of fructose or sucrose prior to exercise may improve exercise tolerance, but does not completely prevent exercise-induced damage [Preisler et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Surgery. Persons with GSD III undergoing surgery should be admitted the night before the procedure and an IV infusion containing 10% dextrose started within two hours of the last cornstarch dose or the last meal. Glucose and ketone monitoring should continue overnight and during the procedure. IV dextrose infusion should not be stopped abruptly as dangerous hypoglycemia can occur from a hyperinsulinemic state. IV fluids need to be tapered slowly once optimal oral intake has been established and tolerated.

Osteoporosis may occur in adults with GSD III. Good metabolic control leads to improved muscle strength and decreased ketosis. Bone mineralization is adversely affected in acidic environments. In contrast, improved muscle condition and strength increase bone mineralization. Supplementation with vitamin D and calcium is also recommended to augment bone mineralization.

Surveillance

To identify periods of suboptimal metabolic control, blood glucose should be measured between 2 AM and 4 AM or urine ketones should be measured upon awakening at least several times per month.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon in older children and adults upon awakening since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring blood glucose concentrations at 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations less than 0.3 mmol/L. Alternatively morning urine ketone measurements may be assessed with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

The following are appropriate annually:

Measurement of height and weight to monitor growth

Liver ultrasound examination to screen for adenomas and evidence of liver scarring. MRI scans are limited to those individuals with abnormalities on the primary ultrasound screen.

Laboratory studies: LFTs, CK, lipid profile

Echocardiogram to monitor for cardiomyopathy; ECG

Bone density measurements are recommended after growth is complete.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

High sugar intake as excess sugar is stored as glycogen, which cannot be broken down

Steroid-based drugs as they interfere with glucose metabolism and utilization. Long-term steroid usage itself can cause muscle weakness.

Growth hormone replacement therapy as it interferes with glucose metabolism, worsens ketosis, and may theoretically cause liver adenomas to grow

Use the following with caution:

Hormonal contraceptives in women as they can cause hepatic adenoma formation

Statins for control of hyperlipidemia. Use of statins requires CK monitoring because of the potential of exacerbating the muscle disease of GSD IIIa.

Beta blockers as they can induce hypoglycemia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Diagnosis of at-risk sibs at birth allows for early dietary intervention to prevent development of hypoglycemia associated with GSD III.

If the AGL pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing is the best way to determine the genetic status of an at-risk sib.

If the AGL pathogenic variants in the family are not known, diagnosis can be established by presence of fasting ketotic hypoglycemia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Increased monitoring and support are required in pregnancy of women with GSD III as glucose needs will increase. The metabolic requirements will gradually increase throughout the second and third trimesters, and close monitoring of both glucose and ketones is critical to ensure optimal metabolic control. In the third trimester and close to term, it is imperative to maintain ketones within normal levels as ketosis can precipitate uterine contractions and preterm labor. During labor and in the postnatal period, intravenous glucose supplementation must be available at all times to prevent hypoglycemic episodes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type IV (GSD IV), the following evaluations are recommended:

Liver function studies including albumin, transaminases, and coagulation profile

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver size and texture

Referral to a cardiologist for baseline echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (ECG) to assess for cardiomyopathy

Neurodevelopmental evaluation

Neurologic consultation and comprehensive neurologic examination with a baseline assessment of skeletal muscle involvement that can be used to monitor disease progression

Medical or biochemical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, medical or biochemical genetics, and child development.

Hepatic manifestations. Liver transplantation is the only treatment option for individuals with the progressive hepatic subtype of GSD IV who develop liver failure. Of the 18 individuals with GSD IV who have received a liver transplant to date, two required a second liver transplant and six died: four from sepsis, one from hepatic artery thrombosis, and one from cardiomyopathy. The prognosis in persons with GSD IV who undergo liver transplantation is poor because of the significant risk for morbidity and mortality, which is in part attributed to the extrahepatic manifestations of GSD type IV, especially cardiomyopathy [Davis & Weinstein 2008, Magoulas et al 2012].

Selecting appropriate candidates for liver transplantation can be complex. Histologic, molecular, or clinical predictors of disease progression are likely to be useful in stratifying patients prior to liver transplantation [Davis & Weinstein 2008]. Factors such as glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) activity may not be the best predictor of outcome since the level of GBE activity in different tissues can vary by disease subtype and severity.

Neurologic manifestations. Children with skeletal myopathy and/or hypotonia who experience motor developmental delay warrant developmental evaluation and physical therapy as needed.

Cardiac manifestations. For those with cardiomyopathy, care by a cardiologist is warranted. Individuals with severe cardiomyopathy secondary to glycogenosis may be candidates for cardiac transplantation [Ewert et al 1999]; however, consideration of potential contraindications to cardiac transplantation, including myopathy, liver failure, and cachexia, is essential before pursuing this treatment option.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Nutritional deficiencies (e.g., of fat-soluble vitamins) can be prevented by ensuring adequate dietary intake based on frequent assessments by and recommendations of a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver disease.

Bleeding due to coagulopathy can occur especially with surgical procedures; therefore, it is recommended that a coagulation profile be assessed before surgical procedures and fresh frozen plasma be given preoperatively as needed.

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases, albumin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Note: If cardiomyopathy was not observed on the baseline screening echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiograms are recommended every three months during infancy, every six months during early childhood, and annually thereafter.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the GBE1 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, at-risk relatives can be tested so that those with the pathogenic variants can be evaluated for involvement of the liver, skeletal muscle, and heart to allow early diagnosis and management of disease manifestations.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type V (GSDV), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with emphasis on muscle strength/weakness

Basal serum CK activity

Treatment of Manifestations

Aerobic training (on a regular diet). In some individuals, improvement in exercise and circulatory capacity has been reported, probably caused by the increased circulatory capacity, which facilitates delivery of blood-borne fuels [Haller 2000].

In eight individuals who underwent a 14-week aerobic conditioning program in which they pedaled a cycloergometer for 30-40 minutes a day, four days a week at an intensity corresponding to 60% to 70% of maximal heart rate, an increase in work capacity, oxygen uptake, cardiac output, citrate synthase activity, and beta-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity was observed, indicating that moderate aerobic exercise improves exercise capacity in individuals with GSDV [Haller et al 2006].

Nine individuals who underwent an eight-month supervised aerobic exercise training program including five weekly sessions of walking or cycling for no more than 60 minutes, improved their peak power output, peak oxygen uptake, and ventilatory threshold with no evidence of negative outcomes, suggesting that under carefully controlled conditions individuals with GSDV may exercise safely and may respond favorably to training [Maté-Muñoz et al 2007].

A systematic review of physical training for GSDV published in the Cochrane Database concluded that there are no randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials of aerobic training in people with GSDV; however, three studies using small numbers of participants provided some evidence that aerobic training improves fitness without adverse events in people with GSDV. They suggested that it would be safe and worthwhile to conduct larger controlled trials of aerobic training in patients with GSDV [Quinlivan et al 2011].

In a subcohort of 63 patients (out of 239 registered) interviewed for their physical activity habits and whose peak oxygen uptake (and index of peak cardiorespiratory fitness and peak muscle oxidative capacity) were measured, the 32% who were physically active had higher levels of peak oxygen uptake (by 23%, p=0.003) and were more likely to improve their clinical course over a four-year period compared with inactive patients (odds ratio = 225; 95% confidence intervals 20.3 to 2496.7) after controlling for age. Moreover, for 81% of patients in the physically active cohort, clinical disease was reclassified as less severe. Mean peak oxygen uptake was very low, especially in women, where it barely reached the limit (13 mL O2/kg/min or 3.7 metabolic equivalents (METs, with 1MET equaling 3.5 mL O2/kg/min) necessary for independent living. Age also had a negative effect on peak oxygen uptake. However, the peak oxygen uptake in patients who were physically active was 1.5METs higher than in those who were not active. Seven patients (6 physically active) had a peak oxygen uptake of 8 METs, which is the minimum threshold for optimal health.

Three daily habits recommended by Haller [2000] to improve the quality of life:

Avoid intense isometric exercise and maximal aerobic exercise, which triggers cramps and, potentially, myoglobinuria (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Avoid a totally sedentary life, which induces deconditioning.

Engage in regular, moderate aerobic exercise, which improves cardiorespiratory capacity and increases delivery of blood-borne fuels, a sort of permanent "second wind" (i.e., decrease in heart rate and perceived exertion during exercise) effect [Ollivier et al 2005].

Pharmacologic and Nutritional Treatments

Two systematic reviews of pharmacologic and nutritional treatments for GSDV were published in the Cochrane Database [Quinlivan & Beynon 2004, Quinlivan et al 2008]. The authors' conclusions:

There is no evidence of significant benefit from any specific nutritional or pharmacologic treatment for GSDV.

Low-dose creatine supplementation demonstrated a statistically significant benefit, albeit modest, in ischemic exercise in a small number of individuals.

Ingestion of oral sucrose immediately prior to exercise reduces perceived ratings of exertion and heart rate and improves exercise tolerance. This treatment does not influence sustained or unexpected exercise.

A carbohydrate-rich diet was of benefit.

Because of the rarity of GSDV, multicenter collaboration and standardized assessment protocols are needed for future treatment trials.

Pharmacologic treatments

Creatine monohydrate in a placebo-controlled crossover trial with nine affected individuals improved symptoms and increased their capacity for ischemic, isometric forearm exercise [Vorgerd et al 2000]. This positive effect did not result from increased levels of phosphocreatine in muscle. Rather, creatine may have a quenching effect on the potassium-mediated changes in membrane excitability. A subsequent clinical trial with high doses of creatine monohydrate in 19 individuals lowered exercise intolerance [Vorgerd et al 2002]. Thus, the indication for symptomatic therapy with creatine monohydrate needs to be strengthened.

Ramipril, an ACE inhibitor, used in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial in eight persons with GSDV, decreased disability and improved exercise physiology only in those individuals with the ACE D/D genotype (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [Martinuzzi et al 2008].

Nutritional treatments

In a single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study in 12 individuals with GSDV, Vissing & Haller [2003b] found that ingestion of 75 g of sucrose markedly improved exercise tolerance.

Ingesting simple carbohydrates (adult dose: 30-40 g glucose, fructose, or sucrose, or ~440 mL of most commercially available sport drinks; pediatric dose: 20 g) about five minutes before engaging in strenuous exercise such as brisk walking (or physical education classes in the younger individuals) can be helpful [Perez et al 2007, Andersen et al 2008]. In addition to increasing exercise capacity and sense of well-being, the treatment may protect against exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis.

Ingestion of sucrose before exercise combined with an aerobic conditioning program is reasonable [Amato 2003].

Individuals with GSDV can also benefit from adopting a diet rich in complex carbohydrates (i.e., with a high proportion (65%) of complex carbohydrates such as those found in vegetables, fruits, cereals, bread, pasta, and rice) and a low proportion (20%) of fat [Andersen & Vissing 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations and Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To prevent muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis) and myoglobinuria-induced renal damage: follow the exercise and nutritional measures described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual routine physical examination

Annual review of diet

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exercises that involve heavy static contractions or induce severe myalgia should be avoided [Quinlivan et al 2011, Lucia et al 2012].

Exercises that should be avoided in patients with GSDV [Lucia et al 2008] are the following:

Static muscle contractions (e.g., handgrip exercises)

Static muscle contractions or heavy loads on low muscle mass (e.g., weightlifting)

Dynamic exercises at a high-intensity level (e.g., competitive ball games)

Exercises with a high involvement of eccentric (lengthening) muscle contractions (e.g., jumps)

Very intense dynamic aerobic exercise (e.g., running, strenuous swimming, or cycling) except in individuals who are very fit and well habituated

General anesthetics. Risk of acute muscle damage is reported with certain general anesthetics (usually muscle relaxants and inhaled anesthetics), although in practice, problems appear to be rare. One report showed hyperthermia, pulmonary edema, and rhabdomyolysis [Lobato et al 1999]; however, GSDV does not appear to cause severe perioperative problems in routine anesthetic care. Nonetheless, measures for preventing muscle ischemia and rhabdomyolysis should be taken in individuals with GSDV [Bollig 2013].

Lipid-lowering drugs. A study in which 136 individuals with myopathy induced by one of the three lipid-lowering drugs atorvastatin, cerivastatin, and simvastatin were tested for the two more frequent PYGM pathogenic variants (p.Arg50Ter, p.Gly205Ser) revealed 20-fold more PYGM heterozygotes than expected for the general population [Vladutiu et al 2006]. These findings provide preliminary evidence that PYGM heterozygotes may be predisposed to statin-induced myopathy; however, because only two pathogenic variants were assessed, some individuals in this study who were presumed to be carriers could actually be compound heterozygotes. Thus, clinicians should be cautious when recommending statins to individuals who have GSDV or are carriers for a PYGM pathogenic variant.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of GSDV in relatives at risk may improve long-term outcome by heightening awareness of the need to avoid repetitive episodes of muscle damage that may lead to rhabdomyolysis and fixed weakness.

When the family-specific PYGM pathogenic variants are known, molecular genetic testing can be used.

When the family-specific PYGM pathogenic variants are not known, a reliable and accurate diagnosis of GSDV could be reached following the criteria described in Diagnosis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

The condition does not appear to adversely affect pregnancy and childbirth outcomes [Quinlivan et al 2010, Lucia et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy. An adenoviral recombinant containing the full-length human myophosphorylase cDNA was efficiently transduced into phosphorylase-deficient sheep and human myoblasts, where it restored enzyme activity [Pari et al 1999].

Adenovirus and adeno-associated virus-mediated delivery of human phosphorylase cDNA and LacZ cDNA to muscle in the ovine (sheep) model of McArdle disease showed expression of functional myophosphorylase and some re-expression of the non-muscle glycogen phosphorylase isoforms (liver and brain isoforms) in regenerating fibers [Howell et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Vitamin B6 has been used because the overall body stores of pyridoxal phosphate are depleted in GSDV. A beneficial effect has been documented in two individuals, but this requires confirmation [Phoenix et al 1998, Sato et al 2012].

Branched-chain amino acids (BCA). Administration of BCA as alternative fuels to glycogen to six individuals worsened bicycle exercise capacity, possibly because of the free fatty acid-lowering effect of the amino acids [MacLean et al 1998].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with GSD VI, a clinical genetics consultation is recommended:

Treatment of Manifestations

Some individuals with glycogen storage disease type VI (GSD VI) may not require any treatment, but most have better growth and stamina with therapy.

For hypoglycemia, frequent small meals and uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) given one to three times a day may normalize blood glucose concentration and avoid ketosis.

For children and adults with no hypoglycemic episodes, a bedtime dose of cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) can improve energy and well-being [Nakai et al 1994].

When on cornstarch therapy, children have improved growth and bone density and decreased liver size — findings that may be significant when considering lifestyle-related issues [Author, personal observation].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia may be prevented by administration of uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) one to three times a day.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Osteoporosis related to chronic ketosis is common in GSD VI that has not been aggressively treated; treatment with complex carbohydrates or cornstarch may improve bone density.

Short stature and delayed puberty, which also occur in the setting of chronic ketosis, improve with better metabolic control.

Surveillance

Routine monitoring of blood glucose concentration and blood ketones to assess control is recommended as well as monitoring of both around periods of increased activity and illness. Note: Since ketosis is usually more severe than hypoglycemia, blood ketone level is more indicative of control than blood glucose concentration.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations lower than 0.3 mmol/L.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon on waking since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring of blood glucose concentrations at 2 AM to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Height and weight should be measured annually to monitor growth.

Although formal studies are lacking, the theoretic small risk of hepatic adenoma increases with age; thus, annual liver ultrasound examinations are recommended beginning at age five years.

Bone density determinations are recommended after growth is complete.

During pregnancy, women with GSD VI should monitor blood glucose concentrations, given that exacerbations of hypoglycemia may occur.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Excessive amounts of simple sugars to prevent excessive hepatic glycogen deposition

Glucagon administration as a rescue therapy for hypoglycemia because blood glucose concentrations will not increase

Growth hormone for short stature because it usually exacerbates ketosis and often is not efficacious

When hepatomegaly is present, contact sports (or use appropriate cautions)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the family-specific pathogenic variants are known it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk sibs so that early diagnosis can lead to early treatment and avoidance of factors that exacerbate disease.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although clinical and biochemical abnormalities usually resolve with age and most adults are asymptomatic, hypoglycemia can occur during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

An extended-release cornstarch preparation is presently being tested in other types of GSD. This experimental product may improve maintenance of normoglycemia with fasting for a longer duration and may reduce the number of doses of cornstarch required.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with liver PhK deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of blood glucose concentration (normal >70 mg/dL) for two to three days: upon waking in the morning; prior to meals and night time supplementation with oral cornstarch; and after activity

Measurement of blood ketone levels for two to three days: upon waking in the morning; prior to meals and night time supplementation with oral cornstarch; and after activity. Elevated blood ketones (beta-hydroxybutyrate >1.0 mmol/L) could be an indicator of suboptimal metabolic control and pending hypoglycemia.

Liver imaging, if not performed in the past year. The type of liver imaging (ultrasound, MRI, or CT) is determined by factors such as age and underlying liver status (such as liver cirrhosis).

Basic metabolic panel including liver enzymes (AST, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase)

Prothrombin time

Lipid panel (cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations)

Serum creatine kinase measurement (Some individuals with liver PhK deficiency can have muscle involvement)

Baseline echocardiogram (Although cardiac problems have not been reported to occur in PhK deficiency [due to paucity of systematic investigation and lack of knowledge], baseline echocardiogram may be done as a precaution.)

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with muscle PhK deficiency, the following evaluations are suggested:

Physical therapy evaluation

Serum creatine kinase measurement

Treatment of Manifestations

Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia

can be prevented with frequent daytime feedings that are high in complex carbohydrates and protein.

The dose of cornstarch can range from 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg every six hours based on clinical symptoms.

Protein should be given as 15% to 25% of total calories (tailored to the patient’s age) as long as renal function is normal. Protein provides an alternative source of glucose via intact gluconeogenesis.

For signs of

hypoglycemia or ketosis, Polycose® or fruit juice should be given orally (if oral intake is tolerated) followed by a snack high in complex carbohydrates and protein. Blood glucose and ketone concentrations should be monitored periodically to ensure that they return to normal. If oral intake is not tolerated, an IV should be started. An initial glucose bolus (D50, or D10 if D50 not available) may be needed to maintain blood glucose concentrations above 70 mg/dL. The bolus can then be followed by 10% dextrose by IV.

Symptomatic management of liver manifestations such as cirrhosis, liver failure, portal hypertension is appropriate.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Signs and symptoms should be managed as with other muscle GSDs, such as GSD III [Kishnani et al 2010].

Physical therapy evaluation and intervention based on physical status and function

Coordination with a metabolic nutritionist regarding monitoring and optimizing blood glucose concentrations based on levels of exercise and activity

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia. Frequent feedings high in complex carbohydrates and protein are given to prevent hypoglycemia. In some individuals, no additional treatment is required to prevent hypoglycemia. However, some persons with liver PhK deficiency have severe and recurrent hypoglycemia which can be prevented by ingestion of uncooked cornstarch (range of cornstarch dose 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg) one to four times per day, depending on the severity of the condition. Some individuals may require cornstarch only before bedtime. Requirements for cornstarch tend to lessen with age.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Little published information is available on prevention of primary manifestations in individuals with muscle PhK deficiency; however, regular moderate aerobic exercise may be beneficial. Intense exercise should be avoided as it may promote rhabdomyolysis and muscle cramping.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Liver PhK deficiency. Perioperative care for elective procedures should include IV glucose infusion preoperatively which should start as soon as the patient is made NPO. Continue with intraoperative and postoperative IV glucose infusion to prevent hypoglycemia. IV glucose should be tapered off gradually as the patient tolerates the usual diet. Abrupt discontinuation of fluids could result in hypoglycemia.

If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with liver PhK deficiency may have increased CK levels and myopathy [Author, personal experience]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule. Any immunizations that may prevent illness, such as influenza leading to hypoglycemia, should be offered.

Muscle PhK deficiency. Lipid-lowering drugs (e.g., statins) that can worsen or unmask myopathy should be used cautiously.

If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with muscle PhK deficiency have increased CK levels and myopathy. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule.

Surveillance

Liver PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement

Regular monitoring of blood glucose concentration and ketones, as recommended by a metabolic physician and nutritionist. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during times of stress including illness, intense activity, rapid growth, puberty, and pregnancy; and at any time in which intake of food is reduced or meal and/or cornstarch dose or scheduling is altered. Note: It is possible that blood glucose concentrations may be normal when moderate to large ketosis in liver PhK deficiency results from increased fatty acid oxidation and upregulated gluconeogenesis. The role of ketone monitoring in this setting as a marker of metabolic control requires further systematic investigation.

Liver imaging. In children younger than age 18 years, liver ultrasound examination every 12 to 24 months. With increasing age, consideration of CT or MRI using intravenous contrast to evaluate for complications of liver disease

Follow-up echocardiogram. No guidelines established. Follow up approximately every two years or earlier if symptoms are present

Muscle PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement.

Regular evaluation by a physical therapist to look for progression in symptoms and to guide exercise program

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Liver PhK deficiency. Affected Individuals with should avoid the following:

Large amounts of simple sugars as they will increase liver storage of glycogen.

Prolonged fasting

High impact contact sports if significant (moderate to massive) hepatomegaly is present. The final decision is based on clinician judgment.

Drugs known to cause hypoglycemia such as insulin and insulin secretagogues (the sulfonylureas); though there are no reports in the literature of drugs precipitating hypoglycemia in children with liver PhK deficiency

Alcohol, as this may predispose to hypoglycemia.

Hypoglycemic events in adults with liver PhK deficiency are relatively uncommon; however, caution should be used with drugs causing potential hypoglycemia, particularly in persons with impaired liver function.

Muscle PhK deficiency. Affected individuals should avoid the following:

Vigorous exercise

Medications that can cause rhabdomyolysis (e.g., succinylcholine)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific variants are known) and/or evaluation by a metabolic physician during the first year of life (if the family-specific variants are not known) allows for early diagnosis and treatment for sibs at increased risk for liver PhK deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Ideally, women with PhK deficiency consult with their health care team and maintain optimal metabolic control before conception.

It is extremely important that euglycemia is maintained throughout pregnancy to avoid upregulation of counterregulatory hormones which would result in lipolysis and ketosis, with risk of fetal demise. The appropriate diet during pregnancy is unique to each individual. For some, this may only require following a regular healthy diet, but for many it may mean increasing snacks to include more complex carbohydrates and protein and/or adding or increasing the amount of corn starch. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during pregnancy on a regular basis to ensure euglycemia. Adequate amounts of protein are necessary to provide an alternate source of glucose via gluconeogenesis.

Therapies Under Investigation

The improved and modified version of cornstarch, called Superstarch®, is under investigation for prevention of hypoglycemia in GSDs in general.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Hartsfield syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Determine the type of holoprosencephaly (alobar, semilobar, or lobar) by neuroimaging, preferably a brain MRI.

Assess development including evidence of spasticity.

Evaluate suspicious activity for evidence of seizures.

Evaluate nutritional status and feeding for evidence of problems that may result from cleft lip/palate and/or oromotor dysfunction and other problems that may result from gastrointestinal involvement (e.g., slow gastric emptying, gastroesophageal reflux, constipation).

Evaluate for evidence of diabetes insipidus, temperature dysregulation, and/or disturbance of sleep-wake cycles.

Evaluate for evidence of endocrine deficiency (growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, central diabetes insipidus).

Consult with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

Neurologic. Medically refractory epilepsy typically requires multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Spasticity can be treated with physical and occupational therapy and bracing. Muscle relaxants may be used to treat moderate or severe spasticity. Surgery may be required.

Hypothalamic involvement

Central diabetes insipidus may require treatment with desmopressin.

Temperature dysregulation can be managed by modifying the environment.

Disturbance of sleep-wake cycles can be managed with good sleep hygiene and, if needed, with use of melatonin or other sleep aids such as clonidine.

Skeletal. Surgery of hand and foot defects can improve dexterity.

Other

Tethered cord may require surgical intervention.

Cleft lip and palate: reparative surgery is needed in most.

Some children may require a gastrostomy and/or tracheostomy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary coproporphyria (HCP), the following evaluations are recommended in an individual with acute abdominal symptoms:

Review of medications for those that are thought to induce attacks (See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.)

Detailed neurologic examination for signs of motor neuropathy (which indicates a more advanced attack and, therefore, the need for early treatment with hematin)

Inquiry into possibility of seizures

Measurement of serum sodium concentration. Hyponatremia is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

Quantitation of urinary excretion of porphobilinogen (PBG) on several occasions over a few months to establish a baseline for future use in determining if a new symptom or drug reaction is due to an acute attack (In an acute attack urinary excretion of PBG is substantially elevated over the baseline.)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute Attacks

Further details on the treatment of acute porphyria are available in published reviews [Anderson et al 2005, Stein et al 2013].

In an individual presenting with acute abdominal symptoms:

Identify and discontinue any medications that are thought to induce attacks (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Discontinue all nonessential medications.

Evaluate those with nausea and vomiting for dehydration and hyponatremia, which is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

Provide glucose-containing IV solution to reverse the fasting state.

Note: Caution is indicated in patients with hyponatremia, as aggressive administration of dextrose in water may cause the serum sodium concentration to drop to a critically low level.

Treat seizures with a short-acting benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) or with magnesium, which has been used for eclamptic seizures [Sadeh et al 1991].

Note: A number of the commonly used anti-seizure medications, including phenytoin and sodium valproate, are contraindicated because of the risk of further exacerbating an attack (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Intravenous hematin is the treatment of choice in moderate to severe acute attacks. Order hematin at the time that an acute attack requires hospitalization. Although hematin is not stocked by most hospital pharmacies, it can be obtained by overnight express from the manufacturer (Panhematin®, Recordati, 1-888-575-8344). An alternative in Europe and elsewhere is heme arginate (Normosang®; not yet approved in the US).

Some individuals recover with a glucose infusion only; those who do not respond in 24 to 48 hours should receive intravenous hematin.

When signs of a motor neuropathy are present, hematin is given as soon as possible. Hematin given at the initial signs of motor neuropathy may halt its progression; however, it has no effect on established motor deficits, which are the result of axonal degeneration.

Hematin is reconstituted at the bedside as described in the package insert. Human albumin may be used in place of water (132 mL of a 25% albumin solution) to reduce the risk of a chemical phlebitis, which is the main side effect of hematin administration [Anderson et al 2006].

The infusion is started without delay, as hematin in solution decays rapidly [Goetsch & Bissell 1986].

The preparation is given into a large peripheral vein or via central line over 10-15 minutes so as to minimize the risk of phlebitis. The dose is weight based at 3-4 mg/kg; 200 mg once daily is appropriate for most individuals.

The following responses to hematin infusion can be expected:

Decrease in the urine concentration of PBG, the first sign, occurs after two doses.

Clinical improvement is seen after a total of three or four doses, and typically is dramatic, with no further need of narcotic analgesia [Bissell 1988].

The motor neuropathy of acute attacks, when it occurs, does not respond to hematin administration. Return of function requires axonal regeneration and takes many months. Although it can be complete, some individuals have residual wrist drop or foot drop.

Liver transplantation. The experience with liver transplantation in acute porphyria is growing, with accumulating evidence that transplantation is curative in selected severe cases [Singal et al 2014]. The status of the disease in candidates for liver transplantation must be well-documented biochemically: they must not have responded to multiple courses of hematin and must be demonstrating neurologic complications.

Chronic (Cutaneous) Manifestations

For low-grade chronic or seasonal cutaneous symptoms, the only effective current treatment is avoidance of sun/light, whether direct or through window glass. Damage is caused by blue light and long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA), both of which pass through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing such as long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to blue light. Grey or smoke colored filters provide only partial protection.

Note: Topical sunscreens are not helpful because they block UVB light, not the blue light that causes porphyrin-related skin injury.

The association of cutaneous manifestations with severe attacks (in which porphyrins as well as ALA and PBG are markedly increased) suggests that the cutaneous, as well as the neurovisceral, symptoms could respond to hematin administration. Indeed, this is the finding of a recent case report of an individual with severe HCP who was given ‘maintenance’ hematin [Ma et al 2011].

Other. For more prolonged control of seizures, the combination of gabapentin and propofol is effective and safe.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prevention of acute attacks

involves the following:

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives to identify those heterozygous for the CPOX pathogenic variant identified in the proband

Education of CPOX heterozygotes regarding circumstances that may trigger an acute attack (See Clinical Description.)

Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are risky and not recommended. The recommended method of birth control for HCP heterozygotes is an IUD plus a barrier (diaphragm and/or condom).

A copper-eluting IUD is theoretically the safest in porphyria.

The hormone-eluting variety may also be safe because the systemic increase in hormone is quite small; however, little information exists.

Suppression of menses using a GnRH agonist. Leuprolide, nafarelin, and other GnRH agonists may help CPOX heterozygotes who experience monthly exacerbations.

CPOX heterozygotes undergoing surgery are at increased risk for an acute attack because of the routine preoperative fast and the (former) use of barbiturate (thiopental) induction of anesthesia. Adherence to the following recommendations greatly reduces the risk of an acute attack:

Minimizing the preoperative fast as much as possible and providing intravenous glucose (10% dextrose in half-normal saline) in the perioperative period

Anesthesia induction using non-barbiturate agents that have little or no P450-inducing activity (e.g., propofol, ketamine, short-acting benzodiazepines). Inhalation agents (isoflurane) and muscle relaxants also appear to be low-risk for triggering an attack.

Prevention of acute attacks

does not

involve the following:

Use of glucose. Because glucose is used to treat acute attacks, its use in preventing attacks has been suggested, and is in fact touted in lay discussions of porphyria; however, there is no evidence that heterozygotes can protect themselves by overeating or adopting a high-carbohydrate diet, and they risk becoming obese. Heterozygotes should adhere to a healthful diet with the usual balance of protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Weight loss is possible but only by incremental restriction of calories combined with exercise. Extreme diets (e.g., all bacon, all brown rice, starvation) are risky and should be avoided.

Liver transplantation. Because the vast majority of attacks respond to hematin and other supportive measures, liver transplantation has no role in prevention of acute attacks in a CPOX heterozygote.

Surveillance

For those who have chronically elevated ALA (which is infrequent in those who are asymptomatic) and/or are older than age 60 years, an annual check of liver and kidney function is recommended.

Current noninvasive techniques for assessment of fibrosis in the liver include transient elastography (FibroScan®) and a blood-based test (FibroTest® or FibroSure®). Note: They have been vetted mainly for people with chronic viral hepatitis or steatohepatitis but may also be useful in porphyria.

For anyone with evidence of chronic liver injury, annual screening for hepatocellular carcinoma with abdominal imaging (such as ultrasound) and serum alpha-fetoprotein is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Extreme caloric deprivation (i.e., total fasting, gastric bypass surgery)

Female reproductive hormones. Birth-control pills are risky and not recommended. For recommendations regarding contraception, see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Selection of appropriate contraception for females.

Medications. Some drugs are clearly unsafe for CPOX heterozygotes. It is important to note, however, that many drugs are safe, lest providers regard individuals with acute porphyria as “untreatable.” Compilations of safe and unsafe drugs are available online and are updated as new information becomes available. See www.porphyriafoundation.com and www.porphyria-europe.com.

In theory, the most dangerous medications are inducers of CYPs, such as barbiturates and the related compound, phenytoin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk for HCP in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from education regarding the risk factors associated with acute attacks.

If the CPOX pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the CPOX pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a first-degree relative with symptoms can be evaluated with biochemical tests (see Diagnosis). Note: Although some CPOX heterozygotes have a diagnostic biochemical profile of heme precursors in urine and feces (see Table 1, ‘Active’ columns), many have normal findings (see Table 1, ‘Asymptomatic’ columns) and can only be diagnosed by molecular genetic testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The effect of pregnancy on inducing acute attacks is unpredictable. In general, serious problems during pregnancy are unusual. In fact, some women with recurrent symptoms associated with the menstrual cycle report improvement during pregnancy. Attacks, if they occur, are usually in the first trimester. The women most at risk are those with hyperemesis gravidarum and inadequate caloric intake [Aggarwal et al 2002]. Among antiemetics, ondansetron is not expected to precipitate or exacerbate acute attacks or to increase the risk for congenital anomalies in the fetus; however, metoclopramide should be avoided, as it may precipitate acute attacks [Shenhav et al 1997].

The experience with administration of hematin (or heme arginate, which is not available in the US) during pregnancy is limited. Badminton & Deybach [2006] published an anecdotal report of successful heme arginate treatment (without adverse fetal effect) in several women experiencing attacks of variegate porphyria or other acute porphyrias during pregnancy. Based on the absence of reported adverse effects, use of hematin to control exacerbations of acute intermittent porphyria during pregnancy has been recommended [Isenschmid et al 1992, Farfaras et al 2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

Due to the rarity of symptomatic acute porphyria, the efficacy of intravenous hematin has never been documented in a controlled trial. Efforts to accomplish this are under way.

Planned studies focus on individuals who have spontaneous acute attacks in the absence of any known external trigger in order to identify genetic cofactors that may be involved in such attacks, and are thus potential targets for new therapies.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Huntington disease-like 2 (HDL2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuroimaging studies to exclude other lesions, such as subdural hematomas secondary to falls, which may be contributing to signs or symptoms

Standardized rating instruments, such as the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) or Quantitated Neurological Examination (QNE) for motor abnormalities and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) for cognition

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and based on the treatment for HD and other neurodegenerative disorders.

Pharmacologic agents may suppress abnormal movements. The most common choices are low-dose neuroleptic agents, such as fluphenazine or haloperidol.

Tremor in one individual was suppressed with clonazepam. However, clonazepam, levodopa/carbidopa, anticholinergics, and typical and atypical neuroleptics were not found helpful in treating the abnormal movements of other affected individuals.

Based on experience with Huntington disease, antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood stabilizers (lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine, and lamotragine), and occasionally stimulants may be effective in treating the psychiatric manifestations of HDL2.

In the only report specifically related to HDL2, depression partially responded to sertaline in one individual and to nortriptyline in another individual [Walker et al 2003b].

The affected individual, other family members, and care providers should be educated regarding the likely course of the disease. Assurance that cognitive decline, depression, apathy, and irritability are manifestations of the disease rather than the "fault" of the individual can decrease stress and guilt.

Environmental interventions (establishing regular schedules, easing of expectations to maintain the family finances, encouraging the use of lists to assist with memory) may help.

Families often need help in obtaining social services (see Resources).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No known treatment stops or slows the progression of HDL2.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Loose rugs and clutter should be removed from the individual's home to help prevent falls and other injuries. Driving may need to be curtailed or limited to prevent risk of accidents. Food preparation may need to be altered to prevent choking.

Surveillance 

Nutrition and swallowing should be monitored. Feeding changes should be implemented when necessary to minimize the risk of aspiration.

Gait should be monitored, with consultation as needed from physical therapists to provide the most appropriate strategies or devices to minimize falls.

Driving safety should be monitored, with consideration of formal driving safety evaluations if safety is uncertain.

Monitor mood and irritability so that measures to decrease the risk of suicide, other behavioral abnormalities, and distress may be implemented.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any agents that increase ataxia should be used with caution.

Individuals with HDL2, like others with neurodegenerative disorders, are vulnerable to delirium from medical illnesses and medicines, especially polypharmacy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

There is no specific information available about disease management during pregnancy. Prudence suggests close attention to prevention of falls and monitoring for swallowing difficulties. Medications should be reviewed to assess their safety during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic assessment

Psychological and psychiatric assessments

Brain MRI to determine the extent and localization of white matter changes, presence of cortical atrophy, and involvement of the corpus callosum and corticospinal tracts

Assessment of feeding/eating, digestive problems (constipation, incontinence), and nutrition based on patient history

EEG or video EEG if a seizure disorder is suspected; evaluation of the need for antiepileptic drugs

Lumbar puncture to measure neurofilament light protein (NFL) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to follow the disease progression. An increased level of NFL on repeat CSF examinations may suggest faster disease course and thus worse prognosis.

Assessment of family and social structure to determine the availability of adequate support system

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific therapy is currently available for ALSP.

Management is supportive and includes: attention to general care, nutritional requirements, antiepileptic drugs for seizures, and antibiotic treatment for general and recurrent infections such as pneumonia or urinary tract infections.

Other:

L-dopa or other dopaminergic therapies have not been beneficial in individuals with ALSP or in those with an atypical parkinsonian phenotype, but may be worth trying.

Antidepressant medications may be prescribed for depression but reports to date have demonstrated no long-term benefit.

Antipsychotics are in general not recommended due to extrapyramidal side effects, but may be used in aggressive individuals.

Anti-seizure medications should be initiated in any individuals with seizures and are reported to be beneficial.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendencies are often associated with the progression of the disease. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder.

Surveillance

Periodic clinical evaluation to monitor for the following is appropriate:

Changes in mobility, communication, and behavior, which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (wheelchair/ personal assistance)

Onset of seizures and need for antiepileptic therapy

Contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions and actions, problems following directions, memory loss, incontinence, which indicate curtailing of independence

Difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration for gastrostomy

Need for physical therapy to minimize contractures and maintain locomotion

Longitudinal MRI studies can potentially help with prognosis, as during the disease course the more rapid the confluence of patchy or focal T2 hyperintensities and the progression of cortical atrophy, the poorer the prognosis appears to be [Van Gerpen et al 2008, Sundal et al 2012c].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Use of first-generation neuroleptics, which increase seizure risk and risk of additional parkinsonian signs

Treatment agents for multiple sclerosis, as these medications are of no benefit and have major side effects

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hemophilia A, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict disease severity

A joint and muscle evaluation, particularly if the individual describes a history of hemarthrosis or deep-muscle hematomas

Screening for hepatitis A, B, and C as well as HIV if blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates were administered prior to 1990

Baseline CBC with a platelet count, especially if there is a history of nose bleeds, GI bleeding, mouth bleeding, or (in females) menorrhagia or postpartum hemorrhage

Referral to a hemophilia treatment center. For locations:

Worldwide, see World Federation of Hæmophilia;

US only, see National Hemophilia Foundation.

Identification of the specific F8 pathogenic variant in an individual to aid in determining disease severity, the likelihood of inhibitor development, and the chance that immune tolerance will be successful if an inhibitor does develop

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor, particularly for a new diagnosis in the family and for females of childbearing years

Treatment of Manifestations

The World Federation of Hemophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center. (Individuals in the USA see National Hemophilia Foundation; individuals worldwide see World Federation of Hemophilia for locations).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor VIII for bleeding episodes within an hour of noticing symptoms:

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers should be identified, as frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia A should be trained to administer the infusions. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia A include the following [Chalmers et al 2011, Srivastava et al 2013]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, is treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered preferably subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor VIII requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

DDAVP®

(desmopressin acetate). For individuals with mild hemophilia A, including symptomatic females, immediate treatment of bleeding can be achieved with DDAVP®. A single intravenous dose often doubles or triples factor VIII clotting activity. Alternatively, a multi-use nasal formulation of DDAVP® Nasal may be more convenient.

Note: Hemophilia genotype influences DDAVP® response [Castaman et al 2009, Nance et al 2013].

Immune tolerance therapy. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor VIII greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Fogarty & Kessler 2013]. High titer inhibitors can often be eliminated by immune tolerance therapy [Hay & DiMichele 2012]. Individuals with large gene deletions are less likely to respond to immune tolerance than individuals with other types of variants [Coppola et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hemophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusions of factor VIII concentrate three times a week or every other day to maintain factor VIII clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002, Feldman et al 2006]. Newer modified recombinant products with longer half-lives allow less frequent infusions.

Factor VIII concentrate infusions given prophylactically in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds can nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007].

The greatest benefit is seen in affected individuals who start therapy before age 2.5 to three years. Routine prophylaxis begun later in childhood or in adults significantly decreases bleeding episodes [Valentino et al 2012, Manco-Johnson et al 2013, Mondorf et al 2013].

"Secondary" prophylaxis, started after some joint damage has occurred, can be given on a long-term basis or around periods of increased activity or surgical procedures. An increasing number of adults with hemophilia are on long-term prophylaxis and clinical benefit is being documented in short- and long-term studies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Reduction of bleeding and chronic joint disease is achieved by prophylactic treatment and prompt effective treatment of bleeding, including by use of home therapy. Many recombinant products are now created without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.

Surveillance

Persons with hemophilia who are followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia A should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by their parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is indicated at least once during the first ten to 20 treatment days in children with severe hemophilia, and then every three to six months after treatment with factor VIII concentrates has been initiated either for bleeding or prophylaxis. After 50 to 100 exposure days, annual screening and screening prior to elective surgical procedures is sufficient. Testing for inhibitors should be performed in any individual with hemophilia whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia A benefit from at least yearly contact with an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia A can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years. Affected individuals with comorbidities and other complications or treatment challenges may require more frequent visits.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is excluded; or, if present, the infant should be treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin, should be avoided unless there is strong medical indication, such as in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Avoid the following:

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Identification of at-risk relatives. A thorough family history may identify other relatives who are at risk but have not been tested (particularly in families with mild hemophilia A).

Early determination of the genetic status of males at risk. Either assay of factor VIII clotting activity from a cord blood sample obtained by venipuncture of the umbilical vein (to avoid contamination by amniotic fluid or placenta tissue) or molecular genetic testing for the family-specific F8 pathogenic variant can establish or exclude the diagnosis of hemophilia A in newborn males at risk. Infants with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, factor VIII concentrate is administered immediately before and after the procedure to prevent delayed oozing and poor wound healing.

Note: Ideally, the cord blood for factor VIII clotting activity assay should be drawn into a syringe containing one-tenth volume of sodium citrate to avoid clotting and to provide an optimal mixing of the sample with the anticoagulant. If not available a standard blue top tube can be used.

Determination of genetic status of females at risk. Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor VIII activity lower than 40% and may have abnormal bleeding. In a survey of Dutch heterozygous females, bleeding symptoms correlated with baseline factor clotting activity; there was suggestion of a very mild increase in bleeding even in those with 40% to 60% factor VIII activity [Plug et al 2006]. Therefore, all daughters and mothers of an affected male and other at-risk females should have a baseline factor VIII clotting activity assay to determine if they are at increased risk for bleeding (unless they are known to be non-carriers based on molecular genetic testing). Very occasionally, a female will have particularly low factor VIII clotting activity that may result from heterozygosity for an F8 pathogenic variant associated with skewed X-chromosome inactivation or, on rare occasion, compound heterozygosity for two F8 pathogenic variants [Pavlova et al 2009].

It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Obstetric issues. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

If the female is symptomatic (i.e., has baseline factor VIII clotting activity <40%), she will be somewhat protected by the natural rise of factor VIII clotting activity during pregnancy, which may even double by the end of the third trimester. The factor VIII level should be measured in the third trimester to confirm that the level is in the normal range, and if it is not, a plan for factor replacement therapy should be developed. Postpartum factor VIII clotting activity can return to baseline within 48 hours, and postpartum hemorrhage may ensue [Lee et al 2006].

Newborn males. Controversy remains as to indications for cesarean section versus vaginal delivery [James & Hoots 2010, Chalmers et al 2011]. In retrospective data analysis of 580 males age 0-2 years with hemophilia, 17 suffered intracranial hemorrhages with delivery, and all but one were delivered vaginally [Kulkarni et al 2009]. This finding supports the recommendation of cesarean section for hemophilic infants, however, 12 of the 17 were born to women not known to be carriers, suggesting that a planned delivery may mitigate risks. In anticipation of delivery, the relative risks of cesarean section versus vaginal delivery should be considered and discussed with the family and obstetrician in anticipation of delivery so that a coordinated plan can be developed.

Therapies Under Investigation

Recombinant factor VIII molecules are being modified to extend their half-life and allow less frequent infusions [Young & Mahlangu 2016]. Two products are FDA approved, one modified by pegylation and one by Fc fusion; others are in clinical trials. These result in half-life extension by approximately 1.5 fold. Products with greater half-life extension are under development.

Attempts are being made to learn more about the immunology of inhibitors and ways to prevent them or improve the success rate of immune tolerance [Zakarija et al 2011, Hay & DiMichele 2012, Astermark et al 2013]. Several novel products that “bypass” the need for factor VIII or factor IX are in clinical or preclinical study [Kaufman & Powell 2013].

Clinical trials for gene therapy for hemophilia A have begun and others are in the preclinical phase [Spencer et al 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Vitamin K does not prevent or control bleeding in hemophilia A.

Cryoprecipitate is no longer recommended to treat hemophilia A because it is not treated with a virucidal agent.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hemophilia B, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict disease severity

A joint and muscle evaluation, particularly if the individual describes a history of hemarthrosis or deep-muscle hematomas

Screening for hepatitis A, B, and C as well as HIV if blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates were administered prior to 1990

Baseline CBC including platelet count and ferritin, especially if there is a history of nose bleeds, GI bleeding, mouth bleeding, or in females, heavy menstrual bleeding or postpartum hemorrhage

Referral to a hemophilia treatment center. For locations:

Worldwide, see World Federation of Hæmophilia;

US only, see National Hemophilia Foundation.

Identification of the specific F9 pathogenic variant in an individual to aid in determining disease severity, the likelihood of inhibitor development, and the risk of anaphylaxis if an inhibitor does develop

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor, particularly if a new diagnosis in the family and for females of childbearing years

Treatment of Manifestations

The World Federation of Hæmophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center (for locations in the USA: see National Hemophilia Foundation; elsewhere worldwide: see World Federation of Hæmophilia).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor IX for bleeding episodes should be initiated within an hour of noticing symptoms.

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Identify staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers because frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia B should be trained to administer the infusions as soon as is feasible. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia B include the following [Chalmers et al 2011]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia B should not be circumcised unless hemophilia B is either excluded or, if present, treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor IX requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

Inhibitors. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor IX, seen in 1%-3% of persons with severe hemophilia B, greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Hay et al 2006]. Their onset can be associated with anaphylactic reactions to factor IX infusion and nephrotic syndrome [DiMichele 2007, Chitlur et al 2009]. Immune tolerance can be challenging and long-term bypassing therapy may be needed for treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hæmophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusion of factor IX concentrate twice weekly or every other day to maintain factor IX clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002]. Also, some individuals will require troughs higher than 1% to prevent bleeding. Longer-acting factor IX concentrates that extend the half-life three- to fivefold are now available. Choice of product should be individualized based on clinical factors and activity levels. Initiation of prophylactic infusions of factor IX concentrate in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds has been shown to nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007]. Prophylaxis in adults is standard of care in many countries and has been shown to decrease bleeding and improve joint function and quality of life [Josephson 2013, Manco-Johnson et al 2013]

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Many recombinant products are now produced without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.

Surveillance

Persons with hemophilia followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia B should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by the parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, viral testing if indicated, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is usually done in those with severe hemophilia B after treatment with factor IX concentrates has been initiated for either bleeding or prophylaxis. Affected individuals at increased risk for inhibitor formation should be closely monitored during initial infusions and additional screening is usually performed up to a few years of age when the genotype is a large partial deletion, complete F9 deletion, or early termination variant (<100 predicted amino acids) (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations and Molecular Genetics, Pathogenic variants). Testing for inhibitors should also be performed in any individual with hemophilia B whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity; with hemophilia B, the onset may be heralded by an allergic reaction to infused factor IX concentrate.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia B benefit from at least yearly assessments at an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia B can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Circumcision of infant males with a family history of hemophilia B unless hemophilia B is excluded; OR if circumcision is performed on an infant with hemophilia B, the infant should be treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin unless there is strong medical indication (e.g., in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease). Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Older, intermediate purity plasma-derived “prothrombin complex” concentrates should be used cautiously (if at all) in hemophilia B because of their thrombogenic potential.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Identification of at-risk relatives. A thorough family history may identify other male relatives who are at risk but have not been tested (particularly in families with mild hemophilia B).

Early determination of the genetic status of males at risk. Either assay of factor IX clotting activity from a cord blood sample obtained by venipuncture of the umbilical vein (to avoid contamination by amniotic fluid or placenta tissue) or molecular genetic testing for the family-specific F9 pathogenic variant can establish or exclude the diagnosis of hemophilia B in newborn males at risk. Infants with a family history of hemophilia B should not be circumcised unless hemophilia B is either excluded or, if present, factor IX concentrate is administered immediately before and after the procedure to prevent delayed oozing and poor wound healing.

Note: (1) The cord blood for factor IX clotting activity assay should be drawn into a syringe containing one-tenth volume of sodium citrate to avoid clotting and to provide an optimal mixing of the sample with the anticoagulant. (2) Factor IX clotting activity in cord blood in a normal-term newborn is lower than in adults (mean: ~30%; range: 15%-50%); thus, the diagnosis of hemophilia B can be established in an infant with activity lower than 1%, but is equivocal in an infant with moderately low (15%-20%) activity.

Determination of genetic status of females at risk. Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor IX clotting activity lower than 40% and may have abnormal bleeding. In a recent Dutch survey of heterozygous females, bleeding symptoms correlated with baseline factor clotting activity; there was suggestion of a very mild increase in bleeding even in those with 40% to 60% factor IX clotting activity [Plug et al 2006]. Joint range of motion in female carriers with factor VIII or factor IX activity lower than 40% was found to be significantly different from that measured in normal controls and inversely related to factor level [Sidonio et al 2014]. All daughters and mothers of an affected male and other at-risk females should have a baseline factor IX clotting activity assay to determine if they are at increased risk for bleeding (unless they are known to be non-carriers based on molecular genetic testing). Very occasionally, a female will have particularly low factor IX clotting activity that may result from heterozygosity for an F9 pathogenic variant associated with skewed X-chromosome inactivation or, on rare occasion, compound heterozygosity for two F9 pathogenic variants.

It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Obstetric issues. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

Unlike for factor VIII (FVIII), maternal factor IX levels do not increase during pregnancy and carriers are more likely to need factor infusion support for delivery or to treat or prevent postpartum hemorrhage. In carriers, postpartum hemorrhage has been a prominent feature, despite the absence of heavy menstrual bleeding [Yang & Ragni 2004].

If the female has a baseline factor IX clotting activity below approximately 40%, she by definition has hemophilia and is at risk for excessive bleeding, particularly post partum, and may require therapy with factor IX concentrate [Yang & Ragni 2004].

Newborn males. Controversy remains as to indications for cesarean section versus vaginal delivery [James & Hoots 2010, Ljung 2010]. For elective deliveries, the relative risks of cesarean section versus vaginal delivery should be considered, especially if a male has been diagnosed with severe hemophilia B prenatally.

At birth or in the early neonatal period, intracranial hemorrhage is uncommon (<1%-2%), even in males with severe hemophilia B who are delivered vaginally.

Therapies Under Investigation

Recombinant factor IX (FIX) proteins with prolonged survival. Two products with modifications to prolong half-life (Fc or albumin fusion proteins) are now FDA approved and others, including with site-specific PEGylation, have completed Phase III clinical trials [Powell et al 2013, Peyvandi et al 2016, Santagostino et al 2016]. Clinical trial data show a three- to five fold prolongation of FIX half-life with the fusion proteins.

Gene therapy for hemophilia B. Several clinical trials of gene therapy using intravenous infusion of an adeno-associated viral vector expressing factor IX are underway; some have shown sustained factor levels [Lheriteau et al 2015]. These vectors use liver-restricted promoters to target synthesis to the natural site of FIX synthesis.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Vitamin K does not prevent or control bleeding caused by hemophilia B.

Fresh frozen plasma is no longer recommended to treat hemophilia B because it is not treated with a virucidal agent.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis (HFE-HH), the following evaluations are recommended at initial diagnosis:

Serum ferritin concentration to establish disease status and prognosis (see Figure 2)

For p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes:

Liver biopsy remains the gold standard for establishing or excluding cirrhosis.

Liver biopsy is recommended for those with serum ferritin >1,000 ng/mL or elevated AST and ALT to evaluate for advanced hepatic fibrosis [Morrison et al 2003, Bacon et al 2011].

Liver biopsy is not recommended for those with serum ferritin concentration <1,000 ng/mL and normal ALT and AST because their risk for advanced hepatic fibrosis is low [Bacon et al 2011].

MRI to estimate parenchymal iron content by utilizing the paramagnetic properties of iron:

A specialized MRI technique with excellent sensitivity for estimation of hepatic iron concentration was approved by the FDA for clinical use [St Pierre et al 2005]. This method of quantitative MRI accurately measures liver iron within a sufficiently wide liver iron concentration range. Compared with liver biopsy, MRI-R2 is noninvasive and significantly reduces biopsy sampling error [Fischer & Harmatz 2009]. In addition, T2* MRI measurement of liver iron is now widely available [Brittenham et al 2003, Cheong et al 2005, Ptaszek et al 2005].

Cardiac iron concentration can also be monitored using similar techniques and may be of prognostic value [Fischer & Harmatz 2009, Ramazzotti et al 2009].

Biomagnetic liver susceptometry (BLS) to estimate liver iron by measuring the change in magnetic flux as a hemochromatosis patient moves through a stable magnetic field, generating a voltage in the SQUID sensor [Fischer & Harmatz 2009]. As BLS is not widely available it is not included in diagnosis or management guidelines for hemochromatosis.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD) has published practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis [Bacon et al 2011] (full text). The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) published Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of hemochromatosis [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Clinical 

Therapeutic phlebotomy is indicated in the presence of symptoms of iron overload or evidence of end-organ damage (e.g., advanced cirrhosis, cardiac failure, skin pigment changes, or diabetes):

Periodic phlebotomy is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective treatment.

Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

Each mL of packed red blood cells contains 1 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is removal of the excess iron by weekly phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) until the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or lower. Twice-weekly phlebotomy may be occasionally useful to accelerate iron depletion.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the hematocrit is 75% of the baseline hematocrit.

At this point, if the serum ferritin concentration is ≥50 ng/mL despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, the interval at which phlebotomy is performed needs to be spaced further apart. Once the serum ferritin concentration is ≤100 ng/mL, serum ferritin concentration should be quantified in all affected individuals after each additional one or two treatments [Barton et al 1998].

The serum ferritin concentration is the most reliable and inexpensive way to monitor therapeutic phlebotomy.

Maintenance therapy is aimed at maintaining serum ferritin concentration <50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation <50%. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women. Subsequent phlebotomies to prevent reaccumulation of iron can be carried out approximately every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. However, this is uncommon in individuals with HFE-HH.

Therapeutic phlebotomy improves fibrosis except in cases of cirrhosis [Powell et al 2006].

Orthotopic liver transplantation is the only treatment for end-stage liver disease from decompensated cirrhosis. However, the post-transplant survival among untreated individuals with HFE-HH is poor [Crawford et al 2004, Kowdley et al 2005]. Although one study suggested that outcomes may have improved, this report did not enroll persons with documented HFE-HH but rather used a database [Yu & Ioannou 2007].

Biochemical 

Both the EASL and AASLD guidelines recommend therapeutic phlebotomy for persons with biochemical HFE-HH (i.e., those who have increased body iron stores in the absence of clinical evidence of iron overload). See European Association for the Study of the Liver [2010] (full text) and Bacon et al [2011] (full text). The exact serum ferritin concentration at which therapeutic phlebotomy should be initiated is not clear, the European Association for Study of Liver suggests performing phlebotomy once serum ferritin concentration is higher than 500 ng/mL.

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

These individuals do not have iron overload and thus do not need phlebotomy.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with iron overload should be advised against ingestion of shellfish or raw fish.

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is advised [Tavill 2001].

Surveillance

Clinical HFE-HH

Once the serum ferritin concentration is <50 ng/mL, monitor serum ferritin concentration every three to four months.

It is reasonable to perform follow-up T2* MRI for assessment of cardiac iron among persons with a history of cardiac involvement or known cardiac iron deposition.

Since cirrhosis is a crucial stage in the natural history of hemochromatosis, the diagnosis of cirrhosis is important because management changes. Individuals with cirrhosis should be followed regularly and screened for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) [Tavill 2001]. The AASLD Practice Guidelines recommend imaging every six months with good ultrasonography [Sherman 2010]. This may be accompanied with measurement of alpha fetoprotein. Noninvasive methods that use results derived from values of serum markers such as HepaScore® and FibroMeter™ can also be used to assess the stage of liver fibrosis [Martínez et al 2011].

Although the gold standard for the diagnosis of cirrhosis is biopsy, FibroScan® has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for cirrhosis [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. FibroScan (also known as transient elastography) quantifies fibrosis with ultrasound in a non-invasive manner [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. The results from a meta-analysis suggested a cut-off value for diagnosis of cirrhosis of 13.01 kPa [Friedrich-Rust et al 2008]. Individuals with normal transient elastography (TE) values on FibroScan would not need a biopsy while individuals with intermediate or high TE values should have biopsies to confirm cirrhosis. These results should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical and biochemical parameters.

Note: The AASLD Guidelines recommend that individuals with cirrhosis undergo surveillance regardless of whether or not they have been iron depleted [Bacon et al 2011] (full text).

Biochemical HFE-HH

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron, mineral supplements, excess vitamin C, and uncooked seafood

Alcohol consumption in those with hepatic involvement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the status of apparently asymptomatic adult sibs and offspring of individuals homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

The following strategy is appropriate:

Offer molecular genetic testing to the adult sibs of an individual homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr.

Perform iron studies (i.e., transferrin iron saturation and serum concentration of ferritin) on those sibs who are homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr.

Begin phlebotomy therapy if serum ferritin concentration is elevated above the upper limits of normal and if the proband has clinical HFE-HH. Note: Sibs of probands with clinical HFE-HH appear to have a higher prevalence of clinical HFE-HH than asymptomatic individuals detected through screening programs.

Note: Genotype-based testing has been found to be cost effective in most individuals because it has excellent negative predictive value. However, genotype-based testing has a low positive predictive value because many p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes and compound heterozygotes will not express the disease [El-Serag et al 2000, Beutler et al 2002].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No guidelines exist; common practice is to withhold phlebotomy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

The oral iron chelator, deferasirox (Exjade®) has been studied in a Phase I/II study in patients with hemochromatosis. Final results of this trial suggest that deferasirox is effective at reducing iron burden within an acceptable safety profile [Phatak et al 2010]. It has not yet been approved for use in treating hemochromatosis.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation for excess hepatic iron

Targeted analysis for HFE pathogenic variants (see HFE-related familial hemochromatosis)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There are no effective treatment regimens to restore enzyme levels in individuals with HEP. Hence, treatment recommendations at this time are similar to the ones for familial porphyria cutanea tarda (F-PCT): the avoidance of sunlight, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The following measures are recommended:

Protection from sunlight because of the high risk for severe skin damage and possible mutilation

Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) . See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Avoidance of drugs and agents that induce the hepatic P450

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B

Surveillance

There are currently no recommendations or guidelines for surveillance in those with HEP.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Persons of all ages should avoid exposure to sunlight.

Older individuals should avoid the known precipitating factors (e.g., alcohol, oral estrogen, smoking, and drugs that induce the cytochrome P450s).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the family-specific UROD pathogenic variants are known, it is reasonable to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives so that those with biallelic UROD pathogenic variants can be counseled regarding sun protection and avoidance of known susceptibility factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count, hepatic panel, and coagulation profile and ultrasound examination to identify mild, moderate, or severe portal hypertension (PH), hypersplenism, and biliary tree abnormalities [Lonergan et al 2000]

Esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) to screen for varices, particularly when the platelet count has decreased significantly over time or prior to interventions such as renal transplantation [Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Although not universally accepted in children, screening for varices allows for prognostication, planning, and primary prevention of variceal bleeding.

Screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome by measuring upright oxygen saturation and screening for portopulmonary hypertension with echocardiogram to estimate pulmonary artery pressure [Whitworth & Sokol 2005]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no known treatment for the underlying defect in CHF: no therapies can repair the primary ductal plate malformation or reverse the fibrosis or biliary tree abnormalities. Therapies based on extrapolations from other forms of liver disease, anecdotal reports, and deductive reasoning are used to manage the complications of the underlying defect [Shneider & Magid 2005].

The most important manifestations of CHF are variceal bleeding, hypersplenism, cholangitis and, to a lesser extent, biliary stones, cholangiocarcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Variceal bleeding. The management of varices has been reviewed [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008, Ling et al 2011, Shneider et al 2012]. Care should be provided by those experienced in the management of PH.

Primary prevention (prior to any variceal bleeding) entails screening for varices and treating medium or large varices with nonselective beta blockers with the dose titrated to pulse and blood pressure. If beta blockers are not tolerated, variceal banding should be considered. Management in children is not as well defined as in adults. Affected children should be referred to tertiary centers with experience in the management of varices in children.

Standard procedures for management of variceal bleeding include obtaining adequate initial intravenous access, resuscitation, transfusion without over transfusion, octreotide, antibiotic prophylaxis, proton pump inhibition, and endoscopy when stabilized.

Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding (once bleeding has already occurred) consists of banding of esophageal varices, histacryl injection of gastric varices, and continued use of nonselective beta blockers. Because banding devices do not fit on the smallest endoscopes, small children with variceal bleeding often undergo sclerotherapy instead.

Individuals who have had repeated variceal bleeding (especially if gastric varices are present) should be considered for surgical portosystemic shunting rather than repeated variceal ligation [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Such intervention is best performed in a center experienced with this procedure.

Although controversial, consideration of a surgical shunt in an individual with CHF who has never had variceal bleeding may be reasonable if PH is likely to progress and liver transplantation is unlikely given the intact hepatic synthetic function in certain settings. For example, a surgical shunt would be a strong consideration in an individual with large varices that have never bled if appropriate expert care is not available for emergent management of variceal bleeding.

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) are widely available. However, it is the authors’ opinion that use of TIPS is not indicated outside of an emergency; because of their intrinsic occlusion rate, particularly when considered over long periods of time, TIPS may require repeated procedures to maintain adequate patency. Furthermore, the intravenous contrast often utilized to assess and perform TIPS revisions is potentially nephrotoxic – a serious consideration given the typical association of CHF with ARPKD.

Hypersplenism. Hypersplenism usually does not result in clinically significant sequelae. Individuals with significant splenomegaly are fitted with spleen guards to wear when playing contact sports or performing activities that could result in splenic injury.

Splenectomy is contraindicated because it does not treat the underlying PH and often exacerbates it.

Abnormalities of the biliary tree. Cholangitis should be considered and investigated in individuals known to have biliary dilatation who develop unexplained fever or right upper-quadrant pain with or without jaundice [Shneider & Magid 2005].

Cholangitis is best treated with rapid institution of appropriate antibiotics.

Segmental resection of the liver is a controversial option for individuals with segmental bile duct abnormalities who have had repeated episodes of cholangitis [Ulrich et al 2008] even though cysts may form in other areas of the liver after the resection.

Recurrent cholangitis with or without more widespread bile duct abnormalities is best treated with liver transplantation. If cysts in the extrahepatic bile duct are complicated by recurrent infection and/or the presence of stones, excision of the common bile duct with a Roux-en-Y hepatojejunal anastomosis has been recommended.

Biliary stones. The treatment of biliary stones depends on their location, number, and size. Care is best provided in a tertiary care facility with expertise in managing biliary stones.

Cholangiocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. These should be managed by a multidisciplinary team.

Patient education. Patients are taught the manifestations of variceal bleeding (hematemesis, melena, and hematochezia) and cholangitis (fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice) and instructed to seek appropriate care when such manifestations occur.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The CDC (Centers for Disease Control) recommends immunization for hepatitis A and B in persons with chronic liver disease.

Although evidence is lacking, antibiotic prophylaxis for recurrent cholangitis is sometimes used in individuals who have had cholangitis [Shneider & Magid 2005].

Surveillance

General health should be closely followed. Decreased growth rate should be investigated as it is less likely to be the result of PH than of other associated problems, such as reduced renal function.

Extrapolating from studies in persons with cirrhosis, individuals with CHF should be screened for esophageal varices particularly when the platelet count decreases significantly over time or prior to interventions such as renal transplantation [Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Screening is controversial in children and should only be undertaken if a therapeutic intervention (e.g., beta-blocker therapy, variceal banding) is being considered.

Small varices warrant a repeat esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) in a year.

If no varices are identified when EGD is performed because of a decline in platelet count, EGD should be repeated every two to three years.

Screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome is achieved by measuring upright oxygen saturation; screening for portopulmonary hypertension is performed with echocardiogram to estimate pulmonary artery pressure [Whitworth & Sokol 2005] in the presence of sustained platelet decrease and/or prior to an intervention.

Imaging allows:

Assessment of spleen size to indirectly follow PH;

Visualization of bile duct abnormalities (e.g. cysts in the liver) that could identify individuals at greater risk for cholangitis, bile duct stones, and cholangiocarcinoma.

The appropriate frequency of surveillance imaging is not well defined, and depends on disease severity. For individuals with mild disease, ultrasound examination every two years would be adequate; for those with more severe disease, an annual ultrasound examination could enable adequate monitoring of disease progression.

Note: No data on surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma in this setting are available. However, the incidence in children is thought to be extremely rare (see Definition, Clinical Manifestations of Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following agents/illnesses known to accelerate hepatic fibrosis could have the same effect in CHF and should be avoided or aggressively managed:

Alcohol

Obesity

Diabetes mellitus

Malnutrition

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Immunosuppression (e.g., after renal transplantation)

Hepatotoxic medicines should be avoided.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in those with varices because of the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and poor clotting as a result of impaired platelet function.

Behavior that could increase the risk of viral hepatitis should be avoided.

Contact sports, or activities that are likely to result in splenic injury, are to be avoided once the spleen is significantly enlarged.

Therapies Under Investigation

Although there are theoretic reasons why choleretics such as ursodeoxycholate may impede the development of abnormalities of the bile ducts, or even fibrosis, this has not been proven [Shneider & Magid 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination and radiographs of the hands and feet to evaluate for characteristic abnormalities (e.g., small thumbs, fifth-finger clinodactyly) that may affect hand function

Urologic assessment of bladder/ureter function and urethral competence or position, including renal ultrasound examination and voiding cystourethrogram; examination for UPJ obstruction

Gynecologic examination prior to menstruation or pregnancy for evidence of incomplete Müllerian fusion, longitudinal vaginal septum, or extremely small hymenal opening. Evaluation may include ultrasound, hysterosalpingogram, hysteroscopy, sonohysterogram, MRI, or other imaging studies. Such studies could be accomplished at the same time as urologic imaging.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Urologic referral is indicated. Appropriate treatment includes surgical correction of bladder outlet abnormalities and ureteric implantation.

Gynecologic referral is indicated. Surgical removal of longitudinal vaginal septum is rarely indicated, even in anticipation of labor. Surgery for removal of a uterine septum or reunification of a bicornuate uterus is likewise exceptional in the absence of recurrent mid-trimester pregnancy losses. Hymenectomy may be necessary for tight constriction ring.

Usually, extremity surgery is not necessary, although repair of hallux varus and tarsal fusion [Verp et al 1983] have been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Prophylactic antibiotics or surgery as needed to prevent urinary tract infections or other complications of ureteral reflux or UPJ obstruction

Gynecologic examination prior to menstruation for small hymenal opening

Pre-pregnancy evaluation of the vaginal and uterine anatomy because of the increased risk for premature labor and fetal loss associated with structural abnormalities of the uterus

Surveillance

Follow-up with a urologist in the presence of vesicoureteral reflux and/or documented urinary tract infection is warranted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Physical examination of relatives and HOXA13 sequence analysis will help identify those at risk of genitourinary and reproductive tract complications.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In women with HFGS, premature pregnancy loss is possible secondary to uterine malformation. Consultation with an obstetrician before pregnancy is recommended and should include evaluation for and discussion of potential pregnancy complications. Affected fetuses are generally healthy, but could be at risk for premature birth secondary to maternal uterine malformation if the mother is also affected.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI), evaluation by the following specialists is recommended:

Biochemical geneticist or pediatrician with an interest in metabolic disorders

Dietician with experience in managing inherited metabolic diseases

Hepatologist

Nephrologist

Clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute presentations should be managed symptomatically in a hospital setting, including intravenous glucose (dextrose) administration, supportive treatment of hepatic insufficiency (including fresh frozen plasma or exchange transfusion), and treatment of metabolic acidosis, if present.

Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is the cornerstone of HFI treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). During acute episodes of intoxication, including at the time of initial diagnosis, immediate and absolute elimination of fructose (by substitution of fructose with other carbohydrate sources including glucose, maltose, and cornstarch) rapidly reverses symptoms and should result in normalization of related metabolic disturbances.

Ongoing education for children and adults concerning the need for dietary restriction is recommended, and should ideally be handled by nutritionists with specific experience in treating HFI and other inherited metabolic diseases.

Individuals with HFI are advised to wear a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace at all times.

Hepatomegaly with steatosis and lipid vacuolization may remain a persistent complication despite fructose restriction and resolution of initial fibrosis. This includes individuals ascertained by family history and treated from birth [Odièvre et al 1978]. The reason for this remains to be determined, but may be related to insufficient fructose restriction as well as lower tolerance of fructose early in life [Froesch et al 1963].

Chronic renal insufficiency, specifically proximal tubular dysfunction, may also persist despite fructose restriction. Typically resolution of renal disease occurs shortly after starting fructose restriction [Odièvre et al 1978]. In rare historical instances, dietary modification did not affect renal dysfunction [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968]. This may be a result of earlier, incomplete attempts at restriction, as reported patients tended to manage themselves with self-restriction alone. It may also be in part due to primary defects in aldolase function and ATPase interaction within the proximal tubule, leading to dysfunctional acid-base regulation, renal tubular insufficiency (manifesting as glucosuria, aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia), and nephrocalcinosis [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968, Lu et al 2001, Steinmann & Santer 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is necessary for the treatment/management of HFI (Table 3).

Specific ingredients to avoid include fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, agave syrup, inverted sugar, maple-flavored syrup, molasses, palm or coconut sugar, and sorghum.

In addition, medicines and formulas in which fructose/sucrose may not be listed as a primary component, examples of which include syrups, enema solutions, some immunoglobulin solutions, and many infant and pediatric nutritional drinks. When ingredients are listed, the terms “sugar,” “table sugar,” “natural flavorings” and even in some cases “sugar-free” or “no added sugar” (with no further clarification on the type of carbohydrate used) should raise suspicion for the presence of fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Table 3. 

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Food Category

Foods Permitted

Foods Prohibited

Dairy

Any milk, cheese, eggs

Milk products w/added sugar (sweetened yogurt, fruit yogurt, milkshake, chocolate milk)

Meat

Beef, veal, lamb, pork

Ham, bacon, hot dogs, processed meats; any other meat where sugar is used in processing

Fish

All fish

None

Poultry

Chicken, turkey

None

Cereal

Cooked or ready-to-eat cereals (except sweetened & sugar-coated cereals)

Sweetened/sugar-coated cereals

Fruit

None

All fruits, fruit juices, including squashes & cordials, & fruit extracts prohibited

Vegetables

Asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, green beans, green peppers, lettuce, nuts, onions, potatoes, spinach, wax beans

All other vegetables, including sweet potatoes

Bread

Breads prepared w/out fructose, sucrose, sugar, or sorbitol; soda crackers & saltines

Any breads or crackers prepared w/fructose/sucrose/sugar/sorbitol

Fat sources

Butter, margarine, oil, mayonnaise / mustard prepared w/out sugar

Mayonnaises, mustards, & salad dressings made with sugar

Desserts and sweeteners

Dietetic jello, dietetic ice cream, dietetic puddings; natural yogurt; glucose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose & zero-calorie sweeteners

All desserts containing sugar (cake, pie, cookies, candy, jello, ice cream, sherbet, honey, fruit juice); sugar, sucrose, sorbitol, fructose

Miscellaneous

Vegetable juices, coffee, tea, salt, pepper, broths/soups from permitted vegetables; some sugar substitutes; some dietetic beverages; pasta; rice; cinnamon, garlic, poppy seeds; peanut butter (when pure & w/out added sugars)

Ketchup & any other sauces / condiments containing sugar, jam, jelly, preserves, carbonated beverages / soda; peanut butter if prepared w/added sugars; chewing gum w/sorbitol

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

During hospitalizations special caution should be taken to avoid use of fructose-containing intravenous fluids. A number of reported accidental and iatrogenic fructose infusion-related deaths have prompted greater awareness of HFI [Locher 1987, Sachs et al 1993, Curran & Havill 2002, Müller et al 2003]; however, with a rare disorder such as HFI and in circumstances in which specific dietary (and infusion) restrictions may not be adequately disclosed, the danger of exposure in a hospital setting remains [Cox 1993]. The following are recommendations:

During any hospitalization, all members of the care team should be aware of the diagnosis of HFI and the patient is advised to wear at all times a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace that provides information about the diagnosis of HFI.

‘Red flags’ should be placed in the patient’s chart or medical record to alert practitioners to the HFI diagnosis and to medical risks associated with exposures to foods and/or medications (oral or parenteral) containing fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Specific medicines known to contain fructose or fructose-like substances should be avoided.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should be utilized and medications should be cleared for use on a case-by-case basis.

Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a favorable approach to diagnosis of HFI.

Dietary restriction should be strictly followed and maintained, especially in infancy. Although some have suggested that after age two years dietary restrictions can be relaxed somewhat [Steinmann & Santer 2011], currently, there are no specific guidelines regarding dietary fructose limits in any age group.

Tolerance of dietary fructose probably depends on an individual’s residual enzyme activity. Furthermore, because actual fructose content in foods may be unreliably reported or difficult to ascertain, adherence to complete dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol may be difficult attain and unrealistic for some patients with HFI.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Ensuring adequate vitamin supplementation in the setting of reduced fruit and vegetable intake is imperative. Daily supplementation with a “sugar-free” multivitamin is recommended to prevent micronutrient deficiencies, specifically the water-soluble vitamins.

Surveillance

There are no formal guidelines for surveillance for individuals with HFI (e.g., frequency of subspecialty visits with physicians and/or dieticians with expertise in management of inherited metabolic diseases).

Once the diagnosis of HFI has been made, periodic evaluation of liver function, renal function, and growth is reasonable, particularly if there are concerns regarding compliance with the fructose/sucrose/sorbitol-restricted diet.

While isoelectric focusing of transferrin and/or monitoring of aspartylglucosaminidase (elevated in untreated HFI) have been suggested as markers of disease control in HFI, neither of these clinically available tests has definitively proven utility in diagnosis or surveillance [Pronicka et al 2007, Michelakakis et al 2009, Quintana et al 2009].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Great care should be taken to avoid enteral or parenteral exposure to fructose, sorbitol, sucrose, sucralose, and polysorbate as administration of these substances to individuals with HFI can be fatal.

The following resources can be valuable in determining medical and dietary safety.

Dietary guidance –including prohibited foods- is outlined in Table 3.

An extensive list of tolerated and non-tolerated sugars in HFI can be found online, a site curated by the Boston University HFI laboratory.

Although there is no single consolidated list of medications that contain these or related sugars, an advanced search on www.medicines.org.uk using the search term “fructose OR sorbitol OR sucrose OR sucralose” yielded 1776 results. Many such medications are oral suspensions or chewable flavored tabs designed for pediatric use. Also listed were injectable medications like immunoglobulin solutions (e.g., trastuzumab, filgrastim, some intravenous immunoglobulin solutions), vaccines (e.g., certain influenza, meningococcal), and iron supplements, as well as enema solutions and rinsing aids. For many preparations, it may not be apparent that fructose or similar compounds are present.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should clear use of medications on a case-by-case basis. Of particular note, a 24% sucrose solution (routinely administered to hospitalized neonates for minor procedures) should

not be given to neonates known to have HFI.

The fructose tolerance testing (‘fructose challenge’) to diagnose HFI can be hazardous and should not be used.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It may be appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs in order to identify individuals who would benefit from fructose restriction (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). If the ALDOB pathogenic variants in the family are known, targeted molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Few reports exist relating to management of pregnant women with HFI or pregnancy-related complications in HFI. In general, in familial reports in which pregnancies are not expressly discussed, it appears that HFI in a pregnant mother does not cause harm to the mother or the child provided that strict fructose avoidance is followed during the pregnancy.

In one family a woman with enzymatically documented HFI had three children (presumably from the same father), all of whom also had HFI [Marks et al 1989]. Most complications observed in these children seem to have resulted from their own poorly controlled HFI or comorbidities in early childhood, rather than maternal effects of HFI per se. The first child developed failure to thrive and cirrhosis and died at age six months of E. coli sepsis and pulmonary edema. The second child, who had HFI complicated by transfusion-acquired HIV infection, died at age five years from complications of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). In her third pregnancy, which proceeded normally, the mother was maintained on a strict fructose-restricted diet. The child also had HFI but thrived on a fructose-restricted diet.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis (POIKTMP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Dermatologic evaluation

Physical therapy assessment

Evaluation by pulmonary specialists including pulmonary function testing to evaluate for restrictive lung disease and/or pulmonary fibrosis

Muscle MRI to evaluate for progressive muscle involvement (optional)

Blood tests:

Liver function: SGOT, SGPT, ALP, GGT

Baseline complete blood count with differential. Individuals with clinical evidence of anemia or cytopenias should be evaluated by CBC and bone marrow biopsy if clinically indicated.

Fecal elastase level if steatorrhea is present

Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for cataracts or other abnormalities

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Dermatologic

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure and use of sunscreens with both UVA and UVB protection

Pulsed dye laser can be discussed in older individuals as an option for cosmetic management of the telangiectatic component of the rash; however, no data on its use are available.

Avoidance of excessive heat exposure and control of fever, especially in the first years of life to prevent overheating

Lymphedema management (manual lymphatic drainage, compression)

Topical treatment for eczema-like lesions (emollients, topical steroids)

Muscle

Physical therapy and exercise to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Calcium and vitamin D supplements may also be warranted in individuals with muscle weakness to prevent osteopenia.

Lung

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device if needed

Noninvasive ventilation if needed

Pancreas. Treatment of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency with pancreatic enzyme supplementation

Liver. Treatment of cholestasis with ursodeoxycholic acid

Growth. Enteral feeding as needed

Cataract. Surgical removal of visually significant cataracts

Surveillance

Annual surveillance beginning at the time of diagnosis (to be adapted to patient’s symptoms):

Dermatologic evaluation for poikiloderma, lymphedema of the limbs, eczema-like lesions, changes in the nails and hair

Physical therapy assessment for muscle weakness or contractures

Pulmonary function testing

Blood test:

Complete blood count with differential

Liver function testing: SGOT, SGPT, ALP, GGT

Ophthalmologic examination

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures (with attention to Achilles tendon contractures) and scoliosis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Excessive sun exposure, which may exacerbate the rash

Exposure to heat because of heat intolerance secondary to hypohidrosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline endoscopy to look for macroscopic tumor [Fitzgerald et al 2010]

Evaluation of CDH1 heterozygotes for H. pylori infection given its ability to induce promoter hypermethylation of CDH1 and its role in GC carcinogenesis

Breast examination/mammography in females

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Care by a multidisciplinary team comprising those with expertise in clinical genetics, gastric surgery, gastroenterology, pathology, and nutrition is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010] (see full text and Figure 1 therein).

H. pylori infection (if present) is treated in the standard manner.

The primary curative treatment of gastric cancer is surgical resection. Regardless of the surgical procedure used for the treatment of gastric cancer, the effectiveness of surgical resection is poor if the ultimate goal is increased cure rate: studies have shown that surgery alone is less than satisfactory in the management of early gastric cancer, with cure rates approaching only 40%. The role of adjuvant therapy was indefinite until three large, randomized controlled trials showed the survival benefit of adjuvant therapy over surgery alone [Macdonald et al 2000, Cunningham et al 2006, Sakuramoto et al 2007].

Numerous randomized clinical trials have failed to show consistent survival benefits from adjuvant radiation therapy or chemotherapy alone in the treatment of gastric cancer.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Biopsy-proven diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended if a biopsy shows diffuse-type gastric carcinoma [Chun et al 2001, Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Heterozygotes for a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant. The importance of identifying the genetic basis of cancer susceptibility in families with HDGC has been underscored by the observation of early gastric cancers in prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) samples obtained from individuals with a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant [Chun et al 2001, Huntsman et al 2001, Norton et al 2007]. These findings suggest that currently prophylactic total gastrectomy, rather than endoscopic surveillance, is the best preventive measure for individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant.

Prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) involves D-2 dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy and obtaining proximal margins to ensure removal of the gastric mucosa [Norton et al 2007].

In a young, healthy individual, the risk of mortality with PTG in an experienced surgeon’s hands is less than 1% [Lynch et al 2005]. However, the morbidity from prophylactic gastrectomy is high. All individuals have long-term morbidity related to both immediate post-surgical complications as well as long-term complications including rapid intestinal transit, dumping syndrome, diarrhea, eating habit alterations, and weight loss [Caldas et al 1999, Lewis et al 2001]. In addition, the risk for malabsorption increases after total gastrectomy; malabsorption accounts for the increased incidence of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and malnutrition described in persons with gastric cancer [Liedman 1999].

In light of these possible complications, it is recommended that a multidisciplinary team including a surgeon, gastroenterologist, and dietician provide preoperative and postoperative care for an individual undergoing PTG. The multidisciplinary team members can counsel candidates for PTG on the risks and benefits of the surgery. In making the decision to undergo PTG, the affected individual and his/her physicians should consider the following:

The age-specific risks of gastric cancer. Due to nutritional implications, PTG is not generally recommended until the individual’s growth period is complete. In families in which gastric cancer is early onset, PTG should be considered on a case by case basis [Blair et al 2006]. In these individuals, regular endoscopic screening may be begun prior to the consideration of PTG.

The 100% morbidity of gastrectomy and the 1% risk of mortality following the surgery

The risk in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant of developing extragastric cancers (e.g., lobular breast cancer and colorectal cancer) and the screening recommendations for these cancers

Breast cancer. Referral to a high-risk breast clinic is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Prophylactic mastectomy may be considered in women heterozygous for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. The authors are aware of only a handful of women who have to date undergone prophylactic mastectomy for this reason. It is important to note that prophylactic mastectomy can have psychological effects; appropriate counseling should include the possible altered perception of the body and sexual relationships [Lodder et al 2002, Brandberg et al 2008].

Surveillance

Gastric Cancer

Although it has been proposed that individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant undergo routine surveillance for gastric cancer, the optimal management of individuals at risk for a gastric cancer is controversial because of the unproven value of surveillance regime. In most cases, the gastric cancer is not detected until it reaches an incurable, advanced stage. Samples obtained at the time of prophylactic gastrectomy of six asymptomatic individuals with a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant revealed occult disease on microscopic analysis even though each individual had had normal screening tests prior to surgery [Norton et al 2007].

Due to the highly penetrant nature of HDGC caused by a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant, it is recommended that at-risk individuals who are not ready to undergo PTG or who have declined it be screened every six to 12 months by upper endoscopy with multiple random biopsies [Norton et al 2007, Barber et al 2008, Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text). Screening should begin five to ten years prior to the earliest cancer diagnosis in the family.

Several screening modalities have been tested:

Endoscopy. The effectiveness of endoscopy (currently the only method in use) in detecting the early lesions of gastric cancer has not been proven. Endoscopy permits direct inspection and biopsy of suspicious areas; however, diffuse gastric cancer is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage because the lesions tend to spread in the submucosa rather than as exophytic masses. The submucosal lesions are difficult to identify; an additional challenge is sampling bias in a macroscopically normal-appearing gastric mucosa [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004, Norton et al 2007]. It is recommended that individuals at risk who do not wish to have prophylactic gastrectomy undergo a detailed 30-minute endoscopic examination of the gastric mucosa with multiple random biopsies and biopsies of subtle lesions at six- to 12-month intervals [Caldas et al 1999].

Chromoendoscopy, using indigo-carmine staining, has been shown to improve the detection rate of early gastric cancer [Stepp et al 1998, Fennerty 1999]. Charlton et al [2004] studied six stomachs removed prophylactically after macroscopically normal gastric endoscopies. A pH-sensitive Congo red dye followed by pentagastric stimulation revealed signet ring foci that were five times more prevalent in the transitional zone of the distal stomach, a finding in contrast with other studies [Carneiro et al 2004]. The transitional zone occupies less than 10% of the stomach and lacks gastric-secreting G cells. The authors suggest that chromoendoscopy using Congo red dye and pentagastric stimulation may highlight this area during endoscopy and thus increase the chances of detecting cancer foci. Further research is needed to evaluate this possibility.

The same group of investigators reported a year later on a follow up of 99 surveillance endoscopies over five years [Shaw et al 2005]:

69 of 99 (70%) endoscopies were normal.

23 lesions with signet ring cell cancer were identified in ten individuals.

The Congo red/methylene blue dye detected foci between 4 and 10 mm, not less than 4 mm.

These findings need to be evaluated in a larger group of heterozygotes for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. However, concerns over the toxicity of Congo red have precluded the use of this stain in chromoendoscopy.

Endoscopic ultrasound examination is important in the detection and staging of gastrointestinal cancers [Pfau & Chak 2002], but is not believed to be useful in detecting precursor lesions [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004].

Other. Several other tools utilized include PET scan [van Kouwen et al 2004], endoscopic ultrasound, stool for guaiac, abdominal CT, and multiple random stomach biopsies [Barber et al 2008]. However, none of these reliably detects DGC, as demonstrated by the finding – one week after a number of these screening investigations were performed – of multiple small cancer foci in six of six gastrectomy specimens from individuals who were heterozygous for a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Norton et al 2007].

Lobular Breast Cancer (LBC)

Currently the data on women with germline CDH1 pathogenic variants and development of lobular breast cancer are insufficient to determine the best cancer screening strategies. Recommendations for LBC risk management in CDH1 heterozygotes or at-risk women are based on recommendations for women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant (see BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer). At-risk women should undergo regular breast screening as determined by their physicians, including monthly breast self-examinations and a clinical breast examination every six months.

Because lobular breast cancer is often difficult to diagnose on clinical examination and mammography, it may also be prudent to refer a woman who has a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant to a high-risk breast cancer screening program and to consider use of MRI, which appears to be more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in such women [Schelfout et al 2004; Lehman 2006; Schelfout, personal communication].

The screening should begin by age 35 years or five to ten years prior to the youngest age of breast cancer diagnosis in the family [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Colon Cancer

Although evidence is insufficient to conclude that colon cancer is a manifestation of HDGC, it is prudent to recommend colonoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 40 years or ten years prior to the youngest age at diagnosis of colon cancer in families in which both DGC and colon cancer have occurred [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives if the CDH1 pathogenic variant is identified in an affected family member, so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. See Genetic Counseling, Testing of asymptomatic at-risk individuals younger than age 18 years for discussion of issues related to testing of this population.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Testing of Populations at Risk

In Japan, where the prevalence of gastric cancer is high, a mass population screening program allows for successful detection of early disease by endoscopy [Shiratori et al 1985]. In this program, all suspicious findings seen on endoscopy are biopsied and evaluated histologically. Suspicious findings include minute changes in the color of the mucosa, altered vascular pattern, roughened surface, flat lesions, and minor mucosal irregularities.

Pregnancy Management

Evidence shows that pregnancy after PTG can have healthy and normal outcomes. Kaurah et al [2010] discussed six healthy pregnancies and infants born to four women after total gastrectomy. However, it is important that women who have undergone PTG and are pregnant be followed closely by their physician and a dietician who is aware of the situation.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Weight and height plotted on standard growth charts to evaluate growth over time

Baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram

Baseline carotid artery duplex scans to evaluate size of the lumen and intimal thickness in order to establish baseline vascular status

Baseline MRI/MRA of the brain and neck

Skeletal x-ray to evaluate for characteristic findings: acroosteolysis, clavicular resorption, coxa valga, and extraskeletal soft tissue calcifications [Cleveland et al 2012]

Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to assess bone mineral density. Note: This must be normalized for height-age [Gordon et al 2011].

Standard goniometry to assess joint mobility; physical therapy and occupational therapy assessments

Nutritional assessment

Audiologic, ophthalmologic, and dental examinations

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A complete, system-based management guide is available from the Progeria Research Foundation.

No evidence that a low-cholesterol, low-fat, or other special diet influences the course of progeria exists. Thus, a regular diet is indicated unless the lipid profile becomes abnormal, at which point appropriate treatment includes exercise, diet modification, and medication as warranted. Frequent small meals tend to maximize caloric intake.

Stiffened peripheral vasculature may be less tolerant to dehydration; therefore maintaining optimal hydration orally is recommended.

Shoe pads are recommended, as lack of body fat leads to foot discomfort.

Use of sunscreen on all exposed areas of skin, including the head, is recommended for outdoor activities.

Prior to decline in cardiovascular or neurologic status (resulting from strokes, angina, or heart attacks), children should be encouraged to be as physically active as possible, taking into account possible limitations related to restricted range of motion of joints and hip problems including osteoarthritis and hip dislocation.

Because intellect and maturity are normal, age-appropriate schooling is usually indicated.

Infections are generally handled as for unaffected children.

Medications. Dosages should be based on body weight or body surface area and not on age. Anesthetics should be used with particular caution.

Nitroglycerin is frequently of benefit if angina develops.

Routine anticongestive therapy is appropriate if congestive heart failure is present.

Statins are recommended for their putative effect on farnesylation inhibition.

Anticoagulation is warranted if vascular blockage, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, angina, or myocardial infarction occur.

Injuries. Wound healing is normal.

Fracture rate is equivalent to the general pediatric population. When children do fracture, treatment and healing are routine.

Hips. Conservative management of hip dislocation with physical therapy and body bracing and avoidance of surgical procedures on bones are recommended when possible.

Teeth. Extraction of primary teeth may be required to avoid crowding and development of two rows of teeth. Since secondary teeth may erupt slowly or not at all, pulling primary teeth to make room for secondary teeth should be performed after secondary teeth have fully or almost fully or almost fully descended. Once the primary tooth has been extracted, the secondary tooth often moves into the appropriate position with time.

General anesthesia and intubation should be performed with extreme caution, ideally with fiberoptic intubation, if possible. Individuals with HGPS may have a narrow and unusually shaped airway; additionally, they may exhibit an extreme sensitivity to alterations in blood pressure due to vascular stiffness.

Physical therapy. Routine physical and occupational therapy is recommended to help maintain range of motion in large and small (i.e., finger) joints; see Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy in Progeria (pdf). Active stretching and strengthening, along with hydrotherapy, are recommended.

Podiatric evaluation is indicated to determine if shoe inserts are needed

Eye care. Corneal dryness, clouding or ulceration should be fully evaluated by an ophthalmologist. Exposure keratitis primarily caused by nocturnal lagophthalmos can be treated during daytime with ocular lubication and during sleep with moisturizing ointment or by closing eyelids with skin tape.

Hearing loss. Hearing aids can be used, when clinically necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Aspirin. Based on the evidence from adult studies that low doses of aspirin help delay heart attacks and strokes, it is probably appropriate to give children with HGPS low-dose aspirin treatment, at doses of 2-3 mg/kg body weight per day. Note: If chicken pox or influenza is prevalent in the community, it may be advisable to discontinue the aspirin during that time because of the increased risk of Reye syndrome.

Adequate oral hydration is recommended, as the vasculature becomes generally less pliable and the risks of stroke and cardiac complications increase over time due to decreased vascular compensation. This is especially important during hot weather or airplane travel.

Vitamin supplementation. Standard amounts of ordinary multiple vitamin tablets are appropriate.

Fluoride supplements are recommended in areas where needed.

Immunizations. The routine doses and administration schedule for all immunizations are recommended. Immunizations are generally handled as for unaffected children.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

ECG, measurement of blood pressure, echocardiogram, and carotid duplex scans annually or semi-annually to monitor for cardiovascular disease. Note: Children may experience severe carotid artery atherosclerotic blockage prior to any significant ECG changes.

Annually:

Neurologic assessment

MRI/MRA of head and neck to assess for vascular changes and silent strokes, which are true strokes that do not result in any clinical symptoms

Lipid profiles

Dental examination, x-ray, and cleaning

Hip x-rays to evaluate for avascular necrosis and progressing coxa valga

Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and/or peripheral cutaneous computed tomography scan of spine, hips, and total body to assess bone density and body fat composition

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment for joint contractures and activities of daily living

Complete audiologic assessment with special attention to possible low-frequency conductive hearing loss

Complete ophthalmologic examination with special attention to possible exposure keratopathy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Children should avoid being in the midst of large crowds with much taller and larger peers because of the increased risk of injury. Physical activity should be self-limited.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search HGPS or progeria within ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical trials for HGPS.

The three therapies currently under human clinical trial investigation for HGPS include: lonafarnib, pravastatin, and zoledronate. For each of these drugs, the target action in HGPS is to inhibit post-translational farnesylation of progerin, the active disease-causing protein in HGPS (see Figure 1):

Lonafarnib is an investigational farnesyltransferase inhibitor.

Pravastatin inhibits HMG-CoA reductase.

Zoledronate is a bisphosphonate that inhibits farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase.

Three clinical trials have been conducted: lonafarnib monotherapy; lonafarnib in combination with pravastatin and zoledronate; and pravastatin and zoledronate administered as combination therapy:

Clinical trial results for lonafarnib have revealed improvement in the rate of weight gain, vascular distensibility as measured via pulse wave velocity and vascular echodensity, bone rigidity, neurosensory hearing [Gordon et al 2012], headaches [Ullrich et al 2013], and life span [Gordon et al 2014].

Trial results for pravastatin and zoledronate are not yet known.

Treatments proposed through preclinical studies but not tested in humans:

Rapamycin improved cellular phenotypes in HGPS fibroblasts via increased autophagy [Cao et al 2011, Cenni et al 2011] and extends life span in a lamin A-deficient mouse model.

Antisense oligonucleotides [Osorio et al 2011] reduced progerin protein levels, enhanced life expectancy, improved disease phenotype, and improved cellular phenotypes in an HGPS mouse model.

Resveratrol [Liu et al 2012] improves the cellular phenotype in HGPS fibroblasts, improves lamin A function via a SIRT-1 dependent manner and extends life span in a Zmpste24-/- mouse model.

Nat10 inhibition by a chemical named remodelin that is not yet developed for clinical use corrected phenotypes in HGPS fibroblasts [Larrieu et al 2014].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurocognitive evaluation of the affected individual including brain imaging

Evaluation of school performance with attention to possible learning disabilities

Treatment of Manifestations

Of primary importance in the management of individuals with HHH syndrome is rapid control of the hyperammonemic episodes that may result from changes in diet (e.g., protein intake), infection, fasting, or injury, or have no apparent cause. Long-term management of affected individuals focuses on the prevention of episodes of hyperammonemia and attempts to lower the level of plasma ornithine concentration.

It is critical that the acute and long-term management of individuals with HHH syndrome be performed in conjunction with a metabolic specialist.

Treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes. Assess plasma ammonia concentration, complete chemistry panel, arterial blood gases (ABGs), CBC and differential (to evaluate for an infectious process), urinalysis, urine and plasma amino acids, and urine orotic acid.

Plasma ammonia concentrations ≥100-125 μmol/L (~2 times control values) should be treated immediately.

Discontinue all oral intake until the patient’s condition is stabilized because vomiting may be induced by hyperammonemia and/or some of the drugs given intravenously to promote ammonia removal (e.g., as part of nitrogen scavenging therapy). This approach also stops all protein intake.

Initial intravenous infusion should be 10% dextrose (with 1/4 normal saline and 20mEq/liter KCl) at twice maintenance; ammonia and glucose/Na/K/Cl/CO2 concentrations should be monitored every two hours or when neurologic status changes. It is important to note that patients respond neurologically differently to rising ammonia concentrations: an individual with HHH syndrome is more likely to respond to the initial IV infusion of dextrose and to normalize his/her plasma ammonia concentration when compared to an individual with a urea cycle disorder such as OTC deficiency or ASS deficiency. If clinical status does not improve, infusion of supplemental arginine and ammonia removal drugs is added to the regimen.

Follow published protocols for treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes similar to those instituted for OTC deficiency [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]. These protocols consist of arginine supplementation and use of intravenous bolus and maintenance infusions of the ammonia removal drugs sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate. The New England Consortium of Metabolic Programs has a complete set of treatment protocols and algorithms that are freely available and easily accessible.

An initial priming dose of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate is given (see Table 3).

Table 3. 

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group

Infusion 1

Infants and Children

Adolescents and Adults

10% arginine HCl

210 mg/kg/day

4.0 g/m2

Sodium benzoate

250 mg/kg/day

5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate

250 mg/kg/day

5.5 g/m2

1. 

Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution.

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group

Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution.

If ammonia levels stabilize, the same arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate solution is infused over 24 hrs.

Note: All preparations of arginine and ammonia removal drugs should be double- or triple-checked given the potential for drug intoxication if high doses are given or continued CNS ammonia toxicity if low doses are given. If sodium benzoate or sodium phenylacetate solutions are not available, infusion of arginine should be started.

Table 4. 

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia

Drug

Action

Glucose

Raises insulin levels

Induces anabolic state

Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids

Arginine 1

Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder

Stimulates secretion of insulin

Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2

Sodium benzoate 3

Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4

Eliminates one amino group in the urine

Sodium phenylacetate 3

Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4

Eliminates two amino groups in the urine

1. 

A non-essential amino acid in humans

2. 

Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals.

3. 

Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase

4. 

Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia

Raises insulin levels

Induces anabolic state

Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids

Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder

Stimulates secretion of insulin

Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2

Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4

Eliminates one amino group in the urine

Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4

Eliminates two amino groups in the urine

A non-essential amino acid in humans

Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals.

Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase

Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]

Hemodialysis. If the patient fails to respond to the above treatment of hyperammonemia, if the plasma ammonia concentration increases, and/or if the neurologic status deteriorates, hemodialysis should be started promptly to remove ammonia from the circulation. Infusion of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should continue during hemodialysis.

Dialysis may be prolonged if the catabolic state persists.

Nutrition. Twenty-four to 36 hours after initial admission the patient should start receiving intravenous alimentation including daily doses of only essential amino acids, carnitine, vitamins, and lipids to help avoid a catabolic state which will prolong hyperammonemia. Note: Non-essential amino acids (i.e., glutamine, proline, and glycine) should be avoided since they increase the nitrogen load to an already compromised urea cycle.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Depending on their age, individuals with HHH syndrome should be maintained on a protein-restricted diet. For infants and children the dietary protein needs to be restricted to control hyperammonemia, but sufficient for normal growth and development.

Dietary supplementation with Cyclinex®-1 (infants and children) or Cyclinex®-2 (adult) formulas that provide only essential amino acids and other nutritional supplements have been helpful for some affected individuals.

Citrulline supplementation at 0.17 g/kg/day or 3.8 g/m2/day is preferred to arginine because citrulline accepts an aspartate (via the arginosuccinate synthase reaction) and therefore eliminates two amino groups per cycle. Moreover, there may be a possible association between arginine supplementation and progression of lower limb spasticity [HHH International Round Table, Roma 2006, unpublished].

Sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®) is given at 450-600 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Sodium phenylbutyrate initially is imported into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to produce phenylacetate.

Lysine supplementation is indicated when plasma lysine concentrations are low. Low plasma lysine concentrations have been associated with delayed growth and development.

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, glutamine, arginine, and essential amino acids should be maintained within the normal range. Note: (1) Although elevated plasma ornithine concentrations may decrease significantly if dietary management is followed, complete normalization of plasma ornithine concentration is rarely observed. (2) Even in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, affected individuals may continue to develop neurologic complications such as spasticity or learning disabilities. Maintaining as low a level of plasma ornithine concentration as possible by restricting protein intake could help prevent some of the progressive neurologic complications seen in these individuals.

Liver transplantation is not indicated for persons with HHH syndrome. Because SLC25A15 and the ornithine degradation pathway are expressed in all tissues (i.e., brain, kidney) and most cell types (i.e., astrocytes, fibroblasts), liver transplantation may correct the hyperammonemia, but it will not correct tissue-specific metabolic abnormalities that also contribute to the neurologic pathology.

Three individuals with HHH syndrome who had acute fulminant hepatic failure and coagulopathy rapidly stabilized after protein restriction and arginine or citrulline supplementation [Fecarotta et al 2006, Mhanni et al 2008].

Surveillance

All surveillance of patients with HHH syndrome should be a combined effort of the general pediatrician or adult practitioner and a metabolic specialist.

Height, weight, and head circumference should be assessed routinely in children from the time of diagnosis to adolescence.

Plasma ammonia concentration, plasma and urine amino acid concentrations, urine organic acids, and urine orotic acid need to be monitored routinely, based on age and history of compliance and metabolic decompensation.

Low plasma concentrations of essential amino acids could trigger a catabolic state, requiring readjustment of the diet/formulas.

Low plasma concentrations of lysine may lead to delays in growth and development in infants.

Parents of infants and small children should be alert to subtle changes in mood, behavior, and eating and/or the onset of vomiting, which may suggest that plasma concentrations of glutamine and ammonia are increasing.

School performance should be monitored since poor school performance may lead to low self-esteem and/or behavioral problems that could influence compliance with a protein-restricted diet.

Periodic neurologic evaluation is warranted to monitor for neurologic deterioration even when metabolic control is optimal.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Excess dietary protein intake

Non-prescribed protein supplements such as those used to increase size of skeletal muscle during exercise regimens

Prolonged fasting during an illness or weight loss

Use of intravenous steroids

Valproic acid, which exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle disorders

Exposure to communicable diseases

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, use molecular genetic testing to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives to allow for early diagnosis and treatment, perhaps even before symptoms occur. Note: Plasma concentrations of ornithine and urinary excretion of orotic acid and homocitrulline may be unreliable in asymptomatic persons.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in a woman with HHH syndrome has not been published. Rebecca Mardach, MD (Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles) provided information to the authors about a healthy boy born after an uneventful pregnancy to a clinically asymptomatic woman in her early 20s who had been diagnosed with HHH syndrome at age 13 years in the course of evaluation of her affected five-year-old sib [Camacho et al 2006]. During her pregnancy the mother was maintained on a protein and citrulline regimen that allowed normal fetal development and maternal health; plasma and urine amino acids, orotic acid, plasma ammonia, and urine organic acids were monitored.

There are no well-controlled epidemiologic studies of the fetal effects of sodium benzoate, phenylacetate, or phenylbutyrate during human pregnancy. However, sodium benzoate has been reported to lead to malformations and neurotoxicity/nephrotoxicity in zebrafish larvae [Tsay et al 2007] and to possible teratogenicity in rats [Minor & Becker 1971, Onodera et al 1978]. As a known differentiating agent, sodium phenylbutyrate also functions as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with potential teratogenicity given its ability to alter gene expression in fetal mice [Di Renzo et al 2007].

The FDA has assigned sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate to pregnancy category C (“potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks”). Theoretically, the use of benzoate/phenylacetate and in particular sodium phenylbutyrate should be avoided during pregnancy, especially during the first trimester. The use of these medications should be carefully evaluated for each individual (benefit/risk ratio) in consultation with a metabolic genetics specialist. Despite the report of successful administration of sodium phenybutyrate to an OTC-deficient woman throughout her 11- to 33-week gestation period, caution is advised and the alternate use of sodium benzoate, if deemed necessary, is recommended [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000]. Mendez-Figueroa et al [2010] reported a small number of females with OTC deficiency who successfully completed their pregnancies without need of ammonia removal medications. This study also reported the use of sodium benzoate to manage a pregnant woman with OTC deficiency who developed mild hyperammonemia during induction of labor.

No specialized care for a fetus known to have HHH syndrome is warranted.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), the following evaluations are recommended [Faughnan et al 2011, McDonald et al 2011a]:

Medical history, with particular attention to epistaxis and other bleeding, anemia or polycythemia, diseases of the heart, lung and liver, and neurologic symptoms

Physical examination including inspection for telangiectases (particularly on fingers, lips, tongue, oropharynx, cheeks, or conjunctiva) and listening for abdominal bruits

Complete blood count, with particular attention to anemia or polycythemia. If anemia is present, it is important to consider other causes of anemia, particularly when the anemia appears to be disproportionate to the amount of epistaxis. People with HHT may develop medical problems unrelated to HHT (e.g., ulcers or colon cancer) that can cause GI blood loss. Polycythemia raises suspicion for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.

Contrast echocardiography for detection of pulmonary shunting/AVM and measurement of the pulmonary artery systolic pressure as a screen for pulmonary artery hypertension. When pulmonary shunting is suggested (or if dependable contrast echocardiography is not available), CT angiography with cuts of 3 mm or less to define size and location of lesions(s) is the next step.

Head MRI (with and without gadolinium) to detect cerebral AVMs, performed as early as possible, preferably in the first year of life. Adults, including those screened with MRI in infancy, should all have a screening head MRI to detect unsuspected vascular lesions and occult cerebral abscesses.

Consideration of ultrasound or CT examination for evidence of hepatic AVM if the individual has symptoms such as high-output failure associated with hepatic vascular abnormalities or otherwise unexplained elevations in liver function tests, or if presence of a visceral AVM would confirm a diagnosis of HHT

Note: Screening for hepatic AVMs in asymptomatic individuals is not common practice because:

Hepatic AVMs are not usually symptomatic and, when they do become symptomatic, it is not sudden and catastrophic, as is seen with pulmonary AVMs and cerebral AVMs; and

Treatment options for hepatic AVMs are less satisfactory than those for pulmonary or cerebral AVMs.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Nosebleeds

It is appropriate to consider intervention for nosebleeds in the case of anemia attributable to the nosebleeds or if an individual feels that the frequency or duration interferes significantly with normal activities.

Humidification and the daily application of nasal lubricants may be helpful.

Hemostatic products (gauze, sponge or powder products) available over the counter help individuals self-manage significant nosebleeds.

Laser ablation typically done under general anesthesia may be the most effective intervention for control of mild to moderate nosebleeds. Office-based sclerotherapy was shown to be a potentially safe and useful alternative in an uncontrolled Spanish study [Morais et al 2012] and a small retrospective US pilot study [Boyer et al 2011].

Young's nasal closure is a consideration for severe epistaxis which has proven unresponsive to the above methods [Richer et al 2012]. Surgical treatment for severe epistaxis in persons with HHT should be performed by surgeons who treat people with HHT regularly.

Oral drug therapy. A meta-analysis of studies of hormonal and anti-hormonal treatment concluded that estrogen-progesterone at doses used for oral contraception may eliminate bleeding in symptomatic HHT and is a reasonable initial option to consider for fertile women [Jameson & Cave 2004]. An anti-estrogen, tamoxifen, was reported to decrease nosebleeds in one series [Yaniv et al 2009]. Antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron®) have been used with some success in selected individuals; the associated risks are not well established [Fernandez-L et al 2007]. Thalidomide, an angiogenesis inhibitor, reduced the severity and frequency of nosebleeds in six of seven affected individuals in a small series [Lebrin et al 2010]. Oral propranolol has also been suggested as a potential treatment [Albiñana et al 2012].

Topical drug therapy. Current evidence and experience suggest that the simple humidification and moisturizing effects of medicated sprays and ointments are more helpful than the particular medication. A multi-HHT center randomized, cross-over, placebo controlled trial (NOSE Trial) to study the efficacy of several medicated nose sprays (bevacizumab, estriol, and tranexamic acid) in the treatment of epistaxis concluded that all groups, including the placebo group using saline spray, had a significant improvement in epistaxis. None of the three topical therapies was any better at decreasing epistaxis frequency than twice-daily saline spray [Whitehead et al 2016]. Another randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled clinical trial of three doses of bevacizumab nasal spray was published simultaneously with the NOSE Trial. Here again, topical bevacizumab had no effect on epistaxis [Dupuis-Girod et al 2016]. Case reports or small series suggest that these and other topically administered agents (e.g., timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution) may help reduce the duration or frequency of nosebleeds in those with HHT [Flanagan et al 2012, Guldmann et al 2012, Olitsky 2012, Reh et al 2013].

Case reports and a small series [Bose et al 2009, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012, Thompson et al 2014] suggest that IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab may be efficacious in those with severe, intractable nosebleeds.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Treatment is unnecessary unless aggressive iron therapy has been ineffective in maintaining hemoglobin concentration in the normal range.

Endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, mesenteric and celiac angiography, and radionuclide studies may be used to localize the source of bleeding and its type [Grève et al 2010].

Endoscopic application of a heater probe, bicap, or laser is the mainstay of local treatment.

Small bowel bleeding sites and larger vascular malformations can be removed surgically after they are identified by nuclear medicine studies.

For severe GI bleeding associated with intractable iron deficiency anemia, various pharmacologic agents have shown promise based on case reports or small uncontrolled series. Treatment with oral estrogen-progesterone or tranexamic acid has decreased transfusion needs [Proctor et al 2008]. A number of single cases of dramatic reduction in GI bleeding after IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab have been reported [Flieger et al 2006, Fodstad et al 2011].

Anemia

Treatment of anemia with iron replacement and red blood cell transfusion, if necessary, is appropriate.

Persons with iron deficiency who are intolerant of or do not respond to oral iron benefit from parenteral administration of iron.

Pulmonary AVMs

Treatment of pulmonary AVMs is indicated for dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and hypoxemia, but is most important for prevention of lung hemorrhage and the neurologic complications of brain abscess and stroke, even in those who are asymptomatic with respect to pulmonary function and oxygen saturation. Any pulmonary AVM with a feeding vessel that exceeds 1.0 mm in diameter requires consideration of occlusion [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010]. Transcatheter embolotherapy (TCE) with coils, occluder devices (Amplatzer®), or both is the treatment of choice. Occasionally, a small lesion cannot be reached because of its location or the size of the feeding vessel. Multiple coils may be needed to occlude AVMs with large or multiple feeding arteries.

Long-term follow up by chest CT and/or contrast echocardiography is indicated after transcatheter occlusion of pulmonary AVMs because of reported recanalization and development or growth of untreated pulmonary AVMs [Cottin et al 2007]. Usually a follow-up CT is done six to 12 months post-occlusion, and if no recanalized or new PAVMs are noted, follow-up CT is done at five-year intervals thereafter [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010, Faughnan et al 2011].

Hepatic AVMs

Treatment of cardiac failure or liver failure secondary to hepatic AVMs is currently problematic. Embolization of hepatic AVMs, which is successful for treatment of pulmonary AVMs, has led to lethal hepatic infarctions. Most individuals with symptomatic hepatic AVMs can be satisfactorily managed with intensive medical therapy [Buscarini et al 2011].

Liver transplantation has been the standard treatment for those (usually older) individuals whose symptoms of hepatic failure do not respond to medical management [Buscarini et al 2006, Lerut et al 2006, Dupuis-Girod et al 2010, Lee et al 2010, Chavan et al 2013].

Bevacizumab administered intravenously has been reported to decrease cardiac output and symptoms of heart failure in affected individuals with severe symptoms secondary to hepatic AVMs in case reports and one series [Mitchell et al 2008, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012].

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Cerebral AVMs

Cerebral AVMs greater than 1.0 cm in diameter are usually treated using neurovascular surgery, embolotherapy, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery.

Note: Before proceeding with treatment for any visceral AVM, individuals and their doctors are encouraged to contact the nearest multidisciplinary HHT clinic, which can be located through the support group, Cure HHT, to assure that appropriate diagnostic and treatment plans are in place.

Intestinal Polyps

Any individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis (JP) should be screened for manifestations of HHT, and the family should be screened for polyps. Any person with HHT who has gastrointestinal polyps, especially at an early age, should be evaluated for JP and managed accordingly (see Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations. Prevention is currently focused at ablating, occluding, resecting or shrinking telangiectases and AVMs to prevent associated morbidity and mortality.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If contrast echocardiography is positive for pulmonary shunting, even if no pulmonary AVM is demonstrated by chest CT, a lifetime recommendation for prophylactic antibiotics in accordance with the American Heart Association protocol for dental cleaning and other "dirty" procedures is advised because of the risk of abscess, particularly brain abscess, associated with right to left shunting [Dupuis-Girod et al 2007]. For the same reason, an air filter or extreme caution not to introduce air bubbles is recommended with IV lines.

Note: The risk associated with these lesions is not for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance

The following protocol is recommended for follow up of all individuals for whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite and for all individuals at risk for HHT based on family history in whom HHT has not been ruled out by molecular diagnosis [Faughnan et al 2011]:

Annual evaluation by a health care provider familiar with HHT, including interval history for epistaxis or other bleeding, shortness of breath or decreased exercise tolerance, and headache or other neurologic symptoms

Periodic hematocrit/hemoglobin and ferritin determination with appropriate treatment for iron deficiency anemia

Reevaluation for pulmonary AVM at approximately five-year intervals [Nawaz et al 2008]:

Contrast echocardiogram is used (if available) if the previous contrast echocardiogram did not reveal evidence of a pulmonary or intracardiac right to left shunt.

Chest CT with contrast rather than pulmonary angiography is used if the previous contrast echocardiogram revealed evidence of a right to left shunt.

Reevaluation for cerebral AVM. While cerebral AVMs are nearly always congenital, development or evolution of cerebral AVMs in the first two decades of life has been reported [Hetts et al 2014]. Accordingly, many HHT experts recommend rescreening the brain once more after puberty if the initial brain MRI was done in childhood.

Periodic screening for gastrointestinal polyps and malignant change in persons with juvenile polyps

Childhood

Because serious complications of pulmonary and cerebral AVM can occur at any age [Mei-Zahav et al 2006, Curie et al 2007], screening for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs is recommended in children from families with HHT, especially those with ENG pathogenic variants [Al-Saleh et al 2009].

Head MRI with and without gadolinium is recommended as early as the first few months of life [Faughnan et al 2011].

Pulse oximetry in the supine and sitting positions every one to two years during childhood is recommended as a minimum to screen for pulmonary AVMs. It may be of concern if the sitting value is even a few percentage points below that of the supine value. (Since most pulmonary AVMs are in the lower lobes, many individuals with pulmonary AVMs have higher oxygen saturation when lying than when sitting because of the effect of gravity.) Oxygen saturations below 97% should be followed up with contrast echocardiography. Many, but not all, serious complications of pulmonary AVM during childhood have occurred in hypoxemic children.

By at least age ten years, additional evaluation should be performed by contrast echocardiography, with a follow-up CT if positive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with significant epistaxis are advised to avoid vigorous nose blowing, lifting of heavy objects, straining during bowel movements, and finger manipulation in the nose. Some individuals with HHT experience increased epistaxis after drinking alcohol.

Most otolaryngologists with experience treating individuals with HHT advise against electric and chemical cautery and transcatheter embolotherapy for treatment of recurrent nosebleeds in most situations.

Anticoagulants including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen that interfere with normal clotting should be avoided unless required for treatment of other medical conditions. In one study, lower dose agents, particularly anti-platelet agents, were not associated with hemorrhage in a high proportion of affected individuals. The findings support the use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents, with caution, if there is a very strong indication for their use [Devlin et al 2013].

Scuba diving should be avoided unless contrast echocardiography performed within the last five years was negative for evidence of a right to left shunt.

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) and prompt initiation of treatment to reduce morbidity and mortality.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, evaluate with molecular genetic testing.

If the familial pathogenic variant is not known and, consequently, HHT cannot been ruled out by molecular diagnosis, at-risk family members should follow the same protocol as is recommended for individuals in whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite (see Surveillance).

Individuals older than age 40 years should have a targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT. The absence of mild but recurrent epistaxis and subtle telangiectases in characteristic locations on careful examination is reassuring.

In individuals age 40 years and younger, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT in addition to an evaluation for brain and pulmonary AVMs should be done initially, as features of HHT may not be identified by medical history and clinical examination in younger individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women with HHT and untreated pulmonary AVMs are also at high risk for lung hemorrhage and cerebral complications of air embolism. Women with treated pulmonary AVMs appear to be at no higher risk during pregnancy than those without pulmonary AVMs.

Therapies Under Investigation

Newer therapies designed to interfere with the development of abnormal vascular connections include thalidomide and bevacizumab; while numerous case reports and small uncontrolled series tout promise, controlled trials are needed [Flieger et al 2006, Mitchell et al 2008, Bose et al 2009, Davidson et al 2010, Lebrin et al 2010, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Fodstad et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hyper IgE syndrome (HIES), the following evaluations are recommended:

Dermatologic examination

Chest imaging

Evaluation for scoliosis

Dental examination for possible retention of primary teeth

Treatment of Manifestations

Currently, there is no cure or targeted treatment for AD-HIES, and the mainstay of therapy is prevention of staphylococcal abscesses and pneumonias with anti-staphylococcal prophylactic antibiotics as well as early aggressive treatment of infections. It is important to institute antibiotic therapy at the earliest sign of infection. Many affected individuals progress from minor to major infection rapidly, and systemic signs of infection may be minimal.

Prophylactic antibiotics targeting Staphylococcus aureus and other pyogenic bacteria are primarily used to prevent the pneumonias and their complications.

If structural damage to the lungs (e.g., bronchiectasis and/or pneumatocoeles) occurs, the breadth of antimicrobial coverage is usually extended, as these structural abnormalities become secondarily infected with Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas) or fungi (e.g., Aspergillus).

The combination of prophylactic antimicrobials and aggressive diagnosis and treatment of pneumonias helps to diminish these secondary lung parenchymal abnormalities.

Continued use of antifungal agents to control mucocutaneous candidiasis and to prevent pulmonary disease may be necessary.

The skin disease of eczema and recurrent boils is usually well controlled with antiseptic therapies such as diluted bleach baths (~1/2 - 1 cup of bleach per bath tub of water for 15 minutes 3 times weekly) or frequent swimming in a chlorinated pool.

Adequate skin lubrication is needed with frequent bleach baths.

Medications such as histamine-1 antagonists to control pruritus are helpful for more significant eczema.

Intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin is used with anecdotal improvement for some individuals, especially those who fail to make protective levels of specific antibodies following vaccination challenge; but prospective, randomized controlled studies of immunoglobulin supplementation have not been performed.

There is no known treatment or prevention for the non-immunologic characteristics.

As many individuals have osteopenia and minimal trauma fractures, optimizing of calcium and vitamin D intake is prudent. The role of medications such as bisphosphonates for persons with AD-HIES with osteoporosis is largely unexplored.

Optimal blood pressure management seems appropriate in light of the arterial abnormalities.

Anti-platelet or anticoagulation therapies may be considered for individuals with significant coronary artery aneurysms to prevent myocardial infarction related to clotting with aneurysm.

However, any anti-clotting therapies need to be weighed against the risk of hemoptysis, a recognized complication of fungal or bacterial lung disease in individuals with AD-HIES.

The role of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HSCT) in AD-HIES remains unknown. An adult treated for lymphoma with HSCT had improvement of many of the clinical features of HIES and decreasing IgE concentrations, but then died of transplant-related complications [Nester et al 1998]. A young girl with recurrent infections had full engraftment and reduction of serum IgE concentration that rebounded with the cessation of immunosuppression [Gennery et al 2000]. Recently, two unrelated affected teenagers who received HSCT for non-Hodgkin lymphoma were reported. Their immunologic and non-immunologic features, such as osteoporosis and course facial skin, were corrected [Goussetis et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prophylactic antimicrobials are used to decrease the number of boils and pneumonias. Aberrant healing from pyogenic pneumonias leads to bronchiectasis and pneumatocoeles; therefore, prevention of these pneumonias may lead to better preservation of lung parenchyma and decreased risk of secondary, more difficult to treat pulmonary infections. The role of prophylactic antifungals to prevent pulmonary mold infections is unknown.

Osteoporosis and minimal trauma fractures are frequent findings. The effect of calcium and vitamin D supplementation is not known.

Surveillance

Individuals with AD-HIES often lack systemic signs of infection and feel better than one would expect when actively infected; therefore, a high index of suspicion for infection is necessary to permit recognition of pneumonias and institution of antibiotic treatment prior to development of extensive lung damage.

Periodic chest imaging is helpful, especially if pneumonias have occurred, to assess whether structural lesions to the lung (e.g., pneumatocoeles) have formed.

Because the microbiology of damaged lung tissue may change over time, it is important to obtain sputum samples intermittently and with acute infections, to direct therapy. Sputum samples should be obtained for microbiology during lung infections.

Scoliosis screening of adolescents is indicated to guide any necessary intervention.

Dental visits should ensure that primary teeth are removed in a timely fashion if necessary to allow secondary teeth to emerge.

Periodic laboratory monitoring should be performed for individuals on chronic antimicrobial therapy.

Individuals with AD-HIES have an increased incidence of lymphoma, which should be considered in the evaluation of lymphadenopathy, masses, or bony lesions.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives of a proband with a known pathogenic variant allows for early diagnosis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cessation of prophylactic antimicrobials is often advised during pregnancy. This may increase the risk of infection and should be taken into consideration. There have been pregnancies without complication, but also instances in which lung disease has worsened after pregnancy, potentially from limited antimicrobial options, delayed radiographic diagnosis, and impaired pulmonary clearance.

Risks associated with pregnancy should be discussed with affected females who have pulmonary compromise, severe scoliosis, or other complications of AD-HIES.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Parents have reported anecdotally that due to the severe eczema of their child, there have been occasions when the health care providers have alerted Child Protective Services reporting that the child is not being kept clean. While skin hygiene is very important, in spite of the best efforts of caregivers, sometimes the skin flares are severe. Questions about parental neglect/abuse have also arisen when a toddler or young child appears with evidence of repeated fractures. Health care providers who are attuned to these possibilities can serve as important advocates for the parents and family.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), as well as to determine the appropriate therapy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to evaluate for rashes, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and neurologic dysfunction

Evaluation of blood and bone marrow compartments (CBC and BM biopsy)

Determination of the extent of liver involvement by measuring serum concentration of transaminases, bilirubin, triglycerides, sodium, and lactate dehydrogenase

Identification of potential infectious co-factors, especially viral infection or reactivation, which would require specific treatment

Establishing the presence or extent of CNS involvement by evaluating the CSF and performing neuroimaging and neuropsychological assessment

Testing of NK cell activity, intracellular perforin and granzyme B expression, and CD107a mobilization if these tests are available

Evaluation of inflammatory factors such as serum concentrations of ferritin, sIL2Rα, and other cytokines

Evaluation and monitoring of PT, PTT, and fibrinogen

Clinical genetics consultation

Molecular genetic testing, if not performed previously, which may help to determine if an affected individual is a candidate for bone marrow transplantation:

Genetic testing for PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, and STXBP2 pathogenic variants

Consideration of testing for RAB27A pathogenic variants in any individual with HLH, even with no obvious evidence of depigmentation

Consideration of testing for XIAP (formerly BIRC4) and SH2D1A pathogenic variants in any male with HLH

Collection of materials for future characterization of underlying genetic defects, most significantly in individuals with terminal disease

Treatment of Manifestations

For a detailed explanation of treatment for HLH, see Jordan et al [2011] (full text).

HLH-1994. To improve survival, in 1994 the Histiocyte Society initiated a prospective international collaborative therapeutic study. It combined chemotherapy and immunotherapy (etoposide, corticosteroids, cyclosporine A, and intrathecal methotrexate for individuals with CNS diseases), followed by HSCT in persistent, recurring, and/or familial disease. Although HLH-94 was primarily designed for the treatment of FHL, it was also open to all individuals with non-familial HLH.

HLH-2004. The HLH-2004 protocol was opened on January 1, 2004, and was designed for individuals with FHL and non-familial HLH. This protocol was based on the HLH-94 protocol with minor therapeutic modifications such as initiation of cyclosporine from onset of induction therapy.

The two protocols developed by the Histiocyte Society are available from the Histiocyte Society website.

Given the poor prognosis of individuals with HLH without prompt and effective treatment, it is recommended that treatment be initiated when clinical suspicion is high, even if all recommended studies are incomplete. In general, treatment involves the following:

Chemotherapy and immunotherapy to achieve a clinically stable resolution prior to hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Antibiotics or antiviral agents to treat or prevent infections that may have triggered the exaggerated inflammatory response

Allogeneic HCT, the only curative therapy, which should be undertaken in children with confirmed FHL as early in life as feasible:

Presymptomatically if status is confirmed by family history of clinical HLH, or

After achievement of clinical remission in simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family)

Use of HCT has improved survival significantly [Henter et al 2002]. Initially, three-year-survival in children who received HLH-94 therapy was approximately 64% [Horne et al 2005a]. More recently, reduced intensity regimens prior to HCT have diminished the early transplant mortality and increased three-year-survival rates to 92% [Marsh et al 2010c]. Long-term follow up reveals that after HCT most children treated early in the disease course return to normal or near-normal quality of life. Brain atrophy secondary to steroid therapy often identified on neuroimaging studies during the acute phase of HLH gradually resolves after HCT [Shuper et al 1998]. However, children who experienced serious CNS involvement may have irreversible neurologic problems and learning disabilities despite adequate disease control following HCT.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be undertaken in children with confirmed familial HLH as early in life as possible.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prompt treatment of HLH with infection prophylaxis is indicated in immunocompromised individuals.

Surveillance

The following are recommended annually after HCT:

Neuropsychological evaluation

Regular follow-up by transplant specialists to monitor for late complications relating to growth and hormone function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Live vaccinations

Exposure to infections

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk sibs for the family-specific pathogenic variants is appropriate to identify those who are affected before symptoms occur for the purpose of early medical management and consideration of presymptomatic bone marrow transplantation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

To date, pregnancy in a woman with primary FHL has not been described. Secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a rare complication of pregnancy and is beyond the scope of this review. Primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis in the fetus is a (reportedly) rare but recognized entity which is typically characterized by nonimmune fetal hydrops [Malloy et al 2004, Nitta et al 2007, Woods et al 2009], preterm delivery [Woods et al 2009], and/or fetal demise. In utero chemotherapy followed by post-natal HCT has been described [Shah et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

The treatment of FHL is also the most effective treatment for secondary HLH and the hemophagocytic syndrome associated with other inherited immunodeficiencies.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed dermatologic examination for evaluation of extent of disease and lesions suspicious for cutaneous leiomyosarcoma to include biopsy for histologic confirmation

Baseline pelvic bimanual examination, pelvic MRI, and/or transvaginal pelvic ultrasound examination to screen for uterine fibroids

Baseline renal ultrasound examination and MRI to screen for renal tumors; abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Cutaneous lesions. Cutaneous leiomyomas should be examined by a dermatologist. Treatment of cutaneous leiomyomas is difficult:

Surgical excision may be performed for a solitary painful lesion.

Lesions can be treated by cryoablation and/or lasers.

Several medications, including calcium channel blockers, alpha blockers, nitroglycerin, antidepressants, and antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), have been reported to reduce pain [Ritzmann et al 2006].

Uterine fibroids should be evaluated by a gynecologist. The uterine fibroids of HLRCC are treated in the same manner as sporadic fibroids. However, most women with HLRCC may require medical and/or surgical intervention earlier than the general population. Medical therapy (currently including gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists [GnRHa], antihormonal medications, and pain relievers) may be used initially to treat uterine fibroids, to decrease the size of fibroids in preparation for surgical removal, and/or to provide temporary relief from the symptoms of fibroids. When possible, myomectomy to remove fibroids while preserving the uterus is the treatment of choice. Hysterectomy should be performed only when necessary.

Renal tumors. Early detection of kidney tumor in HLRCC is important. Surgical excision of these malignancies appears to require earlier and more extensive surgery than other hereditary kidney cancers. Further studies may demonstrate that even small tumors have a high grade of malignancy on pathologic review. Kidney tumors associated with HLRCC have an aggressive disease course. Therefore, these tumors must be managed with caution until more is known about the natural history. Because of the aggressive nature of renal cancers associated with HLRCC, total nephrectomy should be strongly considered in individuals with a detectable renal mass.

Surveillance

There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the following recommendations are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with the clinical diagnosis of HLRCC, individuals with heterozygous pathogenic variants in FH without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone molecular genetic testing should have the following regular surveillance by physicians familiar with the clinical manifestations of HLRCC.

Skin. Full skin examination is recommended annually to every two years to assess the extent of disease and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Uterus. Annual gynecologic consultation is recommended to assess severity of uterine fibroids and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Renal

Yearly examination with abdominal MRI is recommended for individuals with normal initial baseline or follow-up abdominal MRI. MRI is preferred because of the potential added radiation exposure associated with CT over lifetime. Abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated.

Any suspicious renal lesion (indeterminate lesion, questionable or complex cysts) detected at a previous examination should be followed with a CT scan with and without contrast. The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in the characterization of cystic lesions. PET-CT may be added to identify metabolically active lesions suggesting possible malignant growth. Caution: Ultrasound examination alone is never sufficient.

Renal tumors should be evaluated by a urologic oncology surgeon familiar with the renal cancer of HLRCC.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing of asymptomatic at-risk relatives improves diagnostic certainty, allows early surveillance and treatment in those with the family-specific pathogenic variant, and reduces costly screening procedures in those who have not inherited the pathogenic variant.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, fumarate hydratase enzyme assay can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. Early recognition of clinical manifestations may allow timely intervention and improve outcome. Therefore, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early detection is appropriate.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation

Several studies of anti-VEGF and novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment in HLRCC and papillary RCC (including papillary type 2 RCC) have been conducted [Linehan & Rouault 2013]. Early report demonstrated improvement of progression-free survival in patients with papillary type 2 RCC with Sunitinib [Choueiri et al 2008, Clinical Trials].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditionsTo establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with dystonia/parkinsonism, hypermanganesemia, polycythemia, and chronic liver disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination for dystonia, parkinsonism, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech

Brain MRI

Assessment of the liver including liver function tests, liver ultrasound examination, and liver biopsy if indicated. Consultation with a hepatologist is advised.

Establishment of whole blood manganese levels

Assessment for physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy

Evaluation of swallowing and nutritional status

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Chelation Therapy with Disodium Calcium Edetate

Regular chelation therapy with intravenous disodium calcium edetate can stabilize blood manganese levels, improve neurologic symptoms, and halt liver disease [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012].

Short term. The response of an individual to disodium calcium edetate is determined by a single five-day course of twice-daily disodium calcium edetate at 20 mg/kg/dose (made up in 250 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 1 hour) and daily measurement of plasma manganese concentration and 24-hour urine manganese levels. Other monitoring includes: serum concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, and magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium.

Note: To avoid hypocalcemia, disodium calcium edetate infusions need to be administered slowly over at least one hour. If the calcium level (corrected for albumin concentration) is low, infusions should be administered over a longer time span (i.e., >3 hours).

Long term. If chelation therapy proves to be effective in the short term, monthly five-day courses of disodium calcium edetate (intravenous 20 mg/kg/dose 2x/day) are expected to lower blood manganese levels and normalize hemoglobin concentration and iron indices [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012]. Chelation therapy should be continued lifelong. While on treatment, monitoring once every two months includes: serum concentration of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Iron Therapy

Iron is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal manganese uptake; hence, supplementation with iron given orally (despite normal serum iron levels) can reduce blood manganese levels and resolve polycythemia [Tuschl et al 2008, Tuschl et al 2012]. The high serum transferrin levels seen in affected individuals are thought to reduce the risk of manganese toxicity.

Note: Iron indices need to be monitored frequently (every ~3 months) in those receiving iron supplements (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Liver Transplantation

Liver transplantation should be considered in individuals with end-stage liver disease; however, it has not been attempted in individuals with this disorder and, hence, no data are available.

Other

Dystonia can result in physical deformities and pain. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy should be provided. Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications and L-dopa has been attempted with limited success.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Chelation therapy and iron supplementation may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices.

Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications including baclofen and botulinum toxin, and levodopa has been attempted with limited success.

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition. Once an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. In order to prevent aspiration pneumonia gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required.

The potential for complications from chelation therapy and/or iron supplementation can be lessened by careful surveillance.

Surveillance

Close monitoring of liver function and disease markers such as hemoglobin, iron indices, and whole-blood manganese is required at three-month intervals.

Routine follow up with a neurologist and hepatologist should be provided with repeat assessment of MRI brain, and liver ultrasound and biopsy when clinically indicated (e.g., worsening of liver function) and for monitoring of treatment.

Adverse effects of chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate include hypocalcemia, nephrotoxicity, trace metal and vitamin deficiency, and thrombocytopenia and leukopenia [Lamas et al 2012].

Complete blood count and renal function including urinalysis are assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose. Additionally, the following need to be monitored: trace metal levels including manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium; liver function; electrolytes; calcium, magnesium, and phosphate concentrations; and iron status. Trace metal supplements are provided as needed.

Treatment may need to be discontinued if:

White blood count <3.5x10^9/L

Neutrophils <2.0x10^9/L

Platelets <150x10^9/L

>2+ proteinuria on >1 occasion (and no evidence of infection)

The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent mortality and morbidity in SLC39A14-related early-onset parkinsonism-dystonia, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. The clinical treatment benefit needs to be carefully weighed against occurring adverse effects for each affected individual.

Toxicity of iron supplementation. In order to avoid iron toxicity, serum iron and total iron binding capacity need to be monitored regularly. If serum iron exceeds 80% of total iron binding capacity, iron supplementation should be stopped or reduced.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Foods very high in manganese (cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame and sunflower seeds) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Chelation therapy and iron supplementation can potentially prevent primary disease manifestations in asymptomatic individuals.

Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the SLC30A10 pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Periodic monitoring of whole-blood manganese concentration and hemoglobin if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For an affected fetus, no prenatal treatment is recommended as the disease does not manifest before early childhood.

For an affected mother, no data or information on pregnancy management are available.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure (HMERF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuromuscular neurology consultation, ideally at a center with expertise in inherited muscle disease to coordinate specialized testing

Respiratory medicine consultation to assess pulmonary function and coordinate nocturnal ventilator support if required

Physiotherapy consultation to assess lower limb function and general mobility

Occupational therapy consultation to recommend home and/or office adaptations and mobility aids

Social services consultation to assist with workplace adaptations and/or access to social/disability benefits

Clinical genetics consultation to help coordinate genetic investigations and provide genetic counseling consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

At present no disease-modifying therapy exists. Management is supportive.

For distal leg weakness, use of ankle-foot orthoses can optimize independent ambulation. Later in the disease course other mobility aids such as canes, walkers, or wheelchairs may be required.

Exercises and activities suggested by physiotherapy consultation may be helpful to prevent continued loss of physical function due to inactivity.

Noninvasive ventilation with bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may be indicated for nocturnal hypoventilation initially, followed by mechanical ventilatory support as needed.

Patients have increased susceptibility to respiratory tract infections and, therefore, influenza vaccination should be prioritized.

Given the gradually progressive nature of this disease, occupational therapy and social services support are important.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Pulmonary function testing at intervals of 6-12 months, or guided by patient findings

Reassessment of muscle strength and clinical status annually with a neurologist who can coordinate any additional required services

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Information is insufficient to determine if particular issues in HMERF relate to pregnancy. In general, onset of symptoms occurs after the age of childbearing. However, a pregnant woman with early manifestations of HMERF or at risk for HMERF should be considered high-risk because of the associated respiratory muscle weakness, and the increased physiologic demands of pregnancy. Consultation with a high-risk maternal-fetal medicine specialist is recommended when possible.

From the point of view of the fetus the authors are unaware of any specific issues relating to HMERF, since this is an adult-onset disorder.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Comprehensive neuromuscular evaluation

Needle EMG to identify the severity and extent of denervation and reinnervation

Evaluation of phrenic nerve involvement by chest x-ray, ultrasound/fluoroscopic evaluation of diaphragm movement, and pulmonary function tests in seated and supine positions

Clinical genetics consultation

For a practical overview of the physical examination and the value of additional investigations in neuralgic amyotrophy see pn.bmj.com.

Treatment of Manifestations

Currently, no effective therapy is proven to abort or shorten an HNA attack.

Treatment of acute episodes of pain and weakness with corticosteroids has been proposed based on retrospective analysis of cases [van Alfen et al 2009, van Eijk et al 2009]. These reports summarize retrospective, anecdotal evidence that corticosteroids can have a favorable effect on pain and recovery. Additional immunomodulatory treatments with such agents as corticosteroids and immune globulin may be considered, but no prospective trials have been performed [van Alfen et al 2009, Johnson et al 2011].

Pain management is the primary goal of therapy:

In the acute stage, a combination of a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as ketorolac and a narcotic such as controlled-release morphine are used.

In the second phase of chronic pain resulting from damaged, hypersensitive nerves, co-analgesics such as gabapentin, carbamazepine, and amitryptiline may be used.

In the third chronic phase, persistent pain in the neck and shoulder region usually points to strain of the paretic or compensating muscles or to a complication in the glenohumeral joint, such as rotator cuff pathology. As the weakness has to recover by itself, therapy focuses on arm support in a sling, rest, physical therapy, range of motion stretching, and modification of activities. This rehabilitation and prevention of further injury is best managed by a physiatrist.

For persistent paresis, physical therapy is recommended to maintain exercise tolerance and prevent joint or ligament contractures. Care must be taken to avoid post-exercise pain in the affected area, as this is often a sign of strain. In this case, exercise should be temporarily deferred, or at least be without extra added weights and with fewer repetitions per set. The patient must find his or her personal level of exercise tolerance; in practice, this is often much lower than estimated (or desired) by the patient or therapist.

For severe paresis of the serratus anterior muscle persisting more than one year, corrective surgery can be considered to increase scapular stability, for example by a split pectoralis major muscle transfer.

Patients with phrenic nerve palsy need consultation with a respiratory specialist and can benefit from noninvasive nocturnal positive pressure ventilation.

For a clinical overview of neurologic and rehabilitative management, see van Alfen [2007].

Cleft palate is best managed by a local craniofacial team.

Surveillance

As chronic pain resulting from altered biomechanics of the shoulder or upper extremity tends to develop during the first one to two years, follow up every six to 12 months after the initial diagnosis is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although immunizations have been known to precede and possibly trigger attacks, it is still recommended that they be given on the usual recommended schedule because the risk of immunization precipitating an attack is probably low [based on expert opinion].

Patients with persistent weakness and especially scapular instability should be cautioned to avoid overexerting the affected limb.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with HNA should be monitored in the post-partum interval for the development of symptoms. Prompt treatment with corticosteroids or similar agents may ameliorate an HNA attack.

Therapies Under Investigation

In an open-label study of oral prednisone in adults with INA or HNA (60 mg/day for one week, followed by a one week taper by 10 mg/day with a last dose of 5 mg) the only statistically significant finding was a reduction in the time for paresis recovery [van Alfen & van Engelen 2006]. Other variables showed no statistical difference from an untreated group of persons with neuralgic amyotrophy; variables included the duration of the initial pain, maximum present Numerical Rating Scale score and use of analgesics, the occurrence of a chronic pain syndrome, maximum Medical Research Council level of strength recovery, complications such as frozen shoulder or shoulder dislocation, and Rankin score.

An additional review of the Dutch experience revealed the following:

Relative to the untreated patients, a significantly higher proportion of the patients receiving oral prednisolone recovered early from their pareses.

Taken in the first month, prednisolone tended to decrease the average duration of the initial pain, although this finding was not statistically significant.

Functional recovery set in earlier, with significantly more treated patients achieving full recovery within a year or reporting a ‘‘good’’ outcome within six months.

Side effects occurred in 20% of patients, but did not result in discontinuation of treatment [van Eijk et al 2009].

A randomized placebo-controlled trial of oral prednisone conducted in the Netherlands was terminated after three years because of insufficient recruitment within the specified time frame. No treatment effect could be demonstrated in the 13 persons in the primary treatment and placebo arm; however, the small number of participants precluded any definite conclusions.

Experimental immunosuppressive therapies that have been used in other inflammatory polyneuropathies, but for which there are limited data available for treatment of attacks in HNA, include the following:

Methylprednisolone, intravenous 30 mg/kg (or 1.0 g in adults) every 24 hours for three days [Klein et al 2002, Nakajima et al 2006]. Cessation or tapering of corticosteroid therapy has resulted in relapse.

Intravenous immune globulin, 0.4 g/kg/day for five days [Ardolino et al 2003, Moriguchi et al 2011]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, the evaluations summarized in Surveillance are recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of colon cancer in a person with Lynch syndrome. If colon cancer is detected, full colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is recommended rather than a segmental/partial colonic resection because of the high risk for metachronous cancers [Lynch et al 1988, Aarnio et al 1995, Church & Simmang 2003]. A study of 296 individuals (253 with partial resection, 43 with colectomy anastomosis) from families meeting Amsterdam Criteria found that with a median follow up of 104 months, 22% of affected individuals treated with a partial resection developed a high-risk adenoma and 25% developed a second primary colon cancer, while only 11% and 8% of affected individuals developed adenomas and colon cancers respectively [Kalady et al 2010]. Note: Because the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome is often not considered until after treatment of an initial cancer, many individuals diagnosed with Lynch syndrome have previously had their cancer treated with a limited colonic resection.

Although timing may be difficult, evaluating the tumor biopsy specimen by MSI and IHC (and, if indicated, the MHL1 promoter methylation status) may help determine the optimal surgical approach. A study suggests that persons with colon cancer are open to being approached about genetic testing at the time of their diagnosis [Porteous et al 2003].

The other tumors seen in Lynch syndrome are managed as in the general population.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic removal of the uterus and ovaries (prior to the development of cancer) can be considered after childbearing is completed.

Because routine colonoscopy is an effective preventive measure for colon cancer, prophylactic colectomy (removal of the colon prior to the development of cancer) is generally not recommended for individuals with Lynch syndrome.

Surveillance

Colon cancer. Regular colonoscopy with removal of precancerous polyps reduces the incidence of colon cancer in individuals with Lynch syndrome. A 2009 study of a Finish cohort with high compliance with screening found no increase in mortality for individuals with Lynch syndrome over their mutation-negative relatives, indicating that annual colonoscopy could help with the prevention and detection of colon cancer [Järvinen et al 2009]. In this study four individuals were diagnosed with colon cancer and lymph node metastases: one was diagnosed during baseline colonoscopy; the other three were diagnosed more than two years after their last colonoscopy. Therefore, the current recommendation is colonoscopy every one to two years beginning between ages 20 and 25 years or two to five years before the earliest diagnosis in the family, whichever is earlier [Järvinen et al 2009, Engel et al 2010, NCCN 2013].

In MSH6 and PMS2 heterozygotes the risk for colon cancer is lower; thus colonoscopy screening may be delayed until age 30 years [Senter et al 2008, Baglietto et al 2010].

Note: Colonoscopy is recommended rather than flexible sigmoidoscopy because of the predominance of proximal colon cancers in Lynch syndrome [Lynch & Smyrk 1996].

Endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer surveillance is less well established than that for colon cancer.

Because many endometrial cancers can be diagnosed at early stages on the basis of symptoms, women should be educated about the signs of endometrial cancers.

Currently the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does not recommend any specific screening for endometrial or ovarian cancer [NCCN 2013].

Studies on the effectiveness of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy have had conflicting results. Further studies are needed to determine if the combination of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy detect endometrial cancers at an early age.

In a study of the use of transvaginal ultrasound examination to screen for endometrial cancer, no cancers were detected; however, two cancers were detected on the basis of symptoms manifest during the course of the study [Dove-Edwin et al 2002].

A report from a Finnish cohort found that endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasound every two to three years resulted in the diagnosis of early stage cancers. However, because endometrial cancer often presents with symptoms at an early stage, it was not clear that the screening improved detection [Järvinen et al 2009].

Ovarian cancer. No specific ovarian cancer screening trials have been conducted in women with Lynch syndrome. Of note, screening for ovarian cancer using CA-125 blood tests and transvaginal ultrasound examination has not been effective in other high-risk populations such as women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant [Evans et al 2009].

Gastric and duodenal cancers. Upper endoscopy surveillance can be used to screen for cancers of the stomach and duodenum. Currently the NCCN recommends beginning upper endoscopy with a side-viewing scope and extended duodenoscopy between ages 30 and 35 years and repeating them every three to five years depending on the findings. Those with evidence of chronic inflammation, atrophic gastropathy, and/or intestinal metaplasia would be candidates for more frequent evaluation. Note: Biopsies should be evaluated for H pylori infections so that appropriate treatment can be given as needed [NCCN 2013].

Data regarding the effectiveness of upper endoscopy examination for the early detection of gastric cancer in Lynch syndrome are limited.

One study suggested no benefit from this screening for gastric cancer because of the lack of identifiable precursor lesions [Renkonen-Sinisalo et al 2002].

A study looking at gastric cancer risk in a Dutch study suggested that the level of risk is sufficient to warrant screening; however, since 87% of the cancers occurred after age 45 years, it may be most cost effective to initiate screening at age 45 years [Capelle et al 2010].

Schulmann et al [2005] found that approximately 50% of the small bowel cancers in a cohort with Lynch syndrome were located in the duodenum, suggesting that upper endoscopy may be useful for screening. However, no trials to determine the efficacy of upper endoscopy for screening for duodenal cancers have been conducted.

Distal small bowel. At this time data are limited regarding screening for cancer development in the distal small bowel. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enterography are available for evaluating the small bowel, but at this time there is no recommendation for routine use of these approaches for small bowel screening, although they may be helpful for evaluating symptomatic individuals.

Urinary tract. NCCN recommends consideration of annual urine analysis beginning between age 25 and 30 years [NCCN 2013].

Other cancers. At this time, no specific screening recommendations for other Lynch syndrome associated cancers exist. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow other general population screening guidelines and to seek prompt medical attention for changes in health or persistent symptoms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Cigarette smoking increases the risk for colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome [Watson et al 2004, Pande et al 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early recognition of cancers associated with Lynch syndrome may allow for timely intervention and improved final outcome; thus, surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early manifestations is appropriate.

When an MMR pathogenic variant has been identified in a family with Lynch syndrome, molecular genetic testing for the pathogenic variant should be offered to all first-degree relatives (parents, sibs, and children).

The sibs should be considered at risk even if the parents have not had cancer because most Lynch syndrome results from an inherited (not de novo) pathogenic variant.

If clinical history and family history cannot identify the parent from whom the proband inherited the MMR gene pathogenic variant, molecular genetic testing for the pathogenic variant should be offered to both parents to determine which has the MMR gene pathogenic variant.

In general, molecular genetic testing for Lynch syndrome is not recommended for at-risk individuals younger than age 18 years. However, because cancer has been diagnosed in individuals with Lynch syndrome at very young ages [Huang et al 2001], it is recommended that screening begin ten years before the earliest age of onset in the family. In such instances, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to children younger than age 18 years prior to initiating cancer screening.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Ideally cancer screening exams would be planned around a pregnancy. An affected woman would be encouraged to be current on her cancer screening before attempting to become pregnant. If an affected woman is diagnosed with cancer during pregnancy, she should be counseled about cancer treatment options and their potential implications for the fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation

Chromoendoscopy and intensive colonoscopy. A 2008 study compared the effectiveness of chromoendoscopy and intensive colonoscopy inspection in early detection of polyps in persons with Lynch syndrome. Following standard colonoscopy, study participants were randomized to receive a second colonoscopy with chromoendoscopy or a second colonoscopy with careful inspection. This study found that although polyps are frequently missed during standard colonoscopy, no difference was observed between the number of additional polyps detected by chromoendoscopy and by the careful second-look colonoscopy [Stoffel et al 2008]. Further studies are needed to determine if novel colonoscopy techniques confer additional benefit for the screening of persons with Lynch syndrome.

Chemoprevention research studies

A four-arm trial comparing placebo versus aspirin and placebo versus resistant starch was conducted among 1071 individuals with Lynch syndrome. No effect on the risk for colorectal neoplasia was seen in either the aspirin or resistant starch intervention group [Burn et al 2008]. However, when this cohort was followed for ten years, the group receiving aspirin did show a 63% reduction in colon cancer incidence [Burt 2012]. Resistant starch was not found to have an impact on colon cancer risk [Mathers et al 2012].

Whereas oral contraceptives reduce the risk for endometrial and ovarian cancer in women who are at general population risk, it is unknown if they confer the same benefit in women with Lynch syndrome.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), the following evaluations are recommended:

History of focal nerve symptoms

Family history

Neurologic examination

Electromyography / nerve conduction velocity (EMG/NCV)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Transient bracing, such as with a wrist splint or ankle-foot orthosis (AFO), may be useful. Some individuals with residual foot drop may permanently use an AFO.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Protective pads at elbows or knees may prevent pressure and trauma to local nerves.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Bracing of weak muscles, such as ankle-foot-orthosis for foot drop, may prevent injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Risk factors for pressure palsies (and thus activities to avoid) include prolonged sitting with legs crossed, occupations requiring repetitive movements of the wrist, prolonged leaning on elbows, and rapid weight loss [Cruz-Martinez et al 2000, Marriott et al 2002].

Vincristine, commonly used in the chemotherapy of lymphoma, has been reported to exacerbate HNPP [Kalfakis et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Relatives at risk may wish to clarify their genetic status by undergoing molecular genetic testing; if found to have the PMP22 pathogenic variant identified in an affected family member, they can choose to avoid the aforementioned agents and circumstances.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Controversy exists as to whether surgical decompression of nerves is of benefit. Because spontaneous recovery is common and because no systematic controlled study of surgical intervention has been done, this decision must be made on an individual basis, taking into consideration knowledge of the natural history of the disease. Although Earle and Zochodne [2013] reported two cases of clinical and electrophysiologic improvement after carpal tunnel decompression surgery, there is a developing consensus that surgical repair of carpal tunnel syndrome is of little benefit to individuals with HNPP and that transposition of the ulnar nerve at the elbow may actually produce poor results [Lazar et al 2007].

No specific treatment for the underlying genetic or biochemical defect exists and no special diet or vitamin regimen is known to alter the natural course of HNPP.To establish the extent of disease and needs in all individuals diagnosed with homocystinuria caused by cystathionine β-synthase deficiency, the following are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist/medical biochemical geneticist for additional testing and treatment plan

Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) challenge prior to initiation of treatment (see Testing Following Establishment of the Diagnosis, Pyridoxine (B6) challenge test)

Consultation with a genetic counselor for genetic counseling and recurrence risk counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment should be managed by a biochemical geneticist and metabolic dietician and aimed at prevention of primary manifestations of homocystinuria. For published management guidelines, see Morris et al [2017].

Complications should be managed appropriately (e.g., surgery for ectopia lentis) [Neely & Plager 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The principles of treatment are to correct the biochemical abnormalities ‒especially to control the elevated plasma homocysteine concentrations as much as possible, to prevent or at least reduce the complications of homocystinuria [Yap & Naughten 1998], and to prevent further complications such as thrombosis [Morris et al 2017].

The best results have been reported in those individuals identified by newborn screening and treated shortly after birth in whom the plasma free homocystine concentration is maintained below 11 µmol/L (preferably, ≤5 µmol/L) [Yap et al 2001b]. This corresponds to a plasma total homocysteine concentration below 120 µmol/L or, preferably, below 100 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017]. For B6-responsive individuals, the goal for plasma total homocysteine is below 50 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017].

These goals may need revision when very long-term data becomes available.

Measures used to control total plasma homocysteine concentration include vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy (if shown to be B6 responsive), methionine-restricted diet, and folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Betaine therapy is usually added to the therapeutic regimen; in adolescents and adults betaine may be the major form of treatment but it is preferable to remain on life-long metabolic diet. In those who have already had a vascular event, betaine therapy alone may prevent recurrent events [Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010].

Details about each aspect of treatment follow.

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy. In those who are shown to be B6 responsive, treatment with pyridoxine in a dose of approximately 200 mg/day or the lowest dose that produces the maximum biochemical benefit (i.e., lowest plasma homocysteine and methionine concentrations), as determined by measurement of total homocysteine and amino acid levels, should be given.

Pyridoxine may also be included in treatment despite evidence of B6 non-responsiveness, typically in doses of 100-200 mg daily (although some adults receive 500-1000 mg daily).

Dietary treatment. B6-non-responsive neonates or those only very poorly responsive to pyridoxine require a methionine-restricted diet with frequent metabolic monitoring. This diet should be continued indefinitely. Dietary treatment should be considered for clinically diagnosed individuals but often is not tolerated if begun in mid-childhood or later.

The majority of B6-responsive individuals also require a methionine-restricted diet for metabolic control.

The diet for homocystinuria is very complex and the skills of an experienced metabolic dietician must be utilized. Dietary treatment reduces methionine intake by restricting natural protein intake. However, to prevent protein malnutrition, a methionine-free amino acid formula supplying the other amino acids (as well as cysteine, which may be an essential amino acid in CBS deficiency) is provided. Breast feeding may be continued in combination with the methionine-free amino acid infant formula [MacDonald et al 2006]. The amount of methionine required is calculated by a metabolic dietician and supplied in natural food and special low-protein foods and monitored on the basis of plasma concentrations of total homocysteine as well as methionine.

Folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Folate and vitamin B12 optimize the conversion of homocysteine to methionine by methionine synthase, thus helping to decrease the plasma homocysteine concentration. When the red blood cell folate concentration and serum B12 concentration are reduced, folic acid is given orally at 5 mg per day; and vitamin B12 is given as hydroxycobalamin at 1 mg IM per month.

Betaine treatment. Treatment with betaine provides an alternate remethylation pathway to convert excess homocysteine to methionine (see Figure 1) and may help to prevent complications, particularly thrombosis [Yap et al 2001a, Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010]. By converting homocysteine to methionine, betaine lowers plasma total homocysteine concentrations but raises the plasma concentration of methionine.

For children the initial betaine dose is 50 mg/kg twice daily, adjusted according to response (increased weekly by 50 mg/kg increments). For adults the initial dose is 3 g twice daily. The dose and frequency are adjusted according to biochemical response. There is unlikely to be any benefit in exceeding a dose of 150-200 mg/kg/day [Morris et al 2017].

Betaine may be added to the treatment regimen in individuals poorly compliant with dietary treatment or may become the major treatment modality in those intolerant of the diet. Individuals who are pyridoxine non-responsive who were unable to attain metabolic control with diet substantially reduced their plasma homocysteine concentrations when betaine was supplemented [Singh et al 2004].

Side effects of betaine are few. (1) Some affected individuals develop a detectable body odor, resulting in reduced compliance. (2) The increase in methionine produced by betaine is usually harmless; however, cerebral edema has occurred when hypermethioninemia is extreme (>1000 µmol/L) [Yaghmai et al 2002, Devlin et al 2004, Tada et al 2004, Braverman et al 2005]. Eliminating betaine resulted in rapid reduction of the hypermethioninemia and resolution of the cerebral edema.

Note: In a murine model for homocystinuria the effect of betaine treatment diminished significantly over time [Maclean et al 2012].

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be monitored at regular intervals to detect any clinical complications that may develop, to assess dietary compliance, and to measure plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations. Infants should be monitored monthly for the first six months of life and bimonthly until age one year, then every three months until age three years. Semiannual monitoring through the remainder of childhood and annual monitoring in adolescence and adulthood are indicated. Complications should be promptly addressed with appropriate therapy.

Plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations should be monitored in all persons receiving betaine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Betaine treatment).

Vitamin B12 and folate levels should be monitored.

Regular ophthalmology assessments can identify eye complications such as progressive myopia and ectopia lentis and allow for early treatment and prevention of further complications such as retinal detachment.

DXA scans should be performed every three to five years following adolescence to monitor for osteoporosis [Morris et al 2017].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Oral contraceptives, which may tend to increase coagulability and represent risk for thromboembolism, should be avoided in females with homocystinuria.

Surgery should also be avoided if possible because the increase in plasma homocysteine concentrations during surgery and especially post-surgery elevates the risk for a thromboembolic event. If surgery is required, intravenous fluids containing 5% dextrose in 0.5 N saline at 1.5 times maintenance should be administered before, during, and after surgery until fluids can be taken orally. If fluids at 1.5 times maintenance represent a cardiovascular risk as a result of fluid overload, basic fluid maintenance may be administered with careful clinical observation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Plasma concentrations of total homocysteine and amino acids should be measured in at-risk sibs as soon as possible after birth so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

If the CBS pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because women with homocystinuria may be at greater than average risk for thromboembolism, especially post partum, prophylactic anticoagulation during the third trimester of pregnancy and post partum is recommended. The usual regimen is injection of low molecular-weight heparin during the last two weeks of pregnancy and the first six weeks post partum [Pierre et al 2006]. Aspirin in low doses has also been given throughout pregnancy.

Maternal homocystinuria, unlike maternal phenylketonuria (see Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Deficiency), does not appear to have major teratogenic potential requiring additional counseling or, with respect to the fetus, more stringent management [Levy et al 2002, Vilaseca et al 2004]. Nevertheless, treatment with pyridoxine or methionine-restricted diet or both should be continued during pregnancy [Morris et al 2017]. Betaine may also be continued and appears not to be teratogenic [Yap et al 2001b, Levy et al 2002, Vilaseca et al 2004, Pierre et al 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

CBS enzyme replacement therapy is currently in development in the preclinical phase [Bublil et al 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypophosphatasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentration to assess renal function

Serum concentration of calcium, phosphorus, magnesium

Serum concentration of 25(OH) and 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, nPTH (parathyroid hormone, N-terminal part) to assess rickets

Assessment of pulmonary function in infants with the perinatal type to assist in prognosis and distinguishing between the perinatal (severe) type and the perinatal (benign) type

Radiographs of the skull to assess for craniosynostosis in young children with the infantile form of hypophosphatasia

Baseline dental evaluation

Baseline orthopedic evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management at all ages focuses on supportive therapy to minimize disease-related complications.

Multidisciplinary management at various ages may include:

Endocrinology to optimize bone homeostasis and avoid exacerbating treatments

Nephrology to monitor calcium homeostasis and examine for nephrocalcinosis

Neurology to prophylactically or prospectively treat seizures and manage myopathy

Neurosurgery or craniofacial team to manage pseudocraniosynostosis

Orthopedics to manage primary and secondary skeletal manifestations

Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R), physical therapy, and occupational therapy to optimize mobility and autonomy

Pain management

Psychological support

Pediatric and adult dentistry to manage tooth loss

The involvement of multiple specialists treating complex interrelated medical issues mandates case management and social work support.

Enzyme Replacement Therapy

The emergence of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with asfotase alfa (Strensiq™) has altered the natural history of severe perinatal and infantile HPP cases; the long-term effects of treatment are not fully known. A new phenotype of “treated perinatal and infantile HPP” is emerging, and the prior designation of “perinatal lethal HPP” may no longer universally apply in the developed world.

In October 2015, the FDA approved asfotase alfa for treatment of patients with perinatal, infantile, and juvenile onset HPP [Alexion –10-23-2015].

Perinatal/infantile HPP study outcomes. In two prospective, single-arm studies (with historical controls used for survival analysis), 68 individuals with severe, perinatal/infantile-onset HPP (age at treatment onset: 1 day – 78 months) completed at least 24-weeks of TNSALP ERT (≤9 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously) [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Survival. Of those requiring respiratory support (n = 26), 21 (81%) survived through the last date of assessment (median age 3.2 years), in comparison to 1:20 (5%) in historical controls.

In the mixed cohort of 68 patients with perinatal/infantile onset HPP receiving asfotase alfa ERT, 54 required mechanical ventilation and of these, 91% survived and 85% were ventilator free at last contact, in comparison to 27% overall survival and 25% ventilator free in the 48 historical controls [Whyte et al 2016] (final data). Clinical trials with ERT have shown improvement in developmental milestones and pulmonary function [Whyte et al 2012].

Bone findings. Radiographs from 64 of these individuals, and four from a third prospective open-label study of juvenile-onset HPP, were evaluated for HPP-related rickets using the 7-point Radiographic Global Impression of Change (RGI-C) scale. Radiographic change of at least +2 (defined as “responders”) were seen in 50/68 (74%) of those treated (see Figure 2), at last assessment (historical comparative data does not exist). Eighteen individuals with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP experienced fractures during the course of treatment; the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures remaining unclear [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Juvenile-onset HPP study outcomes. One prospective open-label, single arm study included eight patients with juvenile-onset HPP and five patients with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP; age at treatment onset was six to 12 years. The patients with juvenile-onset HPP completed at least 48 months of TNSALP ERT (6 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously). The eight juvenile-onset patients were compared with 32 historical controls. By the RGI-C rating of radiographs, all eight patients were deemed responders; two (6%) of the historical controls were rated responders with an improvement of +2 or more at month 54. Gait, assessed using a modified Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment Gait (MPOMA-G), six-minute walk test (6MWT), and step length improved in patients treated with asfotase alfa. 6MWT improved to the normal range in six of six patients assessed by month 48, from none at baseline. The data are at present insufficient to assess the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures in juvenile-onset HPP [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

When Enzyme Replacement Therapy is Not Available or Not Typically Used

Perinatal types. Limited experience exists for asfotase alfa ERT treatment of perinatal HPP in the immediate newborn period, and this therapy may not be readily available. In the immediate perinatal period, if multidisciplinary assessment identifies the perinatal severe type, comfort care and supportive management of infant and family remain an option.

Infantile type. The infantile phenotype has high mortality, with 50% of individuals succumbing to respiratory failure caused by undermineralization of the ribs. In the absence of ERT, supportive management remains.

Calcium homeostasis. Management can further be complicated by recalcitrant hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria, and optimal management of this issue remains unclear: hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria is typically resistant to hydration and furosemide treatment, and bisphosphonates would be contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). In the absence of ERT, calcitonin and steroids could be attempted short term, with limited efficacy [Deeb et al 2000].

Seizures. When present, seizures may respond to treatment with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), one of the natural substrates of alkaline phosphatase, is the active compound by which pyridoxine mediates essential enzyme activity; PLP deficiency in the central nervous system may reduce seizure threshold by reducing neurotransmitter (GABA) synthesis.

Craniosynostosis in those with the infantile phenotype is variable. When identified, involvement of a neurosurgeon to monitor for complications is prudent. Increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis is an indication for surgical release.

Dental care beginning at age one year is important to preserve primary dentition (to support nutrition) and to preserve or replace secondary dentition.

Childhood (juvenile) and adult hypophosphatasia

Osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs.

Bone pain and osteomalacia are managed supportively: NSAIDs appear beneficial [Girschick et al 2006]. Hypophosphatasia is a relative contraindication to treatment with bisphosphonates (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pseudofractures and stress fractures are difficult to manage; internal fixation has been suggested as the optimal orthopedic management. Foot orthotics may help in management of tarsal fractures and pseudofractures in adults.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Low-impact physical activity and exercise may improve general bone health. Supervision by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia is suggested.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Calcium supplementation and vitamin D therapy may prevent secondary hyperparathyroidism in adults. This should only be pursued with close monitoring by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia.

Surveillance

Children with hypophosphatasia should be seen by a pediatric dentist twice yearly, beginning at age one year.

Children with the infantile type of hypophosphatasia are at elevated risk for increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis, and should be monitored for this complication.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Biphosphonates are relatively contraindicated in hypophosphatasia. Although adverse outcomes have not been identified in children with the severe infantile type [Deeb et al 2000], theoretic concern has long been raised based on the structure of bisphosphonates. The phosphate motifs in bisphosphonates have a similar conformation to inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), the natural substrate of TNSALP; thus, treatment with bisphosphonates is thought to be analogous to "adding fuel to the fire." In adults with hypophosphatasia and osteomalacia treated with bisphosphonates, lateral subtrochanteric femoral pseudofractures have been described [Whyte 2009]. As the prevalence of adult hypophosphatasia is not known and many undiagnosed adult patients undoubtedly are treated with bisphosphonates, the frequency of this unusual complication is not known.

Excess vitamin D can exacerbate hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria in children with infantile hypophosphatasia who have hypercalcemia.

Teriparatide (recombinant human parathyroid hormone fragment, amino acids 1-34) at high doses induces osteosarcoma in rats, and may increase the risk of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (a pediatric growth plate tumor) in humans. It is contraindicated in children with hypophosphatasia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Autosomal recessive hypophosphatasia remains an extremely rare and severe condition. The treatment duration and long-term effects of ERT with asfotase alfa remain unknown for perinatal and infantile HPP. Clinical trials are in Phase IV, with patients treated up to 78 months at the time of FDA approval.

For milder autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant childhood (juvenile) and adult-onset HPP, limited information about asfotase alfa exists; clinical trials are underway in children, adolescents, and adults.

Bone marrow transplantation (hematopoietic cell transplantation) was used to treat an eight-month-old girl with severe hypophosphatasia with prolonged, significant clinical and radiologic improvement [Whyte et al 2003]. Seven years after transplantation, the patient was reported to be active and growing, and to have the clinical phenotype of the more mild childhood (juvenile) form of hypophosphatasia [Cahill et al 2007]. In another trial, both bone marrow and allogenic mesenchymal stem cells were implanted in an eight-month old patient, resulting in improvement of respiratory conditions [Tadokoro et al 2009]. However,the patient developed therapy-related leukemia [Taketani et al 2013]. Transplantation of ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells for patients who had previously undergone bone marrow transplantation improved bone mineralization, muscle mass, respiratory function, intellectual development, and survival [Taketani et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Limb

Limb involvement is determined by physical examination.

If limb involvement is not grossly obvious, upper-limb and hand radiographs can be performed to determine if subtle anomalies of the carpal bones are present.

Cardiac

Chest radiography may demonstrate enlarged pulmonary arteries caused by pulmonary hypertension or cardiomegaly and/or evidence of congestive heart failure.

Echocardiography is the procedure of choice to define the presence of septal defects or other structural cardiac anomalies.

ECG is recommended for the detection of cardiac conduction disease.

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of individuals with HOS optimally involves a multidisciplinary team approach with specialists in medical genetics, cardiology, and orthopedics, including a specialist in hand surgery.

A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation. Pharmacologic treatment for affected individuals with pulmonary hypertension may be appropriate. Individuals with pulmonary hypertension and/or structural heart malformation may require tertiary care center cardiology follow up. Cardiac surgery, if required for congenital heart defect, is standard.

The orthopedic team may be able to guide individuals in decisions regarding surgery for improved upper-limb and hand function as well as physical and occupational therapy options. Those individuals born with severe upper-limb malformations may be candidates for surgery to improve function, such as pollicization (creation of a thumb-like digit by moving another digit into the thenar position) in the case of thumb aplasia/hypoplasia [Vaienti et al 2009]. Children with severe limb shortening may benefit from prostheses as well as from physical and occupational therapy.

Individuals and families are also likely to benefit from programs providing social support to those with limb anomalies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance

ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of potential septal defects, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and/or pulmonary hypertension. People with such disorders require individual assessment by a cardiologist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from appropriate cardiac management. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the TBX5 pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Echocardiography, ECG, and hand x-rays (anterior/posterior view) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women with HOS who have a known history of a structural cardiac defect or cardiac conduction abnormality should be followed by a multidisciplinary team (including a cardiologist) during pregnancy. Affected women who have not undergone cardiac evaluation should do so prior to pregnancy if possible, or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in a child diagnosed with holoprosencephaly (HPE), evaluation for the following is recommended at a minimum (other organ systems may also be investigated depending on specific clinical findings):

Cleft lip and/or palate

Hydrocephalus and/or features of HPE or other cortical anomalies. All children with midline facial anomalies should undergo brain MRI; attention should also be paid to the pituitary region, which often requires high-resolution thin sections.

Growth deficiency. Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured. It is important to compare weight to height in addition to plotting absolute measurements. Evaluation should include thyroid function tests, bone age, complete blood count, blood chemistries, sedimentation rate, insulin-like growth factor 1, and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3. If growth hormone deficiency is found, panhypopituitarism should be assessed by specific hormone testing and brain MRI.

Pituitary dysfunction. Sagittal MRI can be used to determine pituitary absence or ectopia and anatomic information. CNS anomalies and absent corpus callosum and/or septum pellucidum may accompany endocrine dysfunction. Serum analysis for specific hormones can be performed to evaluate pituitary function.

Oral feeding and swallowing. Evaluation should include assessment of caloric intake, swallowing abilities, oral motor skills, and presence of gastroesophageal reflux. Occupational and speech evaluations are warranted to evaluate and address feeding concerns. Studies for diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux including esophageal pH probe, milk scan, barium swallow, and/or endoscopy may be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for HPE varies according to the brain malformations and associated anomalies [Levey et al 2010]. Most affected children benefit from a multidisciplinary team approach with clinicians very familiar with HPE.

Hormone replacement therapy has been successful in some children with pituitary dysfunction.

Antiepileptic drugs can help decrease the frequency and intensity of seizures.

Feeding difficulties and failure to thrive may be managed with gastrostomy tube placement and Nissen fundoplication if gastroesophageal reflux and vomiting are issues. Thickening of feeds and upright positioning after feeding may be helpful to alleviate gastroesophageal reflux. To achieve the best growth in the child with HPE, the quality of the feeds is more important than the quantity.

Accommodations for oral feeding with cleft lip and/or palate may require specific nipples, cups, and parental training. Early surgical repair may improve feeding.

Placement of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt may be necessary in children with HPE and hydrocephalus.

In older children, surgical repair of cleft lip and/or palate may be indicated.

For children with cleft lip and/or palate, referral to a specialized cleft or craniofacial clinic is recommended.

Onset of new neurologic findings or deterioration warrant evaluation for seizures and/or hydrocephalus and/or shunt malfunction. Such evaluation would include vital sign monitoring, neurologic examination, EEG, and MRI.

A major aspect of treatment is support and counseling of the parents [Mercier et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children with hormonal disturbances should receive prompt evaluation during times of stress (e.g., illness, surgery).

Consultation with subspecialists regarding fluid and electrolyte management should be sought if elective surgery is planned.

Children with diabetes insipidus need careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte intake.

Surveillance

Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured during health maintenance evaluations.

Evaluation for endocrine deficiencies should be undertaken at appropriate intervals and during health maintenance visits.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

A careful family history by a clinical geneticist familiar with HPE is critical, as genetic changes associated with HPE, even in a mildly affected individual, would be considered a risk factor for manifestations such as developmental delay.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Assessment of the risks and benefits of surgery and of the individual's brain abnormality is essential in determining the extent and benefit of surgical intervention.

Consistent with the ethical principle of beneficence, intervention at the earliest time possible is advised.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HOKPP), the following evaluations are recommended:

During an acute paralytic attack:

Assessment of respiratory status to detect those individuals who may have early respiratory failure

Measurement of serum potassium concentration

Cardiac electrophysiologic testing (electrocardiagram) to assess for life-threatening cardiac consequences of hypokalemia

Assessment for swallowing difficulty

Between attacks or in a currently asymptomatic individual:

Neurologic examination to assess muscle strength in the legs

Measurement of the following thyroid functions (see Note):

Plasma thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)

Free thyroxine (FT4)

Free triiodothyronine (FT3)

In those with fixed muscle weakness, consideration of CT scan of muscles to evaluate the extent of myopathy

Clinical genetics consultation

Note: (1) Hyperthyroidism may be a trigger for a hypokalemic episode in individuals with HOKPP; (2) thyroid function tests may help to distinguish between HOKPP and TPP in those who have a pathogenic variant in KCNJ18.

Treatment of Manifestations

For a comprehensive summary of the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, see Levitt [2008] (full text). The principles of treatment are summarized in Table 7.

Table 7. 

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Goal

Means

Practical Details

To avoid triggering or aggravating factors for paralytic attacks

Avoid:

Strenuous effortProlonged immobilityCarbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggersProvide dietary review/counseling

Treatment of paralytic attack:

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episodeNormalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassiumOral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvementIV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Preventive treatment for paralytic attacks

Daily K+ supplementation

Slow-release forms of potassium may be used

Diamox (acetazolamide)

K+-sparing diuretics

Preventive treatment for late-onset myopathy

Diamox (acetazolamide)?

Medical precautions

Avoid corticosteroids if possibleUse alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Other elements of management

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficitAdaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Strenuous effort

Prolonged immobility

Carbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggers

Provide dietary review/counseling

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episode

Normalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)

Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassium

Oral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvement

IV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Avoid corticosteroids if possible

Use alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficit

Adaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Paralytic crisis. Treatment of the paralytic crisis is far from perfect, as the only tool is the administration of potassium by mouth or IV, which addresses the hypokalemia directly, but the weakness only indirectly. Resolution of muscle weakness and normalization of the serum concentration of potassium are not strictly parallel. The serum concentration of potassium may normalize before weakness begins to resolve.

During a paralytic attack, there is usually no true potassium depletion in the body (unless digestive or renal losses from another cause are associated), but there is a reversible transfer of potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular space. The global potassium pool (and especially the intracellular pool of the body) is conserved, and the goal of the treatment is to raise the blood potassium level just enough to trigger the shift to repolarization of skeletal muscle membrane, and the liberation of intracellularly sequestered potassium.

Mild to moderate paralytic episodes

Treatment may occur in a familial or non-medical setting if the diagnosis is well-established and the affected individual is able to manage paralytic episodes.

Rapid recovery is typically possible with oral intake of chloride potassium salts, either as capsules or liquid-containing vials. Aqueous potassium contained in vials may act more rapidly.

An initial intake of 1mEq/kg potassium chloride is often used (60 mEq; i.e., 4.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60-kg person).

A response (at least partial) should be seen after 30 minutes. If no improvement occurs after 30 minutes, an additional 0.3 mEq/kg can be administered (20 mEq; i.e., 1.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60 kg person).

Note: (1) Slow-release forms of potassium should be avoided during a paralytic attack. (2) Potassium ingesting should be followed by oral intake of water (e.g., 100 mL (4 oz) of water for each 20 mEq of potassium). (3) Liquids containing high sugar or sodium content should be avoided.

Severe paralytic episodes. If an affected individual has followed the instructions above for a mild to moderate attack and either no improvement or further aggravation is observed after an additional 30 minutes, medical supervision with measurement of serum potassium level should be considered.

The total dose of potassium taken over a 24-hr period for the treatment of an acute attack should not exceed 200 mEq.

During severe paralytic episodes or attacks associated with respiratory, swallowing, or speaking difficulties, or with signs of arrythmia, the affected individual must be transferred to hospital.

In the case of very low serum potassium and severe symptoms (airway compromise with ictal dysphagia, accessory respiratory muscle paralysis, arrhythmia associated with hypokalemia), intravenous potassium treatment should be initiated. Note the following critical points:

The concentration of intravenous potassium chloride solution should not exceed 40 mEq/L because of the risk for thrombophlebitis (the use of a central catheter is rarely necessary).

The solution should be given as a continuous infusion that does not exceed 0.3 mEq/kg/h of potassium (i.e., 18 mEq/h for a 60-kg person) because of the high risk for arrhythmia or cardiac arrest associated with faster infusions.

The physician should be aware that hyperkalemia may occur, as there is no true potassium depletion; a reverse shift of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular space occurs during the resolution of paralytic episode.

A Y-branched peripheral venous line containing potassium chloride should be branched to a perfusion of mannitol or normal saline (avoid glucose-containing solutions, which may enhance hypokalemia).

To prevent cardiac arrhythmias, it is important to monitor the electrocardiogram (ECG) before, during, and after treatment and to perform repeat assessments of blood potassium concentration:

A prominent increase in the amplitude of the U wave, triggered by hypokalemia, is associated with a higher susceptibility to the ventricular arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Some individuals exhibit serious arrhythmias with only mild hypokalemia.

Large and sharp T waves are a marker of hyperkalemia and may occur during and after recovery; they are associated with a risk for cardiac arrest.

Monitoring of ECG and blood potassium concentration must be continued some hours after normalization of the serum potassium concentration, in order to detect a relapse of hypokalemia or the development of hyperkalemia secondary to excessive potassium load.

Administration of supplemental potassium must be discontinued when the serum potassium concentration is normalized, even if weakness persists.

Attempting to abort paralytic attacks when they begin. Affected individuals are advised to keep a sufficient dose of potassium in various places (at the bedside, in pockets or handbags, in the car) so that when warning symptoms appear, the person can take potassium and possibly avoid a full-blown attack, which would usually occur within minutes [Levitt 2008]. It is also acknowledged that maintaining mild physical activity may abort attacks in some cases.

Myopathy. No curative treatment is known for fixed myopathy in HOKPP. The effects of muscle weakness are managed as in other disorders with similar manifestations.

Physiotherapy may help to maintain strength and motor abilities, especially after 40 years of age, when permanent muscle weakness is more often seen.

The physiotherapist must be aware of the following peculiarity of periodic paralysis: that sustained effort results in exacerbation of weakness. Therefore, self-managed exercise should be preferred to superimposed physiotherapy [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive treatment is intended to decrease the frequency and intensity of paralytic attacks. Triggering factors need to be identified and, if possible, avoided (see Table 7).

A diet rather low in sodium and carbohydrate and rich in potassium is recommended.

Potassium supplementation for prevention and treatment of attacks is an empiric but effective treatment for shortening attacks and sometimes preventing their occurrence (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Oral intake of potassium salts (10-20 mmol/dose, 3 doses/day) can prevent attacks, especially if the dose of potassium is taken some hours before the usual time of the attack (i.e., a nocturnal dose if crises occur at awakening).

Acetazolamide is generally considered the additive treatment of choice for prevention of paralytic attacks and myopathy in HOKPP. However, there is no standardized treatment regimen and no consensus as to when to start treatment with acetazolamide.

Typical dosage for acetazolamide in adults is between 125 mg/day and 1000 mg/day (usually 250-500 mg/day), divided into three doses and taken with meals; in children a dose of 5-10 mg/kg/day, divided into three doses and taken with meals, is used.

Acetazolamide treatment:

Is beneficial in approximately 50% of individuals with HOKPP;

Has no effect in 30% of affected individuals;

Exacerbates symptoms in approximately 20% (this deleterious effect may be predicted by genotype, see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations).

In some affected persons, permanent weakness may be partly reversed and muscle strength may be improved by acetazolamide treatment [Links et al 1988].

Whether acetazolamide treatment prevents or treats myopathy and the resulting fixed weakness that occurs with age is unknown.

Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect of preventive acetazolamide treatment on attack rate, severity-weighted attack rate, permanent weakness, and myopathy.

Alternatives to acetazolamide. If acetazolamide is not tolerated or if it is not effective after prolonged use, alternatives include dichlorphenamide (50-200 mg/day), triamterene (50-150 mg/day), and spironolactone (25-100 mg/day).

Other drugs have been used with limited success: lithium gluconate [Confavreux et al 1991] (though Ottosson & Persson [1971] earlier demonstrated lack of efficacy); pinacidil [Ligtenberg et al 1996]; and bumetanide [Wu et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Creating a safe environment, getting help in case of paralytic attack, and preventing falls and accidents are critical [Levitt 2008].

An affected person experiencing a paralytic attack must have access to potassium as well as physical assistance. Thus, those with HOKPP should inform their companions or acquaintances of their risk for paralytic attack, especially in a sports or school context, so that they can access appropriate help rapidly in case of an attack.

Falls and injuries from falls are frequent in those with HOKPP (67% of affected individuals age >40 years report such falls and injuries) [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].

Pre- or postoperative paralysis. Because of the risk for paralysis preceding or following anesthesia, precautions should be taken during administration of anesthesia to individuals with HOKPP. Individuals with HOKPP should be considered susceptible to malignant hyperthermia and managed with a non-triggering anesthetic technique – although general anesthesia using volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine has been reported as safe in a small number of individuals with HOKPP.

General guidelines for perioperative care include the following:

Strict control of serum potassium concentration

Avoidance of large glucose and salt loads

Low-carbohydrate diet

Maintenance of body temperature and acid-base balance

Careful use of neuromuscular blocking agents with continuous monitoring of neuromuscular function [Hofer et al 2001]

Late-onset myopathy with fixed muscle weakness. It is not known whether the prevention of paralytic attacks also prevents the development of myopathy. Individuals with known pathogenic variants who developed myopathy without having experienced episodes of weakness have been reported.

Surveillance

The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's signs and symptoms and response to preventive treatment. Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness associated with myopathy.

Questionnaires completed by the affected individual may be used to evaluate disease severity without treatment and with treatment.

For those individuals who take acetazolamide the following parameters should be evaluated every three months: complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, uric acid, and liver enzyme levels. Renal ultrasound should be performed annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Factors such as the following can trigger paralytic attacks and thus should be avoided when possible:

Unusually strenuous effort

Excess of carbohydrate-rich meals

Sweets

Alcohol

Prolonged immobility

Oral or intravenous corticosteroids, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be used with care in individuals with HOKPP

Glucose infusionm, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be replaced by another type of infusion

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When a pathogenic variant is identified in a proband, molecular genetic testing of at-risk, asymptomatic family members is appropriate because of the risk for unexpected acute paralysis and/or malignant hyperthermia.

When the results of presymptomatic testing are not known, the at-risk family members must be considered at risk for complications and precautions must be taken, particularly in the administration of anesthesia and avoidance of risk factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

While in utero acetazolamide exposure is reported to cause limb defects in rodents, acetazolamide therapy during human pregnancy does not appear to increase the risk for fetal malformations [Heinonen et al 1977].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used in research protocols to evaluate abnormalities in ionic muscle content in periodic paralyses of different types. It represents a possible research tool to evaluate the effect of treatment on skeletal muscles and to assess clinical outcomes in individuals with HOKPP.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), the following are recommended:

Complete ophthalmologic evaluation

Skin examination for severity of hypopigmentation and, after infancy, for evidence of skin damage and skin cancer

History of bleeding problems and symptoms suggesting pulmonary fibrosis and/or colitis. For evaluation for lung fibrosis, pulmonary function tests (PFTs) should be performed in individuals older than age 20 years.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Eyes

The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia (far-sightedness) or myopia (near-sightedness), and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors can improve visual acuity.

Strabismus surgery is usually not required but can be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus is marked or fixed. The surgery is not always successful.

Aids such as hand-held magnifying devices or bioptic lenses are helpful adjuncts in the care of visually impaired individuals with HPS.

Preferential seating in school is beneficial, and a vision consultant may be useful.

Skin. Treatment of skin cancer does not differ from that in the general population.

Bleeding

Humidifiers may reduce the frequency of nosebleeds.

Oral contraceptives can limit the duration of menstrual periods. Menorrhagia has been treated with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system [Kingman et al 2004] and with recombinant factor VIIa [Lohse et al 2011].

Treatment of minor cuts includes placing thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® over an open wound that fails to clot spontaneously.

For more invasive trauma, such as wisdom tooth extraction, DDAVP (1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, 0.2 µg/kg in 50 mL of normal saline) can be given as a 30-minute intravenous infusion just prior to the procedure. The use of DDAVP may or may not improve the bleeding time [Cordova et al 2005]. For extensive surgeries or protracted bleeding, platelet or red blood cell transfusions may be required.

Pulmonary fibrosis

When the pulmonary disease becomes severe, oxygen therapy can be palliative.

One individual with HPS-1 remains well after undergoing lung transplantation [Lederer et al 2005]. The authors know of several additional successful lung transplantations.

Colitis. The granulomatous colitis of HPS resembles Crohn's colitis and, as such, may respond to steroids and other anti-inflammatory agents [Mora & Wolfsohn 2011]. Remicade® has also been used with benefit [Erzin et al 2006, Felipez et al 2010].

Immunodeficiency. When present, immunodeficiency is typically responsive to granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Skin. Skin care in HPS is dictated by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Protection from the sun should be provided to prevent burning, other skin damage, and skin cancer. In very sensitive individuals, sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be significant, while exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually significant in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, and socks). For extremely sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with a high SPF value (total blocks with SPF 45-50+) are appropriate; for less sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with SPF values of 15 or above can be used.

Bleeding. Individuals with HPS should consider obtaining a medical alert bracelet that explicitly describes the functional platelet defect, as the standard tests for bleeding dysfunction (platelet count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time) are normal in HPS.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Prior to the development of pulmonary fibrosis, attention should be paid to maximizing pulmonary function. This entails avoidance of cigarette smoke, prompt treatment of pulmonary infections, immunization with influenza and pneumococcal vaccines, and regular moderate exercise.

Surveillance

Eyes. Annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error, is indicated.

Skin. Over many years, exposure to the sun of lightly pigmented skin can result in coarse, rough, thickened skin (pachydermia), solar keratoses (premalignant lesions), and skin cancer. Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma can develop. Although skin melanocytes are present in individuals with HPS, melanoma is rare. Examination for these findings should be performed at least annually.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary function testing should be performed annually in adults.

Colitis. Colitis is suspected in those with a history of cramping, increased mucus in the stool, and rectal bleeding; colonoscopy is used to confirm the diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Bleeding. All aspirin-containing products as well as activities that could involve the risk of a bleeding episode should be avoided.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Cigarette smoking decreases pulmonary function and may worsen progression of pulmonary fibrosis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In individuals with HPS-1 and HPS-4, the diagnosis of HPS will be apparent because the hypopigmentation and nystagmus are clinically evident.

In rare families with the milder types (HPS-3, HPS-5, or HPS-6), the evaluation of apparently unaffected sibs may yield a positive diagnosis:

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, platelet aggregation or platelet whole mount electron microscopy studies can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies should proceed normally for an affected mother or an affected fetus. Delivery, however, carries risk for bleeding in a woman with HPS; surveillance and a hematology consultation for anticipation of bleeding complications during delivery should be initiated once pregnancy is confirmed.

Therapies Under Investigation

Initial studies suggest a salutary effect on pulmonary function of the investigational drug pirfenidone in affected individuals with pulmonary function greater than 50% of normal [Gahl et al 2002]. A follow-up clinical trial was unable to confirm this finding, but also did not refute it [O’Brien et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In general, opaque contact lenses or darkly tinted lenses do not improve visual function. Dark glasses may be helpful for individuals with albinism, but many prefer to go without dark glasses because they reduce vision.

No successful therapy for or prophylaxis against the pulmonary fibrosis of HPS exists. Steroids are often tried but have no apparent beneficial effect.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a CDC73-related disorder, the following are recommended:

Evaluation for primary hyperparathyroidism: measurement of concomitant intact parathyroid hormone levels and serum calcium concentration

Baseline bone density of the lumbar spine, hips, and distal radius by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and 24-hour urine collection for calcium in individuals with evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism

Evaluation for jaw tumors: panoramic jaw x-ray with neck shielding

Evaluation for renal lesions: renal ultrasound examination preferred; CT and/or MRI as clinically indicated

Evaluation for uterine tumors in women starting at reproductive age: pelvic examination as part of routine gynecologic care; pelvic ultrasound examination (preferred) and other imaging studies (CT and/or MRI) as clinically indicated

Consultation with a medical genetics professional (e.g., medical geneticist, genetic counselor): recommended

Treatment of Manifestations

Primary hyperparathyroidism. While the preferred treatment for sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism is parathyroidectomy by a high-volume parathyroid surgeon (most of whom prefer a minimally invasive or targeted approach), the optimal surgical approach to primary hyperparathyroidism in HPT-JT syndrome has not yet been established. However, because many individuals with HPT-JT syndrome present with a single parathyroid tumor, a minimally invasive approach to remove the parathyroid tumor followed by close monitoring for recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism has been suggested. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy requires the use of:

Preoperative imaging (e.g., ultrasound examination, 99mTc-sestamibi scanning [often with concomitant SPECT/CT], CT, and/or MRI to localize the abnormal parathyroid gland); AND

Intraoperative measurement of iPTH (IOPTH) to ensure an adequate resection of all hyperfunctioning tissue.

IOPTH involves measurement of serum iPTH at the initiation of the surgery and again at five minutes and ten minutes following excision of the presumed parathyroid tumor. An IOPTH that drops more than 50% in the first five minutes is highly suggestive of cure. The success rate of such a measurement is over 95%. If the IOPTH does not drop more than 50% in five minutes, residual hyperfunctioning tissue likely remains in situ and further exploration is recommended to look for other abnormally hyperfunctioning glands. Standard cervical exploration to visualize all four parathyroid glands is generally not recommended unless it appears that residual hyperfunctioning tissue remains.

If there is any suggestion of adherence of the parathyroid gland to the thyroid parenchyma, a concomitant thyroid lobectomy should be considered. In the past, prophylactic total parathyroidectomy was suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma in HPT-JT syndrome; however, given the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not widely accepted. Because the disease usually involves a single gland, a multigland resection increases the risk for hypoparathyroidism with no true benefit of reducing disease recurrence. Therefore, subtotal parathyroidectomy (the standard surgery in MEN1) is not recommended.

Regardless of the surgical approach, the risk of recurrent and/or new metachronous disease exists; therefore, regular lifelong serum testing for biochemical evidence of hyperparathyroidism is recommended (see Surveillance).

Parathyroid carcinoma is suspected in those with extremely elevated serum calcium and iPTH levels, more profound symptoms, and clear radiographic evidence of parathyroid neoplasia. In this situation, an en bloc resection including the ipsilateral thyroid lobe should occur. Care to prevent fracture of the tumor, which could seed the local area, is critical. Experienced surgeons can usually distinguish typical benign parathyroid tissue from carcinoma. Benign tissue is peanut butter in color, soft, small, and non-adherent to surrounding structures. Benign tumors are usually oval, round, or kidney-shaped in appearance. In contrast, parathyroid carcinoma is usually hard, firm, white-grey, large, and intimately attached to surrounding structures [Author, personal experience].

Cinacalcet hydrochloride (Sensipar®), a calcimimetic that binds to the calcium-sensing receptor, has been approved for the treatment of severe hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism in individuals who are unable to undergo parathyroidectomy and for the treatment of parathyroid carcinoma-related hypercalcemia [Messa et al 2011]. Its use in CDC73-related disorders has not been reported, but cinacalcet has proven effective in cases of inoperable parathyroid carcinoma [Silverberg et al 2007].

Jaw tumors. Jaw tumors should be treated surgically as indicated based on the size, location, and symptoms of the lesion. Treatment of choice is complete resection, which may not be possible in all cases. There are no well-defined medical approaches to unresectable jaw tumors. Patients should be followed closely because of the possibility of recurrence.

Renal manifestations. No treatment guidelines for renal manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Management guidelines are available for other polycystic kidney diseases, such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; however, the natural history and likelihood of ESRD is likely to be different in HPT-JT syndrome-associated renal disease. Individuals with evidence of cystic kidney disease should be managed by nephrologists on a case-by-case basis.

Uterine tumors. No treatment guidelines for uterine manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Individuals with evidence of a uterine tumor should be managed by a gynecologist on a case-by-case basis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic total parathyroidectomy has been suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma. However, given the rarity of parathyroid carcinoma in individuals with HPT-JT syndrome and the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The risk of post-operative hypoparathyroidism can be minimized by: ensuring normal preoperative 25-(OH) vitamin D concentrations; recognizing risk factors for hungry bone syndrome preoperatively (e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentration); and implementing close postoperative monitoring that includes prompt replacement of calcium and vitamin D as indicated. Minimization of postoperative nausea and vomiting can help prevent an increase in venous pressure, which could lead to oozing and devascularization of the remaining in situ parathyroid glands.

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck should be avoided when possible to reduce the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.

An en bloc resection should be considered in all patients suspected of having parathyroid carcinoma in order to optimize a surgical cure and prevent positive surgical margins or seeding of parathyroid tissue during removal.

Surveillance

There are currently no well-established surveillance guidelines for individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant. Based on an extensive literature review, the authors make the following management recommendations:

Measure serum concentrations of calcium, iPTH, and 25-(OH) vitamin D (to evaluate for possible coexisting vitamin D deficiency as a cause of elevated iPTH levels or unexpectedly “normal” calcium concentrations) every 12 months starting at age five to ten years.

In patients with a history of parathyroid carcinoma who develop a rise in calcium levels, consider the possibility of a new primary parathyroid tumor in addition to recurrence/progression of malignant disease.

Consider periodic parathyroid ultrasound examination for the detection of non-functioning parathyroid carcinoma, which has developed on rare occasion in individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant [Guarnieri et al 2006].

Obtain panoramic x-ray dental imaging with neck shielding at least every five years, in addition to regular dental hygiene maintenance, starting at age ten years. Dental providers should be notified of the presence of a CDC73-related disorder and the need for monitoring for osseous fibromas of the maxilla and mandible.

Monitor for kidney lesions by renal ultrasound examination at least every five years starting at the age of diagnosis. Serum creatinine concentrations should be monitored in those individuals with renal cysts. Individuals with solid lesions should be referred for appropriate subspecialty care.

Starting at reproductive age, women with a CDC73-related disorder should undergo regular gynecologic care (including pelvic examination). Care providers in obstetrics and gynecology should be notified of the risk of uterine tumors. Pelvic ultrasound examination should be obtained in any woman with a menstrual disorder (particularly abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia) with further imaging studies (CT or MRI) as clinically indicated.

The age at which genetic testing and surveillance should begin for at-risk relatives is also not well established.

The authors recommend considering testing and surveillance for primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumors beginning at around age five to ten years, as this is the age of the youngest reported case of hyperparathyroidism and is ten years younger than the earliest reported age of parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis.

The age at onset of kidney lesions is not well described; renal ultrasound examination can be considered at time of diagnosis.

Uterine tumors have only been reported in adults; surveillance can begin at reproductive age.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Radiation exposure

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck, which increases the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the family-specific CDC73 germline pathogenic variant has been identified, molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk relatives starting around age five to ten years in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or preventive measures.

When molecular testing for a CDC73 pathogenic variant is not possible or not informative, individuals at 50% risk (first-degree relatives of an individual with CDC73-related disorders) should undergo routine evaluation for primary hyperparathyroidism (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy may pose increased risks to the mother (symptomatic hypercalcemia) and to the fetus (intrauterine growth retardation, preterm delivery, intrauterine fetal demise, and/or postpartum neonatal hypocalcemia). Conservative observation may be appropriate for mild asymptomatic hypercalcemia, but for symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism or evidence of adverse effects on the fetus, surgery (preferred in the second trimester) is required for definitive treatment. These women should be managed in conjunction with a maternal-fetal medicine specialist.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type II (HSAN2) the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination to determine extent of sensory loss and involvement of autonomic and motor nervous system

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV)

Detailed family history

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and often involves a team including neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physiotherapists.

Training in the care of the sensory-impaired limb is important and includes self-examination especially of the feet for any signs of trauma. A diabetic clinic is a good source of advice. Appropriate shoes and socks are recommended.

It is best to prevent callous formation in neuropathic skin; once present, calluses should be treated with hydration and lipid-based unguents to prevent cracking and may require medical consultation.

Cleaning and protection of wounds on neuropathic limbs in combination with antiseptic treatment to eradicate infections help prevent osteomyelitis and amputations.

Surveillance

The feet in particular should be inspected daily for injuries and sources of wear.

Patients should be followed annually by centers with comprehensive care for diabetes and/or CMT.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid ill-fitting shoes or other sources of trauma to the feet or hands (e.g., use protective gloves when handling hot items when cooking).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs in early childhood in order to identify those who will develop sensory loss and would benefit from measures to prevent injury to limbs and/or self-mutilation. Molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) (also known as hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IV [HSAN IV]), the following evaluations are recommended:

General physical examination for evidence of self-mutilation of tongue, lips, buccal mucosa; skin injury including infection and/or palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, bone injury including old poorly healing fractures and/or joint injury including dislocations, as well as behavioral and developmental problems

Orthopedic consultation regarding assessment of injuries of the extremities and weight-bearing joints, including radiographs as necessary

Dental examination to assess for auto-extraction of teeth, evidence of dental caries and/or abscess, as well as overall dental health

Ophthalmologic examination to assess for evidence of neuropathic keratitis and its sequelae (corneal infection, ulceration, and/or perforation)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive and is best provided by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology.

It is important to provide assistance and encourage therapies for behavioral, developmental, and motor delays that are appreciated during infancy and early childhood as well as to provide educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents.

Hyperthermia or hypothermia. Monitoring of the body temperature helps to institute timely measures to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia. Hyperthermia responds to direct cooling in a bath or cooling blanket; hypothermia responds to warming by a blanket as necessary.

Control of environmental temperatures is essential to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia.

Orthopedic. Bone fractures of weight-bearing bones and joints can lead to failure of bone union and hypertrophic osseous callous formation, as well as neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) [Szöke et al 1996, Schulman et al 2001, Bar-On et al 2002, Kim et al 2013, Feldman et al 2009]. Because such injuries and their sequelae are difficult to treat, the goal of orthopedic management is to prevent severe articular destruction and the need for surgical amputation.

Although the parents and caregivers of an affected child are advised to modify the child’s activities to prevent injuries, it is often very difficult due to the child’s inability to perceive pain. While protective appliances, such as braces to prevent injury to the lower limbs can be tried, they are associated with a high risk of secondary skin injury and, thus, infection.

Careful daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury is important for early detection and treatment of injuries.

Appropriate footwear and periods of non-weight-bearing are important in the prevention and early treatment of ulcerating foot lesions [Bar-On et al 2002].

In the treatment of various injuries the absence of pain perception makes immobilization difficult, often resulting in delayed healing. Additionally, infection is a serious potential complication of any invasive procedure, such as treatment of bone fractures with an external fixator [Kim et al 2013].

Of note, longstanding infections require wide surgical debridement.

Bone and joint deformities can be managed by corrective osteotomy; leg length discrepancy can be managed by shoe lifts and/ or epiphysiodesis [Bar-On et al 2002]; however, the value of surgical intervention needs to be weighed against non-surgical approaches including close monitoring [Kim et al 2013]. Joint dislocations are best treated conservatively.

Dental. Early and routine preventative oral/dental care and timely treatment of the dental and oral conditions associated with CIPA can help reduce the characteristic oral and dental manifestations [Amano et al 1998, Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Bodner et al 2002, Ikeda et al 2004].

In infants, the incisal edges of newly erupted mandibular primary incisors traumatize the ventral surface of the tongue with sucking and nursing. This ulceration of the tongue can lead to bleeding and infection of the tongue, and halitosis, as well as systemic problems such as poor weight gain and failure to thrive.

The oral self-mutilation (i.e., the severe biting injuries [and resultant scarring] of the fingertips and/or oral soft tissues [tongue, lip, and buccal mucosa]) is found in most affected individuals. Although self-mutilation appears to decrease with age and with intellectual, social, and/or emotional development, such behaviors cannot be completely eliminated.

Methods used to prevent injuries to the lips, buccal mucosa, tongue, and teeth include tooth extraction, and/or filing (smoothing) of their sharp incisal edges [Bodner et al 2002], and/or use of a mouth guard, a protective plate of thermoplastic resin ~0.6-0.8 mm thick [Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Ikeda et al 2004]. Mouth guards must be refashioned as new teeth erupt and the jaw grows. Although use of a mouth guard is a reasonable approach, mouth guards can be difficult to prepare and/or retain.

The high rate of missing teeth and untreated carious teeth observed in individuals with CIPA suggests that dental examination and/or care is underutilized or that tooth decay may be overlooked because of the insensitivity to pain. Serious tooth decay can cause osteomyelitis that can lead to mandibular bone fracture.

Eye. Care for dry eyes, prevention of corneal infection, and daily observation of the ocular surface are crucial for maintaining good visual function [Amano et al 2006]. Of note, surgical treatment of neurotrophic keratitis has not been successful as poor outcomes of lateral tarsorrhaphy, corneal patch graft, and penetrating keratoplasty have been reported [Yagev et al 1999].

Skin. Daily care with a skin moisturizer is recommended to prevent or reduce skin cracking which can lead to bruising, and skin infections, which can progress to more significant infections such as cellulitis or osteomyelitis.

Parents or guardians should practice skin care to prevent serious infections, including daily observation of the whole skin surface and early treatment of even minor skin lesions.

Behavior. Interventions for behavioral, developmental and motor delays as well as educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents are important.

Although irritability, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and acting-out behaviors typically improve with age, medications for antipsychotic and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in conjunction with behavior modification may be beneficial. The advantages and disadvantages should be weighed for each individual with CIPA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Dental care includes the following:

Regular dental examinations and restriction of sweets to prevent dental caries

Early treatment of dental caries and periodontal disease to prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible.

During surgical procedures, the following potential complications need to be considered and avoided:

Inadequate sedation. The congenital absence of peripheral pain fibers may result in analgesia, but inadequate sedation in the postoperative period may trigger unexpected movement, causing secondary injuries. Therefore, tachycardia and hypertension in the postoperative period should raise consideration of the possibility of inadequate sedation.

Hyper- or hypothermia. Temperature needs to be monitored carefully during the perioperative period; heating blankets should not be used.

Of note, the use of muscle relaxants during surgery is not a problem as malignant hyperthermia has not been associated with HSAN [Tomioka et al 2002].

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury;

Regular examinations by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology to identify serious injuries and initiate early treatment;

Annual follow up at a center that fosters comprehensive care and communication between the various subspecialties that are needed for optimal care.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Hot or cold environments; hot or cold foods; hot showers or baths

Jumping or high-impact activities and sports

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, molecular genetic testing may be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk infants so that those who are affected can be monitored to avoid:

Hyperpyrexia and its potential complications, including febrile seizures;

Injuries to the tongue, lips, and teeth when the primary teeth erupt.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, monitor the body temperature of at-risk infants during the neonatal period (i.e., first 28 days of life).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA, the following assessments are recommended:

Feet, ankles, and hands re the condition of the skin

Joints for evidence of Charcot joints

Strength

Loss of sweating and compensatory patchy hyperhydrosis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Wounds on neuropathic limbs heal if they are clean and protected and the limb is rested. Principles of treatment are the same as for leprosy surgery; see Warren & Nade [1999].

Foot drop can be treated with ankle/foot orthotics (AFOs), but these need sleeving with stockings or some form of second skin to prevent skin abrasion.

Charcot joints may require arthrodesis.

Shooting pains are difficult to treat and only partial relief can be obtained with carbamazepine, gabapentin, or amitryptiline, or a combination of an antiepileptic and an antidepressant. Opiates are contraindicated as HSN1A is a chronic disorder.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Foot ulcers are frequently caused by breakdown of callus. Therefore, it is important to prevent callus formation by removing sources of pressure and to treat existing callus by softening the skin. Routine foot care by a diabetic clinic or by a podiatrist instructed to treat as for a diabetic foot is recommended.

Burns can be prevented by using gloves as needed (e.g., during cooking).

A diabetic education clinic is an excellent source of advice regarding skin care.

Surveillance

Feet should be inspected at least daily for injuries or sources of wear.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Opiates are contraindicated as this is a chronic disorder.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Penno et al [2010] found that HSN1A-causing pathogenic variants in SPTLC1 result in decreased specificity of the active site of the enzyme, allowing alanine and glycine into the active site and producing neurotoxic sphingoid bases. The finding suggests that HSN1A is caused by these toxic products and opens an avenue for possible (at present, experimental) therapeutic approaches. Addition of serine to the diet of an HSN1 animal model and to 14 humans with HSN1 was effective in reducing plasma levels of the toxic deoxysphingolipids [Garofalo et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; also known as Hunter syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiogram

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study if sleep apnea is a potential concern

Hearing test

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) study to assess for carpal tunnel syndrome

Head-cervical MRI and/or opening pressure on lumbar puncture to assess for hydrocephalus and spinal cord compression. Because MRI needs to be performed under sedation and/or intubation in individuals with the early progressive form, there is an increased risk of compromising the upper airway. See Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Eye examination

Developmental assessment

Medical genetics consultation

Note: Many of these assessments are age dependent. For example, pulmonary function and sleep studies would not be appropriate in a two year old.

Treatment of Manifestations

Patient management guidelines have been published [Scarpa et al 2011].

At this time, treatment of complications in MPS II is symptomatic.

The involvement of specialists for each affected organ system is required to monitor and treat specific problems (see Clinical Description). Commonly required interventions include the following:

Shunting for hydrocephalus

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy

Positive pressure ventilation (CPAP or tracheostomy)

Carpal tunnel release

Cardiac valve replacement

Inguinal hernia repair

Hip replacement

Developmental, occupational, and physical therapy are often necessary.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) has shown encouraging results in possibly modifying/correcting the non-CNS manifestations; as confirmed in a long-term study [Lampe et al 2014b].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Idursulfase (Elaprase®) is a recombinant form of human iduronate 2-sulfatase that has been approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of MPS II [US Food and Drug Administration 2006a, US Food and Drug Administration 2006b].

Clinical efficacy of ERT was shown in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of 96 patients [Muenzer et al 2006]. When compared to the placebo group after one year of treatment, persons in the weekly idursulfase group demonstrated statistically significant improvement of the primary endpoint (a composite of distance walked and lung function). Based on the better clinical response in the group in which medication was administered weekly compared to group in which it was administered every other week, idursulfase was approved in both the US and EU for the treatment of MPS II at a weekly dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Because this trial only studied individuals with the slowly progressive form of the disease, it yielded little information on outcomes in individuals younger than age five years or with early progressive CNS disease.

Results of a study on ERT in children younger than age five years or individuals with severe pulmonary compromise or severe CNS disease have been published [Muenzer et al 2012].

More recently, in a 3.5 year independent follow-up of 27 individuals with MPS II, Tomanin et al [2014] determined that:

Long-term use of ERT was safe;

ERT efficacy was similar in both a younger age group (age 1.6-12 years at the start of ERT) and an older age group (age 12-27 years at the start of ERT); and

Improvement/stabilization of findings such as GAG level, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otologic disorders, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and cardiac valve regurgitation (except mitral valve) was greater in individuals with the early progressive form compared to those with the slowly progressive form.

Since Elaprase® does not cross the blood-brain barrier, no effect on CNS disease is anticipated; however, there is reason to believe that somatic manifestations of those with severe CNS involvement would benefit from ERT. The young age is not adding any safety concerns, and patients have significant amelioration of somatic symptoms [Lampe et al 2014a].

Infusion-related reactions that may occur with use of Elaprase® ERT are comparable to similar reactions seen with other ERT products used in treatment of lysosomal storage disease and with other infused proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., infliximab). The etiology of the more severe forms of these non-allergic reactions, referred to as anaphylactoid, is unknown. Current evidence suggests that anaphylactoid (as opposed to anaphylactic) reactions are not immune mediated [Mayer & Young 2006].

Infusion reactions are generally mild and include brief, insignificant decreases or increases in heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory rate; itching; rash; flushing; and headache. Mild reactions can usually be managed by slowing the infusion rate for several treatments and then slowly returning to the prior rate.

Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines, as is often done for ERT in other conditions, is not suggested on the label for Elaprase®; however, if mild or moderate infusion reactions (e.g., dyspnea, urticaria, or systolic blood pressure changes of ≤20 mm Hg) cannot be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate, the addition of treatment one hour before infusion with diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (or ibuprofen) to the regimen usually resolves the problem. Pretreatment can typically be discontinued after six to ten weeks.

Severe non-allergic anaphylactoid reactions such as major changes in blood pressure, wheezing, stridor, rigors, or drop in oxygen saturations should be immediately addressed by stopping the infusion and giving appropriate doses of subcutaneous (SQ) epinephrine, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine, and hydrocortisone or methylpredinsolone. Subsequent infusions should then be given at a significantly reduced rate with pretreatment with prednisone 24 hours and eight hours before the infusion, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen or ibuprofen orally one hour before the infusion, and IV methylpredinsolone just before beginning the infusion.

Because of the limitation of the design of the clinical trial, it is not known at this time whether the incidence or severity of infusion-related reactions is different for patients younger than age five years with severe respiratory compromise or with severe CNS disease.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using umbilical cord blood or bone marrow is a potential way of providing sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression of the disease [Guffon et al 2009, Annibali et al 2013]; however, the use of HSCT is controversial because of the associated high risk of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, it remains unclear if treatment early in life significantly reduces the progression of neurologic disease [Mullen et al 2000], and anecdotal case reports published to date have been disappointing, quite unlike the reports of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Hurler syndrome (MPS I). Overall, the efficacy of BMT for MPS II cannot be determined until a number of children with MPS II younger than age two years with known or probable severe CNS disease undergoes transplantation, along with documentation of long-term follow up [Tanaka et al 2012]. Although this study needs to be validated, the use of HSCT is difficult to justify since HSCT and ERT have equal efficacy in restoring growth in children with MPS II [Patel et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Given the risks associated with sedation with/without intubation, anesthesia is best administered in centers familiar with the potential complications in persons with MPS II. Risks associated with general anesthesia include the following:

Ankylosis of the temporomandibular (TM) joint can restrict oral access to the airway.

Visualization of the vocal cords is compromised by the large tongue, GAG-infiltrated soft tissues, and large tonsils and adenoids.

Care must be taken to avoid hyperextension of the neck secondary to atlantoaxial instability and cervicomedullary compression which may be present.

Nasopharyngeal intubation is often necessary. When endotracheal intubation is difficult or when sedation is required for brief procedures, laryngeal mask airway may be indicated.

The risk of airway complications may continue following successful surgery. Extubation may be difficult because laryngeal edema, which has been reported up to 27 hours post surgery, may prevent maintenance of a proper airway [Hopkins et al 1973]. Breathing a helium-oxygen mixture during extubation has been reported to relieve obstruction and improve outcome [Grosz et al 2001].

Surveillance

Guidelines for surveillance have been developed [Scarpa et al 2011].

Modes of surveillance for complications over time depend, like treatment, on organ system and disease severity. Because all persons with MPS II face the same organ failure issues, with the time of failure being dependent on severity, when and how often to monitor for change cannot be generalized. However, the following studies/evaluations are likely indicated on at least a yearly basis beginning in early to mid-childhood:

Cardiology visit with echocardiogram

Pulmonary clinic visit with pulmonary function testing

Audiogram

Eye examination, including examination through a dilated pupil to view the optic disc

Developmental assessment

Neurologic examination

The following are appropriate at baseline and/or when symptoms/age dictates:

Sleep study for obstructive sleep apnea

NCV study for evidence of carpal tunnel syndrome

Head/neck MRI to document ventricular size and cervicomedullary narrowing

Opening pressure on lumbar puncture

Orthopedic evaluation to monitor hip disease

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Although clinical experience suggests that early diagnosis of at-risk males allows initiation of ERT before the onset of irreversible changes and often before significant disease progression [Muenzer 2014], it is unclear at present whether early diagnosis (either by newborn screening or testing of at-risk male relatives) is beneficial as no data are available on whether early ERT improves the outcome of the somatic disease in MPS II. ERT is not expected to benefit children with the CNS form of the disease.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A number of interventions are being evaluated for potential use in MPS II.

Recently, a phase I intrathecal delivery of iduronate 2-sulfatase was initiated (see Clinical Trials). Preliminary results showed no toxicity of the protein injected intrathetically at the dosage used (10 mg and 30 mg). The GAG concentration in the CSF was significantly reduced but clinical efficacy needed further evaluation [Muenzer et al 2014].

Another ongoing multicenter study is evaluating the effect of a one-year course of monthly intrathecal administration of 10 mg of idursulfase on neurodevelopmental status in children with MPS II and cognitive impairment who have previously received and tolerated a minimum of four months of Elaprase® therapy.

Other therapies under preclinical investigation include more direct delivery of enzyme into the CNS, higher peripheral dosing regimens, small-molecule therapies such as chaperone and substrate reduction, and gene therapy [Beck 2010]. Tissue uptake (including the brain and spinal cord) via the transferrin receptor of a fusion protein between iduronate 2-sulfatase (I2S) and a monoclonal antibody against the mouse transferrin receptor is being studied [Zhou et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Huntington disease (HD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination

Neurologic assessment

Assessment of the full range of motor, cognitive, and psychiatric symptoms associated with HD. Among a range of clinical scoring systems that have been described, the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (HDRS) provides a reliable and consistent assessment of the clinical features and progression of HD.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Pharmacologic therapy is limited to symptomatic treatment [Mestre et al 2009, Killoran & Biglan 2014].

Choreic movements can be partially suppressed by typical and atypical neuroleptics such as haloperidol and olanzapine respectively, benzodiazepines, or the monoamine-depleting agent tetrabenazine [de Tommaso et al 2005, Bonelli & Wenning 2006, Huntington Study Group 2006]. However, there is ongoing discussion regarding the best practices for the treatment of chorea [Armstrong & Miyasaki 2012, Reilmann et al 2014].

Anti-parkinsonian agents may ameliorate hypokinesia and rigidity, but may increase chorea.

Psychiatric disturbances such as depression, psychotic symptoms, and outbursts of aggression generally respond well to psychotropic drugs or some types of antiepileptic drugs.

Valproic acid has improved myoclonic hyperkinesia in Huntington disease [Saft et al 2006].

Supportive care with attention to nursing, diet, special equipment, and eligibility for state and federal benefits is much appreciated by individuals with HD and their families. Numerous social problems beset individuals with HD and their families; practical help, emotional support, and counseling can provide relief [Williams et al 2009].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Significant secondary complications of HD include the following:

The complications typically observed with any individual requiring long-term supportive care

The side effects associated with various pharmacologic treatments. Drug side effects are dependent on a variety of factors including the compound involved, the dosage, and the individual; but with the medications typically used in HD, side effects may include depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dyskinesia. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms; such individuals would benefit from being removed from the treatment, having the dose reduced, or being 'rested' regularly from the treatment. Current medications used to treat chorea are particularly prone to significant side effects. Individuals with mild to moderate chorea may be better assisted with non-pharmacologic therapies such as movement training and speech therapy.

Depression. Standard treatment is appropriate when indicated [Paulsen et al 2005b, Phillips et al 2008].

Surveillance

Regular evaluations should be made to address the appearance and severity of chorea, rigidity, gait problems, depression, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline [Anderson & Marshall 2005, Skirton 2005].

The Behavior Observation Scale Huntington (BOSH) is a scale developed for the rapid and longitudinal assessment of functional abilities of persons with HD in a nursing home environment [Timman et al 2005]. For longitudinal studies, the Unified HD Rating Scale is used (UHDRS) [Huntington Study Group 1996, Siesling et al 1998, Youssov et al 2013]. The total functional capacity (TFC) scale is used to describe the progression of HD, the patient level of functioning, and requirements for additional caregiver aid (TFC scale).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

L-dopa-containing compounds may increase chorea.

Alcohol and smoking are discouraged.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A wide range of potential therapeutics are under investigation in both animal models of HD and human clinical trials [Wild & Tabrizi 2014]. This diversity reflects the variety of cellular pathways that are known to be perturbed in HD [Bonelli et al 2004, Rego & de Almeida 2005, Borrell-Pagès et al 2006, Graham et al 2006b, Bonelli & Hofmann 2007].

Pharmacologic agents being investigated include inhibitors of apoptosis, excitotoxicity, huntingtin aggregation, huntingtin proteolysis, huntingtin phosphorylation, inflammation, oxidative damage, phosphodiesterase activity, histone deacetylase inhibitors, and transglutaminase activity as well as compounds that modulate mitochondrial function, chaperone activity,transcription, and neurotrophic support.

Therapeutics that have shown improvements in mouse models of HD and are in preliminary trials include minocycline, sodium butyrate, essential fatty acids, racemide, creatine, cystamine, riluzole, and memantine [Walker & Raymond 2004, Bender et al 2005, Puri et al 2005, Bonelli & Wenning 2006, Hersch et al 2006, Okamoto et al 2009].

Several gene silencing therapies are being developed, including approaches using RNA interference (RNAi) or antisense-oligonucleotides (ASOs) [Pfister & Zamore 2009, Aronin & DiFiglia 2014]. Some methods aim to silence all huntingtin expression, while others are allele-specific [Matsui & Corey 2012, Skotte et al 2014; Southwell et al 2014] and aim to target only the pathogenic variant, leading to personalized therapy for HD [Kay et al 2014].

Neural transplantation studies in HD have shown variable results with small numbers of individuals [Furtado et al 2005, Bachoud-Lévi et al 2006, Farrington et al 2006, Dunnett & Rosser 2007, Barker et al 2013]. However additional larger studies are underway [Lopez et al 2014]. Of concern, recent studies suggest that mutated huntingtin is capable of spreading into the allografted neural tissue [Cicchetti et al 2014].

Biomarker studies, such as TRACK-HD, PREDICT-HD and ENROLL-HD, are/have been conducted to identify early changes in disease progression using imaging, clinical scales, and physiologic measurements [Scahill et al 2012, Ross et al 2014]. Longitudinal studies of persons at risk for HD have also been performed [Huntington Study Group PHAROS Investigators 2006, Paulsen et al 2006].

Numerous human clinical trials are planned or underway for HD and are listed at www.huntington-study-group.org. A number of drug trials have been completed and/or are currently ongoing. For example, both a high-dose creatine trial and trials using SD-809 (a modified form of tetrabenazine [Xenazine®, Nitoman®]) are in Phase III clinical testing. A Phase II clinical trial is also underway for PBT2. For the most up-to-date information see hddrugworks.org.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Children and adolescents living with a parent affected with HD, sometimes in very deprived conditions, can have special problems. Referral to a local HD support group for educational material and needed psychological support is helpful (see Resources).

At the present time cognitive impairment is not amenable to treatment. However, trials (including use of memantine as a treatment) are ongoing.

Donepezil, a drug used to treat Alzheimer disease, has not improved motor or cognitive function in HD [Cubo et al 2006].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with genetic atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Renal function

Creatinine clearance (i.e., glomerular filtration rate [GFR])

Serum concentration of creatinine resources

Urinalysis

Hematologic status

Platelet count

Erythrocyte count

Search for schistocytes in the blood smear

Leukocyte count

Other

Serum LDH concentration

Haptoglobin

Serum C3 and C4 concentrations

Plasma concentrations of Bb and sC5b-9

Measure serum concentrations of CFH and CFI

Assessment of CD46 expression on leukocytes

Testing for CFH autoantibodies because affected individuals who have autoantibodies could benefit from an immunosuppressive therapy (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Eculizumab has been shown to induce remission of acute episodes of aHUS refractory to plasma therapy and is now widely used as a first-line therapy to treat aHUS. Eculizumab should be considered as a first-line therapy when the diagnosis of aHUS is unequivocal, since this treatment has the potential to rescue renal function when administered early after onset of the disease [Zuber et al 2012a, Fakhouri et al 2013].

For further information about eculizumab, click here.

Plasma infusion or exchange guidelines have been published for children [Ariceta et al 2009] and adults [Taylor et al 2010]. Cohort data show that response to plasma therapy was in part related to the genetic background of the treated patient [Noris et al 2010]. Despite the variability in response to therapy, plasma therapy is the only therapy with near-complete global availability and therefore it remains an important treatment for aHUS. Plasma therapy should be started as soon as aHUS is suspected and continued until resolution of thrombotic microangiopathy. In individuals who respond, plasma exchange can be gradually withdrawn, although a significant proportion will require continued plasma exchange to maintain remission. There is minimal evidence to suggest the superiority of either plasma exchange or plasma infusion, and instead the selected option should be based on individual tolerance, local expertise, and resources (e.g., a neonatal benefit from infusion vs exchange) [Nester et al 2015].

Plasma exchange usually involves exchanging 1-2 plasma volumes (40 mL/kg) per session in adults and 50-100 mL/kg in children. Typically, plasma exchange is undertaken daily initially; the duration and frequency of treatment is then determined by the clinical response.

Treatment can be intensified by increasing the volume of plasma replaced. Twice-daily exchange of one plasma volume is probably the treatment of choice for those with refractory disease in order to minimize the recycling of infused plasma.

Plasma infusion is the first-line therapy when plasma exchange or eculizumab therapies are not available. In plasma infusion 30-40 mL/kg of plasma is administered initially, followed by 10-20 mL/kg/day. Plasma infusion should be used to treat or prevent recurrent episodes.

Platelet count and serum LDH concentration are the most sensitive markers for monitoring response to plasma therapy. Plasma treatment should be continued until platelet count and serum LDH concentration remain normal after therapy is discontinued. Discontinuation of plasma therapy is the only way to know if complete remission has been achieved. Immediate exacerbation of disease activity, principally manifested by falling platelet count that requires the resumption of daily plasma therapy, occurs in 29%-82% of individuals after treatment is discontinued. Thus, many cycles of stopping and resuming plasma therapy may occur, in which case therapy with eculizumab should be considered.

Genetic characterization of persons with aHUS has the potential to optimize the treatment:

C3. Response to plasma treatment in persons with C3 pathogenic variants was comparable (57%) to that in persons with CFH pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. It is hypothesized that plasma exchange could remove mutated hyperactive C3 and also provide regulatory plasma proteins to counteract complement activation induced by mutated C3.

CFB. Limited data are available on response of individuals with CFB pathogenic variants to treatment with plasma. Remission with plasma exchange or infusion has been reported in five individuals [Goicoechea de Jorge et al 2007, Roumenina et al 2009, Tawadrous et al 2010, Funato et al 2014].

CD46. The rationale for using plasma in individuals with CD46 pathogenic variants is not so clear, since the CD46 protein (also known as MCP) is a transmembrane protein and, theoretically, plasma infusion or plasma exchange would not compensate for the MCP defect. Published data indicate that the majority (80%-90%) of individuals undergo remission following plasma infusion or exchange [Richards et al 2003, Caprioli et al 2006]; however, complete recovery from the acute episode was also observed in 100% of individuals not treated with plasma [Noris et al 2010]. The decision whether or not to treat with plasma should be based on the clinical severity of the acute episode.

CFH. Plasma infusion or exchange has been used in individuals with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants with the rationale of providing normal CFH to compensate for the genetic deficiency, as CFH is a circulating plasma protein. In published studies, some individuals with CFH pathogenic variants did not respond at all to plasma therapy and died or developed ESRD. Others required infusion of plasma at weekly intervals in order to raise CFH plasma levels enough to maintain remission [Landau et al 2001].

Stratton and Warwicker [2002] were able to induce sustained remission in a patient with a CFH pathogenic variant by three months of weekly plasma exchange in conjunction with intravenous immunoglobulins. One year after discontinuation of plasma therapy, the patient remained disease free and dialysis independent.

A dozen case reports showed that early plasma therapy, generally consisting of daily plasma exchange followed by maintenance plasma exchange/infusion, could prevent relapses and preserve renal function at follow up for up to six years [Loirat et al 2016].

In the authors' series [Caprioli et al 2006, Noris et al 2010], approximately 60% of individuals with CFH pathogenic variants treated with plasma underwent either complete or partial remission (hematologic normalization with renal sequelae). However, the remaining individuals did not respond at all to plasma and 20% died during the acute episode.

In the French cohort [Frémeaux-Bacchi et al 2013] progression to ESRD during the first episode of aHUS was similar in children and adults with CFH pathogenic variants who received high-intensity plasma therapy compared to those who did not.

CFH autoantibodies. In individuals with anti-CFH autoantibodies, plasma treatment induced complete or partial remission (normalization of hematologic parameters with renal sequelae) of 75% of episodes [Noris et al 2010]. Persons with anti-CFH autoantibodies benefit from treatment with steroids or other immunosuppressants in conjunction with plasma exchange.

CFI. Theoretically one should expect a good response to plasma therapy in individuals with CFI pathogenic variants because CFI (like CFH) is a circulating protein; the results, however, suggest that a larger quantity of plasma is required to provide sufficient wild-type CFH or CFI to compensate for the genetic deficiency [Caprioli et al 2006]. Indeed, remission was achieved in only 25% of episodes treated with plasma in persons with CFI pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

DGKE. Absence of evidence linking DGKE deficiency to the complement cascade and relapses of acute aHUS in affected individuals with pathogenic variants in DGKE while receiving plasma therapy suggest that this treatment may not benefit individuals with DGKE pathogenic variants [Lemaire et al 2013].

THBD. Plasma treatment induced disease remission in about 80% of acute episodes in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

Treatment with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists helps to reduce renal disease progression to end-stage renal failure, while at the same time controlling blood pressure levels.

Bilateral nephrectomy may serve as rescue therapy in selected individuals with extensive microvascular thrombosis at renal biopsy, refractory hypertension, and signs of hypertensive encephalopathy, in whom conventional therapies including plasma manipulation are not adequate to control the disease (i.e., persistent severe thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia). Follow up has been excellent in some individuals [Ruggenenti et al 2001].

Renal transplantation outcome is determined largely by the underlying genetic abnormality. An important advance has been the development of transplant protocols integrating eculizumab treatment [Nester et al 2011]. Eculizumab therapy may be used to treat post-transplantation aHUS recurrence, as reported in individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFH, and CFI [Zuber et al 2012b]. Eculizumab prophylactic therapy may also prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Molecular genetic testing can help to define graft prognosis; thus, all affected individuals should undergo such testing prior to transplantation.

C3, CFB, and CFI. Graft failures secondary to recurrences occurred in one individual with a CFB pathogenic variant and in70% of individuals with CFI pathogenic variants. The percentage of graft failure was slightly lower (50%) in individuals with C3 pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

CD46. Four individuals with isolated

CD46 pathogenic variants have undergone renal transplantation with no disease recurrence [Noris & Remuzzi 2005, Noris et al 2010]. The strong theoretic rationale is that because the CD46 protein (MCP) is a transmembrane protein that is highly expressed in the kidney, transplantation of a kidney expressing normal MCP corrects the defect.

CFH. In individuals with CFH pathogenic variants the graft outcome is poor. Recurrence ranges from 30% to 100% and is significantly higher than in individuals without CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2010]. As CFH is mainly produced by the liver, kidney transplantation does not correct the CFH genetic defect in these individuals.

Simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation has been performed in two young children with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2005]. However, following transplantation both children experienced premature irreversible liver failure. The first child recovered after a second uneventful liver transplantation. This child, who had had monthly recurrences of aHUS before transplantation, had no symptoms of aHUS for more than two years following transplantation. The second child expired after primary non-function of the liver graft followed by multiorgan failure.

In six other individuals with CFH pathogenic variants and in one child heterozygous for pathogenic variants in two genes (CFH and CFI) who received simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation [Saland et al 2006, Saland et al 2009, Noris et al 2010], good renal and liver function were recorded at two-year follow up. In these individuals, extensive plasma exchange was given prior to surgery to provide enough normal CFH to prevent damage to the liver graft.

DGKE. Three individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE received cadaveric renal transplantation at ages 2, 19, and 21 years [Lemaire et al 2013]. Two allografts have survived two years and four years, till last observation, whereas the other failed after six years due to chronic rejection. Importantly, there were no aHUS recurrences after transplantation. On the basis of these findings, it appears that renal transplantation can be efficacious and safe in individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE.

THBD. One individual with THBD pathogenic variants had disease recurrence in the kidney graft – an unexpected occurrence, as thrombomodulin (like CD46) is an endothelial transmembrane protein. However, a soluble thrombomodulin form circulates in plasma and has functional activities similar to those of membrane-bound thrombomodulin. It is possible that the grafts were not sufficiently protected against complement activation because of dysfunctional soluble thrombomodulin in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Plasma exchange prophylaxis has been shown to prevent disease recurrences in persons with mutation of CFH [Davin et al 2008]. Plasma exchange and eculizumab prophylaxis may prevent disease recurrences in those with mutation of circulating factors (CFH, C3, CFB, and CFI).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Eculizumab has a greater efficacy than plasma therapy in the prevention of thrombotic microangiopathic events, with earlier intervention associated with a greater clinical benefit [Legendre et al 2013]. Eculizumab can be used as a prophylactic treatment to prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence in those at moderate to high risk of recurrence, as defined below [Nester et al 2011, Weitz et al 2011, Krid et al 2012, Zuber et al 2012b]:

Individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFB, and CFH or those who have the CFH-CFHR1 hybrid allele are at high risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b].

Individuals with anti-CFH antibodies, pathogenic variants in CFI, variants of unknown functional significance, and/or no identified pathogenic variants are at moderate risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b].

The major adverse effect of eculizumab is the increased risk for meningococcal infection [Rother et al 2007].

Vaccination against Neisseria meningitides (tetravalent vaccine A, C, Y, W135) is mandatory two weeks before administration of eculizumab.

In those who are not vaccinated two weeks prior to therapy with eculizumab, daily prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., oral penicillin or a macrolide) should be administered for two weeks following vaccination.

Since currently available vaccines do not cover all N meningitidis strains, a few countries require continuous antibiotic prophylaxis throughout eculizumab treatment.

In children treated with eculizumab, vaccination against Streptococcus pneumonia and Haemophilus influenza type B infections is also required.

Surveillance

Individuals with known aHUS. Measure serum concentration of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, and C4, and haptoglobin:

Every month in the first year after an aHUS episode, then every three to six months in the following years, particularly for persons with normal renal function or chronic renal insufficiency as they are at risk for relapse. Note: Individuals with ESRD usually do not relapse.

Every two weeks for those rare individuals with homozygous CFH pathogenic variants that result in very low or undetectable levels of the CFH protein

Note: The proposed time intervals for checking hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin are suggestions [Authors, personal observation]; each center may follow different guidelines based on their own experience.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Discontinue cyclosporine or tacrolimus when aHUS develops following challenge with the medication.

Fresh frozen plasma should be avoided (i.e., plasma therapy is contraindicated) in persons with aHUS induced by Streptococcus pneumoniae because plasma from an adult contains antibodies against the Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, which may exacerbate the disease. It is preferable to transfuse washed red blood cells or platelets. There is no evidence that plasmapheresis is of value [Copelovitch & Kaplan 2008].

Avoid potential precipitants of aHUS, including the following known triggers of aHUS:

Pregnancy

Medications. Some chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., mitomycin C, cisplatin, daunorubimicin, cytosine arabinoside), immunotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporin and tacrolimus), antiplatelet agents (e.g., ticlopidine and clopidogrel), oral contraceptives, and anti-inflammatory agents

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk family members of persons in whom a pathogenic variant(s) has been identified.

Note: Testing of family members needs to be done with caution because presence of the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) is predisposing rather than causative, and thus is only one of several risk factors required for development of aHUS. Predictions based on a single risk factor in unaffected individuals are unreliable (see Penetrance). Therefore, risk cannot be quantified for a given individual.

The following are appropriate for relatives in whom the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) have been identified:

Monitoring of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin) when exposed to potential triggering events such as severe infections, inflammation, and pregnancy (see Surveillance)

Avoidance of known precipitants of aHUS (see Clinical Description)

No monitoring is needed for:

Relatives in whom no family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified;

Relatives of persons in whom no pathogenic variant has been identified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with a history of aHUS are at increased risk for aHUS flare during pregnancy and an even greater risk in the post-partum period. Pregnancy-associated aHUS (P-aHUS) occurred in 21 of 100 adult women with aHUS, with 79% presenting post partum [Fakhouri et al 2010]. Treatment consisted mainly of plasma exchange, and the outcomes were poor with 62% developing end-stage renal disease by one month after presentation and 76% by last follow up. The risk for P-aHUS was highest during a second pregnancy. Complement abnormalities were found in 18 of the 21 adult women with P-aHUS. Pregnancies in affected women with complement abnormalities were complicated by fetal loss (in 4.8%) and preeclampsia (7.7%).

On the basis of these results, women with complement dysregulation should be informed of the 20% risk for P-aHUS, and any pregnancy in these women should be closely monitored.

As for eculizumab, the experience gained from pregnant women with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria who had been treated with eculizumab suggest a risk-benefit balance in favor of eculizumab use [Kelly et al 2010]. Similarly, recent data showed that eculizumab can be successfully used for the treatment of aHUS during pregnancy [Ardissino et al 2013, Cañigral et al 2014, De Sousa Amorim et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Research efforts are aimed at identifying more specific approaches that may interfere with the primary cause of microangiopathy in the different forms of aHUS.

For aHUS associated with CFH pathogenic variants:

Specific replacement therapies with recombinant CFH protein could become a viable alternative to plasma treatment.

Efforts are also ongoing to isolate plasma fractions enriched in CFH protein that could provide sufficient active CFH while minimizing the risk of allergy and fluid overload associated with standard plasma infusion therapy. A CFH protein concentrate under development for clinical use has recently achieved Orphan Drug designation by European Medicines Agency (EMEA) and the FDA.

The discovery of pathogenic variants in three different complement-regulatory genes provides sufficient evidence to undertake clinical trials using complement inhibitors that block the activation of C3 [Kirschfink 2001]. Studies on other complement-regulatory genes would help to clarify the molecular determinants underlying the pathogenesis of aHUS and potentially improve management and therapy.

Advances in vector safety and transfection efficiency may eventually make gene therapy a realistic option.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Plasma-resistant/plasma-dependent disease. Some individuals with aHUS are plasma resistant (i.e., they do not achieve remission despite plasma therapy); some become plasma dependent, experiencing disease relapse as soon as plasma infusion or exchange is stopped.

Splenectomy – while it induces remission in some persons with plasma resistance – is ineffective and actually increased morbidity and mortality in others.

Other treatments including antiplatelet agents, prostacyclin, heparin or fibrinolytic agents, steroids, and intravenous immunoglobulins have been attempted in both plasma resistance and plasma dependence with no consistent benefit [Ruggenenti et al 2001].An important subset of individuals with HCM are at increased risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD) and may benefit from an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). Further evaluation to assess for the presence or absence of risk predictors associated with SCD is a standard part of patient management.

SCD risk factors include:

Personal history of ventricular fibrillation (VF), aborted/resuscitated sudden death / cardiac arrest, or sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT)

Family history of SCD

Extreme LVH (>30mm)

Hypotensive blood pressure response to exercise

Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) on ambulatory monitoring

Unexplained syncope

Risk factor information, obtained from the medical history, family history, and cardiovascular testing, includes:

Echocardiogram to measure the degree of LVH;

Exercise testing to assess blood pressure response to exercise;

Ambulatory monitoring for significant ventricular ectopy.

Accurate risk assessment is difficult because the positive predictive value of any single parameter – other than prior cardiac arrest or sustained VT – is relatively low. The presence of two or more risk factors has been associated with an increased risk for sudden cardiac death [Elliott et al 2000, Dimitrow et al 2010], although implantation of a primary prevention ICD may be appropriate in the presence of a single compelling risk factor. Conversely, the absence of any risk factors places an individual in a low-risk category [Maron et al 2003b], although 3%-5% of persons with SCD do not have a standard risk factor.

Guidelines [Garratt et al 2010, Gersh et al 2011]* recommend that implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy:

Be used for all patients with a history of sustained VT and/or VF (see Treatment of Manifestations) as secondary prevention;

Be considered for primary prevention in patients with two or more risk factors; or selected patients with a single risk factor (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations);

Currently ICD implantation is the only effective treatment to prevent SCD, but it is associated with cumulative morbidity.

* See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full text of guidelines.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment by physicians experienced in diagnosis and management of persons with HCM improves survival and quality of life. Treatment modalities include pharmacologic therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy, and pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibrillators. Cardiac transplantation may be necessary for patients who progress to advanced heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

No treatments currently exist to prevent or decrease disease development or to reverse established manifestations.

Medical management used for symptom palliation typically relies on the following:

Beta blockers

L-type calcium channel blockers

Disopyramide (its negative inotropic effects can reduce obstructive physiology)

Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for treatment of atrial fibrillation and/or ventricular arrhythmias

Note: Direct vasodilators (e.g., ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) should be avoided in patients with obstructive physiology as they may exacerbate obstruction.

Diastolic dysfunction, a common feature of familial HCM that may contribute significantly to symptoms of exertional dyspnea and volume overload independent of obstruction, is typically challenging to treat:

Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers can be used to slow heart rate and increase diastolic filling time.

Diuretics may be considered judiciously to relieve symptomatic volume overload with the caveat that patients may be preload-dependent to maintain adequate cardiac output, particularly if obstructive physiology is present.

When symptomatic obstruction is refractory to medical therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy may be considered to alleviate symptoms:

Surgical myectomy (removal of a section of muscle from the interventricular septum) has a long and established track record for reducing or eliminating symptoms.

Alcohol septal ablation is a more recently developed catheter-based procedure in which ethanol is injected through a septal perforator vessel to induce focal myocardial infarction targeting the portion of the septum that is primarily responsible for obstructive physiology.

For atrial fibrillation (AF), rate control and medical or invasive attempts at rhythm control may be required, based on symptom burden [Gersh et al 2011]. Because of high thromboembolic risk from atrial fibrillation (AF) in HCM, anticoagulation is recommended, even with paroxysmal occurrences.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

For individuals with familial HCM felt to be at increased risk for SCD, ICD therapy is an important consideration. ICDs are currently the best option for the prevention of SCD and have been shown to be effective in sensing and terminating ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF).

The annual rate of appropriate ICD therapies has been estimated at 2%-4% in individuals with an ICD placed for primary prevention, and 4%-11% in individuals with an ICD placed for secondary prevention [Maron et al 2007, O'Mahony et al 2012].

The potential for complications must be considered in the discussion of ICD placement. Although ICDs are generally safe, they are not benign and cumulative morbidity needs to take into account the age at implantation and duration of therapy. The rate of complications has been reported at 5% per year in persons with HCM. The rate of inappropriate shocks is roughly double the rate of appropriate therapies in persons who received ICDs for primary prevention [Maron et al 2007, Lin et al 2009, O'Mahony et al 2012].

In the absence of highly sensitive, patient-specific predictors, the decision to implant an ICD requires detailed and thoughtful evaluation, as well as the active input of well-informed patients.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because persons with HCM who develop atrial fibrillation are at increased risk for thromboembolic complications, anticoagulation should be strongly considered in those with persistent or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Affected individuals with obstructive physiology have traditionally been considered at moderate risk for infective endocarditis, and previous guidelines have recommended antibiotic prophylaxis for this subgroup. Official guidelines have been revised and decision making should be individualized [Wilson et al 2007].

Surveillance

For individuals with HCM who do not currently meet criteria for placement of an ICD for primary prevention, risk for SCD should be reassessed approximately every 12-24 months (or sooner if any clinical parameters change) [Gersh et al 2011].

For relatives at risk for HCM. Screening guidelines for HCM have been proposed for the longitudinal evaluation of clinically unaffected at-risk family members (see Table 2). Note that the following screening guidelines apply both to relatives in whom a pathogenic variant has been identified and to asymptomatic first-degree relatives (adults and children) of an individual with primary HCM in whom a pathogenic variant has not been identified.

Because penetrance of diagnostic features (i.e., LVH) is age dependent, a single unremarkable evaluation does not exclude the possibility of future development of HCM. Diagnostic clinical manifestations are often not present in infancy/early childhood; they commonly develop during adolescence and early adulthood, but may also develop late in life. Therefore, longitudinal follow up is required at a frequency based on the individual’s age and family history, and physician discretion. Screening should be performed in response to any symptoms that develop or any change in clinical status.

Table 2. 

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Age

Screening Guideline

<12 yrs

Optional unless any of the following are present:

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complicationsCompetitive athlete in intense training programSymptomsOther clinical findings that suggest early LVH

12-18 yrs

Repeat evaluation every 12-18 months

>18-21 yrs

Repeat evaluation every ≤5 years or in response to any change in symptomsMore frequent evaluation if the family has late-onset LVH or HCM-related complications

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complications

Competitive athlete in intense training program

Symptoms

Other clinical findings that suggest early LVH

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals are advised to use moderation in all physical activities. Physical activity guidelines have been established to detail reasonable exercise restrictions for people with familial HCM [Maron et al 2004, Gersh et al 2011]:

Avoid competitive endurance training and participation in recreational activities that require an intensity level similar to competitive athletics.

Avoid burst activities, like sprinting, as well as intense isometric exercise, such as heavy weight lifting.

Avoid exercise in extreme environmental conditions and maintain adequate hydration.

To avoid exacerbation of obstructive physiology and worsening of symptoms, patients with outflow tract obstruction should be particularly careful in alcohol consumption; use Jacuzzis, steam rooms, saunas with caution; and avoid the following:

Dehydration/hypovolemia (therefore, diuretics must be used with caution)

Medications that decrease afterload (e.g., ACE inhibitors; angiotensin receptor blockers and other direct vasodilators including dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers)

Medications for erectile dysfunction (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil)

Cautious use of stimulant medications may be considered in children diagnosed with HCM only after other treatment methods have been explored. Children with HCM undergoing treatment with stimulants should be carefully monitored by a pediatric cardiologist [Vetter et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, clarification of the genetic status of at-risk family members (see Figure 1) allows appropriate longitudinal evaluation of those who have the pathogenic variant (see Surveillance and Table 2).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The hemodynamic changes associated with pregnancy and delivery place women with familial HCM at increased risk for obstetric complications, particularly if significant obstructive physiology is present. Perinatal care with specialists experienced in cardiovascular medicine and high-risk obstetrics is highly recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-REN, the following evaluations are recommended:

Hemoglobin concentration to document the level of anemia

Serum uric acid concentration to identify persons at risk for gout

A 24-hour urine collection to quantify urine output and determine if polyuria is present (although this can usually determined by history). Clinical questioning regarding enuresis (bed-wetting) or frequent thirst or urination will help establish a diagnosis of polyuria.

A standard basic metabolic panel to determine if hyperkalemia is present

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Anemia may be reversed by treatment with erythropoietin [Zivná et al 2009], a medication that is given subcutaneously and managed by hematologists or pediatric nephrologists. Dose is based on response to therapy. There is no clear target at this time and it is left to the discretion of the hematologist or nephrologist. Many children have relatively mild anemia with hemoglobin levels of 10 to 11 g/dL, and can be safely followed off of erythropoietin.

Note: The dose of erythropoietin will need to be reduced as hemoglobin concentration increases during adolescence.

Hyperuricemia/gout. Gout typically responds well to prednisone or colchicine. One should not use of nonsteroidal agents in individuals with ADTKD-REN because the combination of nonsteroidal agents and the low renin state in patients with ADTKD-REN can lead to acute kidney injury; prednisone is the preferable alternative.

Prevention of future gout attacks with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered in individuals with gout. With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented. Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required. In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in REN-associated kidney disease are available.

Hypotension and mild hyperkalemia may be present in children and young adults with this condition. As chronic kidney disease progresses to stage III chronic kidney disease, hypertension may develop, and hyperkalemia is due not to low plasma renin activity but rather to decreased elimination of potassium by the kidneys.

Therefore, treatment of low plasma renin activity/plasma concentration of aldosterone may be indicated prior to the development of stage III chronic kidney disease. Such treatment may include liberal sodium intake if the patient has mild hypotension and hyperkalemia but preserved kidney function. Dietary sodium intake of 3-4 g/day may prevent hypotension. Note: A low-sodium diet should not be used in persons with ADTKD-REN.

If hyperkalemia is present, treatment with fludrocortisone or potassium restriction may be indicated [Bleyer et al 2010b]. Fludrocortisone treatment (0.1 mg orally/day) of one affected child with low plasma renin activity resulted in a mild rise in blood pressure, correction of mild hyperkalemia, and a significant improvement in estimated glomerular filtration rate that may have been hemodynamically mediated [Bleyer at al 2010b]. The use of fludrocortisone may also prevent hypotension that could result from volume depletion such as that associated with viral syndromes or vigorous activities associated with excessive perspiration. Note: Fludrocortisone treatment in two adults with advanced kidney disease had no clinical effect [Author, personal observation].

Fludrocortisone could have the advantage of decreasing renin production (through negative feedback), and thus the production of the abnormal renin deposits. However, since blockade of the renin angiotensin system and aldosterone production has been a general treatment of chronic kidney disease, it is possible that increased serum concentration of aldosterone may increase progression of renal disease. Thus, while the use of fludrocortisone may potentially be beneficial in this condition, at present its use is at the discretion of the clinician.

Mineralocorticoid replacement. Recommendations regarding treatment are not evidence based due to the small number of individuals with this disorder and the limited experience treating affected individuals.

Renal disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs.

Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-REN. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Treatment with erythropoietin can reverse anemia [Zivná et al 2009].

Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol can prevent development of gout.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Iron stores should be replenished as needed to treat iron deficiency (an unrelated condition) if it is present.

Surveillance

Measure hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine annually starting at the time of diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) should be avoided, especially in persons who are dehydrated. The use of NSAIDs in a febrile child with ADTKD-REN precipitated acute renal failure [Bleyer et al 2010b]. The use of other analgesics/antipyretics should be considered.

It would appear that the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor may not be beneficial in the treatment of chronic kidney failure and could aggravate the underlying relative renin deficit.

Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Exertion under extreme conditions (e.g., physical exertion when it is hot) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the familial REN pathogenic variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Particularly important are:

Children because of their increased risk for anemia;

Adolescents because of their increased risk for gout, which can be prevented with allopurinol treatment;

Relatives interested in donating a kidney to an affected family member.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Successful pregnancies have been documented in women with a REN pathogenic variant. The rate of miscarriages or other adverse outcomes was not increased.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (hyperPP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Determine neurologic status

Perform 1H MRI (STIR) of proximal leg muscles to identify muscular water accumulation and fatty muscle degeneration [Weber et al 2006]. Edema should be extruded with long-term diuretics; evaluate by muscle strength measurement and MRI four weeks after start of treatment.

Consult with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for hyperPP is symptomatic and not curative.

Attacks can often be prevented or aborted by continuing mild exercise and/or oral ingestion of carbohydrates at the onset of weakness (e.g., 2 g glucose per kg body weight).

Attacks occur more frequently on holidays and weekends when people rest in bed longer than usual

Individuals are advised to rise early and have a full breakfast.

In some individuals attacks can be aborted or attenuated by intravenously injected glucocorticoids or the inhalation of two puffs of 0.1 mg salbutamol.

Both mild exercise and treatment with β2-stimulating agents appear to work by stimulating the Na+K+-pumps [Clausen et al 2011].

Calcium gluconate (0.5-2 g taken intravenously) may terminate attacks in some individuals [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Diet/environment. Preventive therapy for individuals with hyperPP consists of frequent meals rich in carbohydrates and avoidance of the following:

Potassium-rich medications and foods (e.g., fruits, fruit juices)

Fasting

Strenuous work

Exposure to cold

Diuretics. It is often advisable to prevent hyperkalemic attacks of weakness by the continuous use of a thiazide diuretic or a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, such as acetazolamide or the recently approved medication dichlorphenamide. Diuretics are used in modest dosages at intervals from twice daily to twice weekly.

Thiazide diuretics are preferable because they have fewer side effects than either acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide therapy.

The dosage should be kept as low as possible (e.g., 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide daily or every other day). In severe cases, 50 mg or 75 mg of hydrochlorothiazide should be taken daily very early in the morning.

Individuals should be monitored so that the serum potassium concentration does not fall below 3.3 mmol/L or the serum sodium concentration below 135 mmol/L [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

General anesthesia. Opioids or depolarizing agents such as potassium, anticholinesterases, and succinylcholine can aggravate a myotonic reaction and induce masseter spasms and stiffness of respiratory muscles. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be impaired. Also, alterations of serum osmolarity, pH, and hypothermia-induced muscle shivering and mechanical stimuli can exacerbate the myotonic reaction.

An induction sequence incorporating inhalation of oxygen, cricoid pressure, thiamyal or thiopental, and two times the ED95 dose of an intermediate or short-action non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, followed by intubation, is a reasonable approach to securing the airway in persons with myotonia. Alternatively, inhalational induction may be a possibility for hyperkalemic paralysis and is well tolerated in those undergoing elective surgery.

Following administration of general anesthesia, the affected individual may develop respiratory distress in the recovery room resulting from weakness of respiratory muscles in addition to generalized weakness lasting for hours. The weakness is aggravated by drugs that depress respiration and by the hypothermia induced by anesthesia.

To prevent such attacks, glucose should be infused, a normal body temperature maintained, and serum potassium kept at low level [Klingler et al 2005, Mackenzie et al 2006, Jurkat-Rott & Lehmann-Horn 2007, Barker 2010].

Note: Because the generalized muscle spasms associated with such attacks may lead to an increase in body temperature, individuals with hyperPP have been considered to be susceptible to malignant hyperthermia. Most likely, anesthesia-related complications suggestive of a malignant hyperthermia crisis result from severe myotonic reactions [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004, Klingler et al 2005].

Surveillance

The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's clinical features and the response to preventive treatment.

During prophylactic treatment, measure serum potassium concentration twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia.

Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness.

Permanent weakness requires continuous medication, eg. with a thiazide diuretic, and MRI of the leg muscles once every one to three years. During treatment, serum potassium concentration should be measured twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia. The value should be between 3.0 and 3.5 mmol/L.

Annual monitoring of thyroid function is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

See Prevention of Primary Manifestations and Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures, particularly those that would decrease the risk of unexpected acute paralysis or anesthetic events.

Molecular genetic testing can be pursued if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

When the results of genetic testing or presymptomatic testing are not known, the related family members must be considered at risk for complications and precautions are indicated, particularly during anesthesia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

More than 90% of affected women report an increase in attack frequency during pregnancy. While approximately 80% reported improved muscle weakness during attacks, 75% also reported worse muscle stiffness during attacks [Charles et al 2013].

Women who are chronically treated with a diuretic may continue treatment in pregnancy. Human data on prenatal exposure to acetazolamide have not demonstrated an increased risk of fetal malformations. Human data on the use of oral dichlorphenamide therapy during pregnancy – and whether it leads to an increased risk of malformations in exposed fetuses – are limited.

Therapies Under Investigation

A study that compared treatment with dichlorphenamide to treatment with placebo for prevention of episodes and for improvement of strength in individuals with hyperPP and hypoPP has recently been completed; for results, see ClinicalTrials.gov.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Whether the spontaneous attacks of weakness usually associated with hyperPP are influenced by mexiletine (the drug of choice for several allelic disorders) is unknown.

No data concerning the influence of therapeutic drugs on the development of the myopathy are available.

Cation exchangers are less beneficial than diuretics in treating hyperPP because they result in more severe side effects.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) the following evaluations are recommended in adults and children:

Measurement of pre-treatment lipid values and lipoprotein(a) levels when possible

Exclusion of concurrent illnesses (kidney disease, acute myocardial infarction, infection) that can affect lipid values

Lipid panel including total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides

Consultation with a lipid specialist or clinician with expertise in FH

Recommended in some guidelines: noninvasive imaging modalities in children (e.g., measurement of carotid intima-media thickness) to help inform treatment decisions [Martin et al 2013]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Adults with FH

All individuals with FH should be considered “high risk” for coronary artery disease (CAD) and should be treated actively to lower cholesterol levels. Note that standard Framingham or other risk classification schemes are not applicable [Goldberg et al 2011, Hopkins et al 2011, Stone et al 2014]. The most current recommendations (summarized here) for the management of FH used in the United States are from the American Heart Association [Gidding et al 2015] (full text) and largely reflect earlier recommendations from the National Lipid Association (NLA).

For adults, treatment should begin as soon as possible after diagnosis. All adults with FH require diet/lifestyle management, and almost without exception will also require cholesterol-lowering drug therapy.

Risk factors (e.g., smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension) are the same in FH as in the general population; aggressive management is required to reduce CAD risk, with special attention to smoking cessation.

Regular physical activity, a healthy diet (reduce saturated fat intake, increase intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day), and weight control should be emphasized.

Blood pressure should be treated to 140/90mm Hg (or 130/80 mm Hg in those with diabetes mellitus).

Low-dose aspirin (75-81 mg/day) should be considered in those at high risk for CAD or stroke.

Consider referral to a lipid specialist with expertise in FH if LDL-C concentrations are not reduced with maximal medical therapy (Note: Although it has not been specified, this recommendation generally pertains to LDL-C levels that cannot be reduced by ≥50% with maximal medical therapy over a 6-month period.)

Testing of first-degree and second-degree relatives should be recommended to all individuals with FH (see Evaluation of Relatives at Risk).

For adults with FH age 20 years or older, treatment with statins should be initiated to reduce the LDL-C level ≥50% or to <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) [Hopkins et al 2011, Nordestgaard et al 2013]. Many guidelines suggest a target LDL-C of <100 mg/dL even in those without known CAD as individuals with FH have had a lifelong burden of high LDL-C [Gidding et al 2015].

For persons with FH with any of the following CAD risk factors, drug treatment may need to be intensified (see *Note) to achieve more aggressive treatment goals (LDL-C <100 mg/dL [<2.6 mmol/L] and non-HDL-C <130 mg/dL [<3.4 mmol/L]). Risk factors:

Clinically evident CAD or other atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; the goal is LDL-C level of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L)

Diabetes mellitus or metabolic syndrome

Family history of very early CAD (men age <45 years; women age <55 years)

Current smoking

High lipoprotein(a) (≥50 mg/dL [≥1.3 mmol/L] using an isoform insensitive assay)

The second-line agent for individuals with FH who do not achieve acceptable LDL-C levels is generally ezetimibe. Treatment options for intensification of therapy after ezetimibe or for those intolerant of statins include: bile acid sequestrants and/or PCSK9 inhibitors. Although niacin has been used as an adjunctive therapy in individuals with FH, given recent data, niacin is generally not favored before the other options have been exhausted [Guyton et al 2013, FDA 2016] (see Table 3).

In persons with FH without any of the CAD risk factors listed above, intensification of drug therapy (see *Note) should be strongly considered if 50% reduction in LDL-C is not achieved after six months on maximum statin therapy. For adults, some guidelines call for intensification of treatment if the goal LDL-C of <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) is not achieved [Nordestgaard et al 2013].

*Note: (1) The lipid-lowering therapy should initially be statin-based with titration of doses every few months in order to use the highest tolerated dose of a potent statin, followed by addition of other drugs if the targeted LDL-C level is not achieved. (2) The potential benefit of multi-drug regimens should be weighed against the increased cost and potential for adverse effects and decreased adherence.

Table 3. 

Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH

Class

Primary (1O) and Secondary (2O) Mechanism of Action

LDL-Lowering Response

Statins

↑ LDLR activity (1O)

>35% 1, 2

Cholesterol absorption inhibitors (ezetimibe)

↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

15% 1, 3

Mipomersen (APOB antisense) 4

Blocks APOB production in the liver

50% 5

MTP inhibitor(lomitapide) 4

↓ microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity (1O)inhibition of LDL production (2O)

50% 5

PCSK9 inhibitors(alirocumab, evolocumab)

↓ LDL-receptor degradation

50% 6

Bile acid sequestrants(cholestyramine, colesevelam)

↓ Bile acid re-absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

15% 1, 3

Stanol esters

↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

10% 1, 3

Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.

1. 

Often ineffective in HoFH

2. 

Kastelein et al [2008]

3. 

Rader et al [2003]

4. 

Approved only for adults with HoFH

5. 

Cuchel et al [2014]

6. 

Raal & Santos [2012]

Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH

Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.

Often ineffective in HoFH

Kastelein et al [2008]

Rader et al [2003]

Approved only for adults with HoFH

Cuchel et al [2014]

Raal & Santos [2012]

Children with FH

Guidelines for the management of children and individuals up to age 21 years have been published by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (full text). Children should be considered for drug treatment with statin-based regimens when:

LDL-C levels are ≥190 mg/dL (≥4.9 mmol/L).

LDL-C levels are ≥160 mg/dL (≥4.1 mmol/L) and at least two other risk factors are present.

US-based guidelines from the NLA (full text):

Consultation or referral to a lipid specialist is recommended.

Management of diet and physical activity is recommended at an early age.

Statins are the preferred initial pharmacologic treatment in children. Consideration should be given to starting statin treatment at age eight years or older. In special cases, such as children with homozygous FH, drug treatment needs to be initiated prior to age eight years.

The goal of lipid-lowering therapy in children with FH is a ≥50% reduction in LDL-C or LDL-C <130 mg/dL (<3.4 mmol/L). Note: More aggressive lowering of LDL-C levels should be considered for children with additional CAD risk factors (e.g., family history of CAD, high blood pressure, unhealthy diet or exercise behaviors, obesity).

Children and Adults with Homozygous FH (HoFH)

NLA guidelines for homozygous FH (full text):

Referral to a lipid specialist is indicated.

Early initiation of therapy and monitoring are recommended.

Multiple drug therapy is usually needed. Several different classes of medications are currently being used to treat HoFH (see Table 3).

Since many cholesterol-lowering medications target the LDL receptor, effectiveness in persons with FH with biallelic loss-of function LDLR pathogenic variants can be limited [Cuchel et al 2014]. Statins are often relatively ineffective in the treatment of HoFH because their efficacy largely depends on the upregulation of functional LDL receptors in the liver. In HoFH, both copies of the LDL receptor have absent or greatly reduced activity [Raal & Santos 2012].

High-dose statins, ezetimibe, and bile-acid binding resins may be effective in some persons with HoFH, especially those with some residual LDLR activity.

For HoFH, evolocumab is a PCSK9 inhibitor that showed a 40% mean reduction in LDL-C compared with placebo; however, individuals with two loss-of-function variants saw no response [Raal et al 2015]. PCSK9 inhibitors have not been formally approved in children with FH.

HoFH-specific medications (lomitapide and mipomersen) are effective even with complete loss of LDL receptor function and – though not formally FDA approved for children – should strongly be considered.

Despite these options, many individuals with HoFH (especially those with complete loss of LDL receptor function) will require ongoing LDL apheresis. LDL apheresis (≤2x/week) is often required starting from a young age. Apheresis can lower LDL-C levels by 80% acutely and 30% chronically (weekly or biweekly). Apheresis is offered at a limited number (~40-50) of centers in the United States; many states do not have an apheresis center.

Liver transplantation is also being used in rare circumstances in some centers [Martinez et al 2016]

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive measures include the following:

Statin-based therapy with addition of other medications as needed

Reduced intake of saturated fat

Increased intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day

Increased physical activity

Not smoking

Surveillance

Children. Guidelines for the management of children have been published by multiple national and international organizations [Daniels et al 2008, DeMott et al 2008, Descamps et al 2011, Martin et al 2013] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full texts).

A child who has a family history of FH or of premature CAD, who is heterozygous for the FH pathogenic variant in his or her family, or who has an elevated serum cholesterol concentration should have lipid levels checked starting as early as age two years [Goldberg et al 2011]. It is reasonable to check a non-fasting lipid level first and, if borderline, to follow with measurement of LDL-C. Some guidelines state that elevation of two consecutive measures of LDL-C are needed to confirm a diagnosis of FH [Martin et al 2013].

An LDL-C level of >130 mg/dL (>3.4 mmol/L) in a child is suspicious for FH and an LDL of >160 mg/dL (>4.1 mmol/L) is relatively specific for FH.

During treatment, individuals of any age with:

FH should have lipid levels monitored as recommended;

HoFH should be monitored with various imaging modalities (including echocardiogram, CT angiogram, and cardiac catheterization) as recommended [Raal & Santos 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Smoking

High intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fat

Excessive intake of cholesterol

Sedentary lifestyle

Obesity

Hypertension

Diabetes mellitus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The CDC has classified FH as a Tier 1 condition indicating a significant benefit from performing family-based cascade screening using cholesterol testing with or without DNA analysis on relatives of affected persons with FH in order to identify previously unknown cases of FH and provide those people with life-saving treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of relatives at risk for FH can reduce morbidity and mortality [Goldberg et al 2011, Ned & Sijbrands 2011, Reiner et al 2011].

The genetic status of at-risk family members can be clarified by EITHER of the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member

Measurement of LDL-C level. Table 4 provides age-specific total cholesterol and LDL-C levels [Williams et al 1993]. Note: Age-specific LDL cut-offs are also available based on more contemporary data from the United Kingdom [Starr et al 2008].

Table 4. 

Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH

Degree of Relatedness to an Affected Individual

First Degree 1

Second Degree 2

Third Degree 3

Cholesterol Levels

Total Cholesterol (LDL Cholesterol) in mg/dL

Age

<20

220 (155)

230 (165)

240 (170)

20-29

240 (170)

250 (180)

260 (185)

30-39

270 (190)

280 (200)

290 (210)

40+

290 (205)

300 (215)

310 (225)

1. 

A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.

2. 

An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.

3. 

A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.

Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH

A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.

An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.

A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.

Of note, all national and international guidelines for FH call for “cascade testing” of relatives at risk (i.e., systematic testing of first- and second-degree relatives of the index case [proband]). Evidence supports the use of genetic testing in cascade testing algorithms to improve the detection of FH [DeMott et al 2008, Wierzbicki et al 2008, Wald et al 2016].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Statins are contraindicated during pregnancy; women with FH who are considering a pregnancy should be counseled of this risk and statins should be discontinued prior to conception.

Pregnant women should incorporate all the other recommended lifestyle changes including low saturated and trans unsaturated fat intake, no smoking, and high dietary soluble fiber intake (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pharmacologic treatment

during pregnancy

Statins are contraindicated in pregnancy due to concerns for teratogenicity. The use of statins during human pregnancy has not definitively been associated with adverse fetal outcome; however, the role of cholesterol in embryologic development has led to theoretic concerns about the effect of these medications on a developing fetus and a recommendation that alternative medications be considered during pregnancy and lactation. Nursing mothers should not take statins.

Bile acid binding resins (colesevelam, cholestyramine) are generally considered safe (Class B for pregnancy). Based primarily on animal studies, cholestyramine use during pregnancy has not been associated with an increased risk of fetal anomalies. However, use of cholestyramine could theoretically cause depletion of maternal fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin K.

LDL apheresis is also occasionally used.

Regarding other agents:

PCSK9 inhibitors. Use during pregnancy has not been well studied.

Ezetimibe. Use during human pregnancy has not been well studied.

Niacin. The use of pharmacologic doses of niacin, an essential vitamin, has not been studied in human pregnancy. The recommended upper limit of niacin intake during pregnancy is 30-35 mgs/day; higher doses have been associated with toxicity.

Therapies Under Investigation

CAD outcome trials of PCSK9 inhibitors are currently underway.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hyperekplexia (HPX), the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Evaluation for the head retraction reflex

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Clonazepam appears to be the most effective treatment for HPX [Tijssen et al 1997, Tsai et al 2004]. In adults the initial dose is 0.5 mg twice a day. The dose can be increased up to 2.0 mg three times a day. The stiffness in the neonatal period and stiffness related to startle diminish with the treatment.

Other drugs, mostly described in case reports, have shown variable results; they include carbamazepine, phenytoin, diazepam, valproate, 5-hydroxytryptophan, piracetam, and phenobarbital. For an overview see Bakker et al [2006].

Physical and cognitive therapy to reduce the fear of falling and thereby improve walking can be considered; no randomized trials have assessed the effectiveness of such treatment.

Attacks of tonic neonatal cyanosis can be stopped by the Vigevano maneuver, consisting of forced flexion of the head and legs towards the trunk [Vigevano et al 1989].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations, clonazepam.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypomyelination and congenital cataract (HCC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic examination

Developmental assessment

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Cataract extraction, usually in the first months of life, is indicated.

Supportive therapy includes the following:

Physical therapy to improve motor function

Special education

Antiepileptic drugs if epileptic seizures are present

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Although primary treatment is not possible, management of symptoms can improve the care of these patients. A multidisciplinary approach is advisable to prevent:

Spasticity: pharmacologic agents, physical therapy

Ataxia: rehabilitation

Seizures: anticonvulsants

Cognitive developmental delay: tailored approach at school or at work

Orthopedic: prevention/treatment of orthopedic problems, such as contractures and scoliosis

Feeding: swallowing surveillance and gastrostomy if needed

Surveillance

Surveillance includes periodic:

Neurologic evaluation to identify neurologic complications;

Evaluation by a physiatrist to aid with assistive devices as needed;

Eye examination if cataracts were not identified in the neonatal period.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Evaluation of children with hypochondroplasia usually does not differ significantly from the evaluation of children with normal stature except for genetic counseling issues and dealing with parental concerns about short stature. However, because the phenotype of FGFR3 hypochondroplasia may overlap with that of achondroplasia, recommendations for the management of achondroplasia as outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics [Trotter et al 2005] should be considered in children with hypochondroplasia who exhibit more severe phenotypic features. These recommendations include but are not limited to the following:

Medical genetics consultation

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference and plotting on achondroplasia-standardized growth curves

Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression, with referral to a pediatric neurologist or neurosurgeon if needed

Screening developmental assessment

History for evidence of sleep apnea, with formal sleep study if suggestive

MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum if clinical findings of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression, or central sleep apnea as demonstrated through a sleep study are present

Evaluation for thoracic or lumbar gibbus in the presence of truncal weakness

Examination for leg bowing, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking

Speech evaluation at diagnosis or by age two years

Observation for symptoms suggestive of epilepsy, with referral to a pediatric neurologist when indicated

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of short stature is influenced by parental expectations and concerns. Final adult height in hypochondroplasia is considerably greater than that achieved in achondroplasia and therefore, functional limitations in society (e.g., operating an elevator, driving a car, using an automatic teller machine) are generally less severe or not an issue. One reasonable approach is to address the parents' expectations and prejudices regarding the height of their child rather than attempting to treat the child.

Developmental intervention and special educational input are appropriate, as indicated by deficiencies.

The usual neurosurgical approach to spinal stenosis is laminectomy. Thomeer & van Dijk [2002] determined that about 70% of symptomatic individuals with achondroplasia experienced total relief of symptoms following decompression without laminectomy. The L2-3 level most commonly required decompression.

Making the family aware of support groups, such as the Little People of America Inc. (LPA), can result in assistance with adaptation of the affected individual and the family to short stature through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs. The LPA offers information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children of short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting through local meetings, workshops, seminars, and a national newsletter.

Seizure disorders should be treated in the standard manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Standard management of frequent middle ear infections

Consideration of surgery if neurologic status is affected by spinal cord compression

Surveillance

Height, weight, and head circumference should be monitored using achondroplasia-standardized growth curves.

Because an increased prevalence of mild-to-moderate intellectual disability and/or learning disabilities in children with hypochondroplasia appears likely, developmental milestones should be followed closely during early childhood and a timely referral to an appropriate professional made if there are any indications of learning difficulties during school-age years.

Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression should be performed at routine well-child visits, with referral to a pediatric neurologist if needed.

History for evidence of sleep apnea should be taken at routine visits, with formal sleep study obtained when indicated.

MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum is indicated if there is evidence of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression or central sleep apnea.

Affected individuals should be evaluated for emerging leg bowing at routine visits, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking.

Social adjustment should be monitored.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is a paucity of literature regarding pregnancy management in women with skeletal dysplasias. However, a number of women with hypochondroplasia have had unremarkable pregnancies and deliveries.

In comparison to women who have achondroplasia, vaginal deliveries are possible, although for each pregnancy, pelvic outlet capacity should be assessed in relation to fetal head size.

Epidural or spinal anesthetic can be utilized, but a consultation with an anesthesiologist prior to delivery is recommended to assess the spinal anatomy.

If present, spinal stenosis may be aggravated during pregnancy due to the normal physiologic changes to the shape of the spine that occur as gestation progresses.

Therapies Under Investigation

Growth hormone therapy. Trials of growth hormone therapy in hypochondroplasia have shown mixed results. These differences in individual responses published prior to gene discovery in 1995 [Appan et al 1990, Bridges et al 1991, Mullis et al 1991, Bridges & Brook 1994] may have resulted from genetic heterogeneity and indicate a need for stratification of affected individuals with regard to genetic etiology (e.g., those with FGFR3 mutations and those without). Meyer et al [2003] emphasized the importance of considering pubertal development in assessing the response to growth hormone stimulation testing. Tanaka et al [2003] reported data suggesting that children with hypochondroplasia may have a greater response to growth hormone therapy than children with achondroplasia.

Pinto et al [2012] treated 19 children with hypochondroplasia (11/19 with confirmed FGFR3 mutations, mean age 9.0+/-3.0 years) with human recombinant growth hormone over a three-year period. Their mean height increased 1.32+/-1.05 standard deviation score (SDS) compared to a historical cohort of 40 untreated individuals with hypochondroplasia. Rothenbuhler et al [2012] treated six children with hypochondroplasia (confirmed FGFR3 p.Asn540Lys substitution, mean age 2.6+/-0.7 years) with human recombinant growth hormone over a six-year period. Their mean height SDS increased by 1.9 during the study period, and trunk/leg disproportion was improved. Since data about final adult height in growth hormone-treated individuals with hypochondroplasia are not available, the ultimate success of this approach remains uncertain. Growth hormone therapy should still be considered experimental and controversial in this condition.

Surgical limb lengthening procedures have been used to treat achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia for more than 15 years. Although the complication rate was high initially, outcomes have steadily improved and significant increases in overall height have been reported [Yasui et al 1997, Lie & Chow 2009]. Nevertheless, the procedure is very invasive and entails considerable disability and discomfort over a long period of time. While some advocate performing the procedure during childhood, many pediatricians, geneticists, and ethicists advocate postponement until adolescence, when the affected individual is able to make an informed decision. Surgical limb lengthening is controversial, but is achieving greater acceptance with fewer complications as larger numbers of operations have been performed.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with incontinentia pigmenti (IP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with particular emphasis on the skin, hair, nails, and neurologic system to establish the presence and extent of manifestations

Medical genetics consultation for diagnosis, treatment plan, testing, and family counseling

Involvement of a pediatric dermatologist for diagnosis, and for management of significantly involved cases

Prompt examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with IP and/or diseases of the retina for evidence of retinal neovascularization

EEG and MRI if seizures, other neurologic abnormalities, or retinal hypervascularization are present [Wolf et al 2005, Pascual-Castroviejo et al 2006]

Magnetic resonance angiography, potentially useful in identifying cerebrovascular lesions if the neurologic deficit is consistent with a stroke-like pattern

Developmental screening, with further evaluation if significant delays are identified

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Management of blisters in a standard manner (i.e., not opening them, avoiding trauma); topical treatment (e.g., medications, oatmeal baths) to relieve discomfort. Significant skin involvement may benefit from dermatology management.

Treatment of infections as for any other cellulitis

For retinal neovascularization that predisposes to retinal detachment, cryotherapy and laser photocoagulation [Wong et al 2004]

Standard treatment for retinal detachment

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for evaluation if microcephaly, seizures, spasticity, or focal deficits are present

Brain MRI in any child with functional neurologic abnormalities or retinal neovascularization [Wolf et al 2005, Pascual-Castroviejo et al 2006]

Referral to a pedodontist at age six months or when teeth erupt, whichever comes first. Dental implants have been performed as early as age seven years (as in children with ectodermal dysplasia, who have similar dental problems (see Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia).

Referral to a speech pathologist and/or pediatric nutritionist if delayed or inadequate eruption of primary teeth interferes with chewing and/or speech development

Appropriate developmental stimulation and special education as indicated for developmental delay

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Management in the newborn period is aimed at reducing the risk of infection of blisters using standard medical management: not rupturing sealed blisters, keeping the areas clean while they are healing, and careful monitoring for excessive inflammation and signs of systemic involvement.

The parents should be instructed about the possibility of retinal detachment particularly in children younger than age seven years; any apparent changes in vision or any evidence of acquired strabismus should be evaluated promptly. Head trauma may precipitate retinal detachment; therefore, any evaluation for head trauma should include a thorough eye examination.

Surveillance

No schedule for eye examinations has been established, but the following has been suggested [Holmström & Thoren 2000]:

Monthly until age three to four months

Every three months between ages four months and one year

Every six months between ages one and three years

Annually after age three years

Neurologic function should be assessed at routine visits with a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, or developmental pediatrician.

Ongoing evaluation by a pedodontist or dentist is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures (routine eye examinations).

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, physical examination, including examination of the skin, teeth, hair, nails, retina and CNS, can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Overall pregnancy health and management usually does not vary from normal. The risk of spontaneous abortion is higher than population rates, but management of pregnancy loss is done in the standard manner. For women with retinal problems, delivery management to minimize or eliminate labor should be considered to avoid retinal detachment.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an ALS2-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Family history

Neurologic examination, including assessment of eye movements, speech, fine motor and gross motor function, swallowing

Detailed dietary and feeding assessment as needed

Orthopedic and rehabilitation assessment as needed

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Physical and occupational therapy to promote mobility and independence

Aids for mobility and limb function

Use of computer technologies and devices adapted to facilitate writing and voice communication

Surveillance

Routine monitoring:

For feeding difficulties and assessment of diet to assure that the risk of aspiration is reduced

For early detection and treatment of hip dislocation and/or spine deformities

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GNE-related myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic only:

Individuals with GNE-related myopathy may benefit from consultation with physiatrists, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists.

Foot drop bracing and other mechanical aids may improve the function of individuals with GNE-related myopathy.

Consultation with a pulmonologist to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation or sleep apnea may be considered in symptomatic individuals.

All affected individuals should consult their physician before beginning an exercise program.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No treatment that reverses or slows the natural history of muscle weakness in GNE-related myopathy is available.

Surveillance

Annual routine follow-up with the multidisciplinary team is recommended. Affected individuals should be screened for signs and symptoms of cardiac dysfunction, as two affected siblings with cardiomyopathy have been reported [Chai et al 2011]. Affected individuals should also be evaluated for respiratory dysfunction, with appropriate investigations and treatment as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

It may be prudent to use medications/drugs with potential myotoxicity (for example: colchicine) with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several therapies are under investigation for GNE-related myopathy including oral sialic acid or its metabolites, intravenous immune globulin and gene replacement therapy.

Some investigators believe that the reduction of the sialylation status of glycoproteins in muscle of individuals with GNE-related myopathy is causative of the disease [Huizing et al 2004, Noguchi et al 2004, Saito et al 2004]. Muscle atrophy and weakness in a mouse model of GNE-related myopathy are prevented by administration of sialic acid metabolites [Malicdan et al 2009]. Several oral exogenous forms of sialic acid (e.g., sialic acid-extended release and N-acetylmannosaminic acid) are currently being investigated in clinical trials for human GNE-related myopathy (see ClinicalTrials.gov for details).

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) is a glycoprotein which can be metabolized by neuraminidase to provide free sialic acid. A single trial of IVIG in four affected individuals resulted in mild improvement in muscle strength [Sparks et al 2007].

A single affected individual has been treated with intramuscular injections of a GNE expression vector in a lipoplex vehicle [Nemunaitis et al 2010]. The same person was later treated with intravenous infusion of the GNE-lipoplex preparation [Nemunaitis et al 2011]. No conclusions can yet be made about the efficacy of such treatment. Reported side effects of the latter treatment included low-grade fever, tachycardia, myalgia, transaminase elevation, hyponatremia, and hypotension. Further studies are required before these therapies will be available for widespread use.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of muscle strength, muscle wasting and tendon reflexes. EMG and/or muscle biopsy may be necessary.

Baseline pulmonary function studies

Cardiac evaluation by echocardiogram and ECG

Blood alkaline phosphatase, urine pyridinoline studies and, if indicated, skeletal x-ray or bone scan studies to evaluate distribution and severity of Paget disease of the bone

Baseline neuropsychological studies of behavior and mental status

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team that includes: a neurologist, endocrinologist with expertise in Paget disease, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and geneticist/genetic counselor.

Myopathy. Management should be tailored to the individual. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999].

Weight control to avoid obesity

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Occupational therapy and use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed for ambulation and mobility

Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Use of respiratory aids when indicated

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in individuals with these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998]

Assisted living arrangements as necessitated by muscle weakness and/or dementia

Paget disease of bone. Treatment with the following potent bisphosphonates can reduce the alkaline phosphatase concentration and relieve pain and disability:

Actonel®/risedronate

Fosamax®/alendronate

Aredia®/pamidronate

Surveillance

At periodic intervals:

Echocardiogram and EKG to monitor for evidence of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function studies

Alkaline phosphatase, skeletal x-rays, and bone scans for monitoring of the PDB if symptomatic and for monitoring of therapy

Monitoring of behavior and mental status

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals and their families should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modification in the home and at work.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with susceptibility to infection-induced acute encephalopathy 3 (IIAE3), the following evaluations are recommended after an episode of acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE):

Brain MRI during a quiescent period. This should demonstrate resolution of the edema signals and may reveal regions of necrosis. This interval baseline will be helpful in distinguishing new versus old lesions in subsequent febrile events.

Rehabilitation/OT/PT consultation

Neurology consultation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment has been aimed at reducing the inflammatory state [Okumura et al 2009, Bergamino et al 2012].

During an acute episode of encephalopathy, early administration of corticosteroids has been associated with improved outcomes in patients with sporadic ANE [Okumura et al 2009]. Although this treatment course is also advocated for IIAE3, no specific studies have been performed to support that.

Anecdotally, treatment has mirrored that of acute demyelinating encephalomyelopathy (ADEM) with the use of steroids, IVIg, and plasmapheresis. TNFα antagonists have also been used. Because the diagnosis of ANE is usually made days into the encephalopathy, initiation of therapy occurs after the onset of damage. Thus, anecdotally, these interventions have shown varied, but overall limited, therapeutic effects.

Repeat episodes of encephalopathy presumably result in cellular damage and, thus, outcomes become progressively worse [Neilson et al 2003], prompting the need for close attention to new febrile events and early intervention as follows:

Prior identification of an RANBP2 pathogenic variant in an affected individual allows early recognition of an ANE episode and prompt steroid therapy, which may result in a reduction in disease severity.

With behavioral changes during febrile episodes, early evaluation by a neurologist with prompt hospitalization, CNS imaging, and initiation of steroid therapy may provide the best chance to terminate an ANE episode before damage occurs.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Routine vaccinations and yearly influenza vaccinations are recommended, but caution with certain live virus vaccines may need to be observed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). No evidence exists to suggest that vaccinations cause acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) in an individual heterozygous for an RANBP2 pathogenic variant.

Surveillance

No standard tests allow prediction of the triggering of an ANE event or progression of an event once one occurs.

In intervals between ANE events neurologic function is stable. Follow-up evaluations focus on developmental progression and addressing functional deficits related to neurologic damage. In the absence of other risks for seizures, anticonvulsant therapy started during an ANE event can often be discontinued.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid individuals who are ill with an infectious disease and adhere to strict precautions regarding hand washing.

Only one episode of ANE following an immunization has been reported: cellular pertussis was given to a child age six months representing a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) in whom RANBP2 molecular genetic testing was not performed [Aydin et al 2010]. Because the likely causative component was the cellular pertussis, the acellular DTaP is preferred.

In mice, intranasal inoculation of certain influenza subtypes can result in CNS invasion [Shinya et al 2000]. Although this is unlikely with the live attenuated influenza virus, it may be preferable to choose an injectable form instead.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In a family with IIAE3 in which the disease-associated RANBP2 pathogenic variant has been identified, molecular genetic testing of at-risk first-degree relatives, especially children, is warranted so that those who have inherited the RANBP2 pathogenic variant can benefit from prompt intervention in the early stages of ANE (see Treatment of Manifestations).

The ability to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives also reduces unnecessary utilization of resources, such as emergency room visits, for those who have not inherited the RANBP2 pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with IMAGe syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Endocrinologic evaluation* to manage adrenal insufficiency, typically including:

Serum and urine concentration of electrolytes

Serum concentration of glucose and ACTH

Assessment of arterial blood gases

Consultation with an endocrinologist

*Of note, individuals who are in shock often have hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, acidosis, markedly elevated serum ACTH, and increased urinary excretion of sodium.

Urogenital evaluation and consultation with a urologist to consider management of undescended testicles and/or genital surgery

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Adrenal insufficiency. Management of adrenal insufficiency in IMAGe syndrome is similar to management of adrenal insufficiency from other causes and should be under the supervision of an endocrinologist.

Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency require close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Treatment with IV saline, glucose, and cortisol are utilized. If the serum electrolytes do not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of cortisol is increased.

Once the acute episode has been managed, replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and oral supplements of sodium chloride are given. Dosages must be increased with stress, such as intercurrent illness, surgery, or trauma. Steroid doses need to be managed to enable optimal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) therapy. Although information regarding anticipated adult height in IMAGe syndrome is limited, assessment for GH deficiency should be considered, as one child showed poor GH response to glucagon stimulation [Pedreira et al 2004] and other children with normal GH secretion have demonstrated a response in growth with growth hormone therapy [Lienhardt et al 2002, Kato et al 2014].

Genitourinary abnormalities. Routine surgical management of cryptorchidism and hypospadias by a urologist is indicated.

Males with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are likely to need increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty. Long-term adrenal steroid replacement and testosterone replacement should be managed by an experienced endocrinologist.

Orthopedic intervention as necessary for skeletal complications, including scoliosis and hip dysplasia, is appropriate.

Occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed is appropriate, particularly with the hypotonia that often accompanies the syndrome.

Neurologic evaluation is indicated if developmental delay and/or hypotonia are present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vigilance is required during illnesses and surgeries to prevent adrenal crisis.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes:

Frequent evaluations by an endocrinologist for management of adrenal insufficiency and growth hormone therapy;

Evaluation by an orthopedist as needed to monitor skeletal complications such as scoliosis, tibial/femoral bowing, or pain associated with the skeletal dysplasia;

Neurologic follow up as needed for evaluation of developmental delay and/or hypotonia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If prenatal testing for IMAGe syndrome has not been performed, it is appropriate to evaluate newborn sibs of a proband to enable prompt diagnosis and management of adrenal insufficiency.

Molecular genetic testing is indicated if the CDKN1C pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the CDKN1C pathogenic variant in the family is not known, family members can be screened for serum electrolyte abnormalities, elevated serum ACTH level, and skeletal features of IMAGe syndrome, including short stature and delayed bone age.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Risks to a mother with IMAGe syndrome during pregnancy include potential adrenal insufficiency; risks during delivery include cephalopelvic disproportion.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Thorough ophthalmologic examination to assess for optic atrophy

EEG for the possibility of unrecognized seizure activity

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Note: The extent of disease is often well characterized by the time of diagnosis, since the diagnostic work up frequently includes neurophysiologic studies (EEG, EMG, nerve conduction studies, ERG [electroretinogram], and/or VEP) and brain MRI.

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatments for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and atypical NAD are palliative:

Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures

Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with atypical INAD who have significant dystonia (see Dystonia Overview)

Deep brain stimulation has been successfully utilized in one individual with atypical NAD who had intractable dystonia [Cif et al 2014].

Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation that is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions

Measures such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia

Treatments for PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism are also palliative but differ somewhat:

Treatment with dopaminergic agents is likely to be beneficial for the motor symptoms of parkinsonism and dystonia and may initially produce a dramatic response. In individuals treated to date, this response diminished over time, and affected individuals often developed prominent early dyskinesias, complicating medical management. Despite the dyskinesias, treatment with dopaminergic agents may still be indicated, as affected individuals typically experience benefit for a period of time and the dyskinesias are expected to decline after discontinuation of treatment. In one case report, an individual age 32 years with dystonia-parkinsonism developed episodes of non-painful, fixed upward gaze with neck extension that started shortly after levodopa administration and persisted until the drug wore off [Virmani et al 2014]. The use of deep brain stimulation for PLA2G6-associated dystonia-parkinsonism has not been reported.

Treatment by a psychiatrist for neuropsychiatric symptoms is indicated.

Evaluation by physical therapy may guide the management of postural instability and gait difficulties.

Occupational therapy may offer tools to assist with activities of daily living.

Interventions such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy may be needed to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

A rehabilitation program including physical therapy and orthopedic management should be initiated early in the disease course to prevent contractures when the individual is permanently nonambulatory.

Body temperature monitors may be required for individuals with progressive autonomic involvement to identify dangerous fluctuations in core body temperature.

Surveillance

Periodic assessment of vision and hearing of nonverbal children is indicated as needed to determine the level of sensory deficits.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with the INAD and atypical NAD forms of PLAN have not been known to reproduce due to the relatively early onset and severity of disease.

Two women with PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism have been reported to reproduce [Paisán-Ruiz et al 2010, Virmani et al 2014]. Since onset of manifestations of PLAN has been reported as late as age 30 years, some women may become pregnant before onset of symptoms or early in the disease course. For those who may be symptomatic, the main issue is the potential for teratogenic effects of medications taken during pregnancy. It is not known whether pregnancy itself may have short- or long-term effects on the disease course for the affected pregnant woman.

Therapies Under Investigation

Because some individuals with PLAN have high brain iron and this disorder falls into the category of NBIA, the option of chelation therapy is sometimes raised. The chelator deferiprone is currently under investigation for the PKAN form of NBIA. Results may inform its use in PLAN and/or lead to additional trials.

A proof-of-concept gene therapy strategy is currently under investigation in murine disease models of PLAN [Dr. Manju Kurian, personal communication].

Development of small molecule therapies is also under investigation in cell and murine disease models [Dr. Paul Kotzbauer, personal communication].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is selectively hydrolyzed from phospholipids by the action of the iPLA2-beta enzyme, the protein encoded by PLA2G6. Although not yet tested as an intervention in individuals with PLAN, a Pla2g6-mutant mouse model showed reduced DHA metabolism and signaling [Basselin et al 2010]; evidence from a more recent study showed that DHA can reverse selective iPLA2-beta inhibition [Mazzocchi-Jones 2015]. Given the low risk of harm from DHA supplementation, the authors recommend its administration at a dose that is age appropriate.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual with AIP-related FIPA, the following evaluations are recommended (for details see Katznelson et al [2011]; full text). Note: The evaluation may have to be individualized depending on the presentation.

Detailed personal history, including findings that may be consistent with the following:

A growth hormone-secreting tumor (stature in relation to the rest of the family, change in facial appearance, change in shoe size, problems with ring sizes, headache, excessive sweating, joint pains, carpal tunnel syndrome)

A prolactinoma (menstrual history, galactorrhea, infertility, low libido, impotence)

A non-functioning pituitary adenoma and mass effects (headache, lack of other pituitary hormones, visual field problems)

Thyrotropinoma (hyperthyroidism with non-suppressed TSH)

Corticotropinoma with Cushing disease (truncal obesity, striae, muscle weakness, thin skin, diabetes mellitus, hypertension)

Review of serial photographs over time to help identify the onset of acromegalic or cushingoid changes if present at the time of diagnosis

Measurement of parental heights

Clinical examination including measurement of height and documentation of presence or absence of features consistent with the endocrine disorders acromegaly, pituitary gigantism, Cushing disease, thyrotoxicosis

Visual field evaluation

Basal pituitary function including: spot GH, IGF-1; prolactin; LH, FSH, testosterone/estradiol; TSH, fT4; 9 a.m. cortisol

Glucose tolerance test (GTT) in persons with findings of acromegaly to identify abnormal GH dynamics. In addition, about 25% of persons with acromegaly have a diabetic GTT. Assess ACTH reserve if necessary.

In adults with acromegaly, colonoscopy at age 40 years with further surveillance at three- to ten-year intervals depending on the presence/absence of adenomas in the initial colonoscopy and IGF-1 levels [Cairns et al 2010]

Pituitary MRI to detect the size and extent of a tumor, if one is suspected

Consultation with specialists in endocrinology

Consultation with specialists in medical genetics to obtain detailed family history (of possible pituitary problems, unusual stature, fertility problems, and/or early death)

Treatment of Manifestations

While there is experience with treating pituitary adenomas in symptomatic persons with FIPA, there is little experience in the management and treatment of persons identified prospectively through clinical screening due to family history of FIPA and/or presence of a heterozygous AIP germline pathogenic variant. The following recommendations are based on those of Biller et al [2008], Jaffe [2006], Katznelson et al [2011], and Melmed et al [2011].

Pituitary adenomas can be treated by surgery, medical therapy, and/or radiotherapy.

Adenomas in persons with FIPA, especially those with AIP-related FIPA, are aggressive. Surgery is usually performed, but often does not fully control the tumor. Transsphenoidal surgery has been performed for large adenomas, while microadenomas with normal clinical and biochemistry findings are monitored closely [Chahal et al 2011]. Large tumors, especially those recurring after surgery, may require radiotherapy when the tumor invades neighboring anatomic structures (such as the cavernous sinus).

Somatotropinomas, particularly in persons with a germline AIP pathogenic variant, often do not respond to medical therapy with somatostatin analogs. Daly et al [2010] showed no tumor shrinkage in AIP-related adenomas and significantly lower reductions in GH secretion (40% vs 75%) and IGF-1 secretion (47% and 56%); in these instances growth hormone receptor antagonist therapy could be initiated [Leontiou et al 2008, Daly et al 2010].

Radiotherapy (conventional or radiosurgery) is an option for treating growing adenomas, for which repeat surgery is unlikely to control hormone levels.

Prolactinomas are usually treated with dopamine agonist therapy (cabergoline being the drug of choice), which can result in tumor regression or in some cases disappearance of detectable lesions. No data suggest that FIPA-associated prolactinomas would respond less favorably to dopamine agonist therapy than do sporadic tumors; however, Daly et al [2010] suggested that prolactinomas in AIP-related FIPA appear to be aggressive and difficult to treat. Persons with AIP-related FIPA and a macroprolactinoma (diameter >10 mm) often undergo surgery.

NFPAs are treated with surgery and, if necessary, radiotherapy. They usually do not respond to traditional somatostatin analogs despite the presence of somatostatin receptors and an often good response in vitro. Dopamine agonist therapy has been tried in some cases. Timely diagnosis, prediction of long-term outcome, and treatment of NFPAs remain a challenge for endocrinologists [Korbonits & Carlsen 2009].

Temozolomide has been successfully used for the treatment of a few aggressive pituitary adenomas; however, there is no experience with its use in persons with AIP-related FIPA.

The increased burden of GH secretion and IGF-1 secretion (defined as the level and duration of increased hormone levels) observed in those with acromegaly is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and metabolic complications [Jayasena et al 2011]. Individuals with long-standing acromegaly often have cardiovascular and rheumatologic/orthopedic complications, which need to be treated accordingly.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Tumor size, surgery, and/or radiotherapy can cause hypopituitarism, which needs careful expert follow up.

Persons on glucocorticoid replacement therapy need to increase their steroid dose when ill or stressed.

Surveillance

No guidelines regarding surveillance of persons with AIP-related FIPA have been established. The following recommendations are based on the authors’ personal experience with more than 200 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic AIP-related FIPA.

Persons with AIP-related FIPA who have had a pituitary adenoma. The following are recommended to monitor for recurrence of the previous adenoma and development of new adenomas.

Yearly clinical assessment and basal pituitary function (IGF-1, spot GH, prolactin, LH/FSH, estradiol/testosterone, TSH, fT4, morning cortisol) and if necessary dynamic testing (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test) to evaluate for hormone excess or deficiency

Repeat pituitary MRI. Note: Frequency depends on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor, and treatment modality.

Persons with acromegaly. Follow established guidelines regarding clinical monitoring for related complications including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and colon cancer.

Persons with hypogonadism. Follow established guidelines. Because long-standing untreated hypogonadism may result in the early onset of osteoporosis, bone density needs to be assessed at baseline and if necessary monitored with DEXA scanning.

Persons with an AIP pathogenic variant and no history of pituitary adenomas. Recommendations follow. Note, however, that long-term experience with asymptomatic AIP heterozygotes is limited; more data are needed to develop appropriate future guidelines.

In a family in which an AIP pathogenic variant has been identified, relatives who have the family-specific AIP pathogenic variant or who have not been tested:

Adults

Baseline. Clinical assessment, pituitary function tests (IGF-1, prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, and fT4), and pituitary MRI

Thereafter

Perform annual clinical assessment and pituitary function tests.

Consider repeating a pituitary MRI every five years if clinical findings and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Consider discontinuing monitoring about age 50 years, after which the likelihood of developing new pituitary adenomas is low.

Children

Yearly beginning at age four years

Measure height and weight with calculation of height velocity. Document pubertal development, Tanner stages

Perform pituitary function tests (as for adults).

Perform baseline pituitary MRI at about age ten years.

Consider repeating the pituitary MRI every five years if clinical and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy may increase the size of a growth hormone-secreting adenoma or a prolactin-secreting adenoma (especially macroadenomas); thus, a pregnant woman with pituitary macroadenoma is at risk of developing visual field defects. In each trimester it is appropriate to inquire about headaches and perform visual field testing.

Therapies Under Investigation

A study that is actively ascertaining individuals with FIPA or childhood-onset pituitary adenoma is listed in ClinicalTrials.gov.

Growth hormone receptor antagonists block the action of endogenous growth hormone, thereby controlling disease manifestations such as headaches, soft tissue enlargement, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and high IGF-1 levels. A growth hormone receptor antagonist has been used successfully in persons with AIP-related FIPA and acromegaly and pituitary gigantism [Goldenberg et al 2008; Author, personal observation]. Although growth hormone receptor antagonists are currently not licensed for pediatric use, several case reports have shown their effectiveness, especially when IGF-1 levels need to be reduced immediately to prevent abnormally rapid growth [Higham et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with IPEX syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Endocrine. Glucose tolerance test, thyroid function tests, and autoantibodies to pancreatic islet antigens and thyroid antigens

Hematologic. Complete blood count and differential, Coombs test

Immunologic. Serum IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE concentrations; regulatory T cell numbers

Hepatic. Serum AST, ALT, GGT, and total bilirubin

Renal. Serum concentration of BUN and creatinine; urinalysis

Nutrition assessment. Serum electrolyte levels including calcium, magnesium, and zinc; serum albumin and pre-albumin

Treatment of Manifestations

Monitor fluid intake to assure adequate intravascular volume.

Use of nutritional support, including TPN or elemental or low-carbohydrate-containing formula if necessary, can be beneficial [Sherman et al 2004].

Follow the standard treatment protocols for diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease.

The most effective treatment for the enteropathy of IPEX syndrome is T cell-directed immune suppression (i.e., cyclosporin A and FK506) either alone or in combination with steroids [Di Rocco & Marta 1996]. Toxicity, tachyphylaxis, and increased susceptibility to infection related to chronic use of these agents reduce their potential for long-term amelioration of symptoms in most individuals.

Sirolimus (rapamycin) has been successfully used in patients for whom FK506 was either ineffective or toxic [Bindl et al 2005, Yong et al 2008]. The ability of sirolimus to suppress effector T cell function while allowing Treg cells to continue to develop and function offers some theoretic advantages for its use [Strauss et al 2007].

In persons with autoimmune neutropenia, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF, filgrastim) may be beneficial.

In one person who developed pemphigus nodularis, use of rituximab improved pemphigus and other IPEX syndrome-associated symptoms [McGinness et al 2006]. It has also been effective in controlling autoimmune hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoimmune neutropenia in persons with IPEX syndrome [Torgerson, unpublished results].

In persons with severe disease in whom other therapies have failed and symptoms remain severe, cytotoxic drugs or biologic agents that target T cells may be beneficial, as demonstrated by complete remission of symptoms during a bone marrow transplantation conditioning regimen of anti-thymocyte globulin, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide [Baud et al 2001].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers the only potential cure for IPEX syndrome. Early attempts at BMT using myeloablative conditioning regimens met with only limited success because of transplant-related mortality and other complications related to the underlying disease [Baud et al 2001]. Recent approaches using non-myeloablative conditioning regimens have markedly improved outcomes and survival [Burroughs et al 2007, Lucas et al 2007, Rao et al 2007]. While generally less toxic, these reduced-intensity conditioning regimens still appear to generate long-term, stable engraftment of a regulatory T cell population [Burroughs et al 2010] and, if performed early, can prevent the development of irreversible diabetes mellitus or thyroiditis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

BMT is currently the only cure for IPEX syndrome; the degree of symptomatic remission may depend on use of BMT prior to irreversible damage to target organs such as pancreatic islet cells and thyroid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients with autoimmune neutropenia or recurrent infections resulting from severe eczema may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic therapy to decrease the risk of severe infectious complications.

Aggressive management of dermatitis with topical steroids and anti-inflammatory agents can help to prevent infections from pathogens that enter as a result of the poor barrier function of the skin.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes periodic evaluation of complete blood count, thyroid function, glucose tolerance, kidney function (measurement of serum concentration of BUN, creatinine), and liver function (measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT) for evidence of autoimmune disease.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Immune activation, for example by immunizations or severe infections, has been reported to cause worsening or exacerbation of disease symptoms [Powell et al 1982]. This does not indicate an absolute contraindication for vaccination in IPEX syndrome but does suggest that there may be benefit to giving vaccines individually instead of combining several vaccines on a single day.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk males in a family with a known pathogenic variant either prenatally or immediately after birth enables early diagnosis and BMT in affected males before significant organ damage occurs.

If the pathogenic variant is not known, monitoring at-risk males for early-onset diarrhea, diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, and autoimmune hematologic manifestations can allow early identification of affected males.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

There is no evidence that initiation of immunosuppressive therapy prior to the onset of symptoms prevents the primary manifestations of IPEX syndrome. Bone marrow transplantation prior to the onset of symptoms can, however. prevent disease.To establish the extent of disease and/or needs in an indivudal with a diagnosis of isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (ISOD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic assessment by a pediatric neurologist

Formal developmental assessment

Ophthalmologic evaluation

EEG/video EEG to monitor seizures

Assessment of feeding and nutrition and appropriate intervention

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, no definitive treatment for ISOD has been identified. Symptomatic management by a multidisciplinary team consisting of specialists in neurology, nutrition, gastroenterology, pulmonary medicine, physiotherapy, and orthopedics is recommended. Management includes the following:

Appropriate medications for management of seizures and spasticity

Early consideration of gastrostomy tube placement to manage difficulties with swallowing to assure adequate caloric intake and reduce the risk of aspiration.

Appropriate management of vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and aspiration pneumonia

Chest physiotherapy to prevent respiratory complications

Sleep studies to assess nocturnal hypoventilation and institute appropriate interventions

Assessment for scoliosis

The following treatment modalities have been tried with minimal success:

Dietary. A low-protein diet restricted in cysteine and methionine has been tried in a few individuals with ISOD. Clinical and biochemical improvement were reported in two patients with late-onset ISOD [Del Rizzo et al 2013]. No clinical benefit has been noted in those with classic ISOD. The value of these diets in presymptomatic individuals has yet to be established.

Medical. No medical treatment that improves the neurologic outcome or prevents the development of neurologic manifestations in individuals with ISOD has been identified. The following agents have been tried on an experimental basis with minimal clinical effect:

Betaine has been used to increase the remethylation of homocysteine back to methionine, which reduces cysteine and leads to reduction in sulfite levels.

Thiamine replacement has been attempted (given that the accumulation of sulfite leads to depletion of thiamine).

Use of cysteamine and penicillamine (chelating agents used to chelate sulfite) resulted in no beneficial clinical effects.

Surveillance

Periodic assessment by the multidisciplinary team with particular attention to the following:

Nutritional status

Neurologic status including evaluation of dosages of antiepileptic drugs and their side effects

Degree of spasticity and related complications, including scoliosis

Periodic sleep studies

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There many not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a free sialic acid storage disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic and developmental evaluations to establish a baseline for educational and rehabilitation interventions

MRINote: MRI may reveal classic brain findings, but correlations between such findings and disease severity have not been established.

Biochemical genetics or neurogenetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The medical and psychosocial management of individuals with free sialic acid storage disorders is symptomatic and supportive.

Management focuses on rehabilitation to optimize mobility and communication.

Programs to foster normal development and assure adequate nutrition should be implemented.

Treatment of seizures follows standard management principles.

Surveillance

Regular evaluation by a rehabilitation specialist may identify potentially helpful interventions.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

No routine testing is recommended because adult presentations are unusual and no early interventions are available.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with juvenile hemochromatosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Serum iron status. Measurements of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity, transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin concentration

Pituitary-gonadal axis. Recording of signs and symptoms of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and measurement of serum concentration of gonadotropins (i.e., FSH, LH) (pituitary gland) and testosterone (testes) or estradiol (ovaries). In several clinical situations, a dynamic evaluation of the pituitary-gonadal axis is required, consisting mainly of a GnRH (gonadotropic releasing hormone) stimulation test. Pituitary MRI may be considered in some cases.

Affected joints. Radiographic evaluation

Bone mineral density. Dual photon absorptiometry of the lumbar spine

Cardiac manifestations. ECG, transthoracic echocardiogram. In individuals without overt clinical manifestations of cardiac failure or arrhythmias, findings suggestive of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (reduced left ventricular compliance) often precede evidence of ventricular dilatation and compromised ejection fraction.

Liver function. Liver histology to determine the extent of liver damage. Documentation of the presence or absence of cirrhosis is of prognostic significance. Current recommendations for HFE-associated classic hereditary hemochromatosis are that HFE p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes with serum ferritin concentration lower than 1000 ng/mL and/or normal liver function enzymes need not be biopsied. Liver biopsy should be considered for individuals with higher serum ferritin concentrations and/or raised liver function enzymes in order to establish prognosis [Morrison et al 2003]. Because of the rarity of juvenile hemochromatosis, a specific protocol for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis is not available, but adaptation of the classic HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis recommendation is a reasonable approach.

Diabetes mellitus. Screening for diabetes mellitus by overnight fasting plasma glucose measurement and, when indicated, by oral glucose tolerance test.

Treatment of Manifestations

Management and treatment recommendations for juvenile hemochromatosis stated here are based on the established HFE-associated hemochromatosis recommendations when specific juvenile hemochromatosis information may not exist.

Treatment of iron overload. Phlebotomy is the therapy of choice in juvenile hemochromatosis and follows the same principles as the treatment of classic HFE-associated hemochromatosis. It is simple, safe, and effective. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow a regimen of phlebotomy of one unit of blood once or twice weekly [Tavill 2001]. Approximately 200 mg of iron are removed per unit of blood depending on the individual's hematocrit. Because individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis are usually severely iron overloaded, a therapeutic regimen of one to two weekly phlebotomies may take up to two to three years to reduce iron stores to desired levels.

The hematocrit should be monitored prior to phlebotomy; phlebotomy should be postponed if the hematocrit drops more than 20% of its initial value [Tavill 2001]. Systematic administration of erythropoietin has been successful in maintaining the hematocrit in individuals who failed to mount an adequate bone marrow response to the phlebotomy regimen [De Gobbi et al 2000].

Serum ferritin concentration reflects body iron stores and is used to monitor the progress of therapy; it is expected to fall progressively, along with iron mobilization. Measuring serum ferritin concentration every 10-12 phlebotomies is reasonable; however, once serum ferritin concentration is below 100 ng/mL, it should be measured more often, ideally prior to each phlebotomy. Achievement of serum ferritin concentration below 50 ng/mL and restoration of normal transferrin-iron saturation indicates the end point of the intensive phlebotomy treatment.

Maintenance therapy. The frequency of phlebotomies is adjusted to maintain normal serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation. When iron removal is not urgent, phlebotomies could be spaced further apart according to the responsiveness of the bone marrow to restore adequate hematocrit. Usually four to six phlebotomies annually are sufficient. The individual should permanently continue on this schedule of phlebotomy maintenance therapy.

Iron chelators such as parenteral deferoxamine (Desferal®) are used to treat individuals with secondary iron overload. They are not recommended in the treatment of juvenile hemochromatosis unless the disease is complicated by concomitant anemia or severe cardiac failure. In the latter situation, administration of deferoxamine alone or in combination with deferiprone can reduce mortality by improving left ventricular ejection fraction [Kelly et al 1998, Fabio et al 2007].

Treatment of secondary complications. Treatment does not essentially differ from the conventional treatment applied in other situations:

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is generally considered irreversible, despite adequate iron removal. However, reversal of hypogonadism has been observed in some young individuals who have been successfully treated with phlebotomy or iron chelation [Angelopoulos et al 2005]. For the majority of individuals with hypogonadism, testosterone or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is required to improve symptoms and prevent the development of secondary osteopenia or osteoporosis [Angelopoulos et al 2006].

Transdermal preparations (i.e., patches) deliver testosterone or estradiol at a controlled rate into the systemic circulation, avoiding first-pass hepatic metabolism; therefore, this approach may be useful for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis, eliminating the risk of potential liver complications.

Administration of gonadotropins has restored fertility and has led to a twin pregnancy in a woman with juvenile hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy is not modified by treatment. Individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis have to cope with persistent arthralgia presenting at a young age. Painful joints may require treatment with salicylates or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) [Vaiopoulos et al 2003].

Severe cardiac failure is treated with ACE inhibitors, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, and possibly deferoxamine. If left untreated, cardiac disease progresses rapidly and becomes refractory to treatment, leading to death in most cases. Orthotopic heart transplantation has been used on occasion [Caines et al 2005].

Liver steatosis and fibrosis are treated with appropriately early phlebotomy [Camaschella et al 2002]; however, it is uncertain whether these features are reversible. Reversibility of liver fibrosis has been reported in individuals treated for HFE-associated hemochromatosis [Falize et al 2006].

Cirrhosis is thought to be irreversible despite iron removal. Individuals with cirrhosis should undergo endoscopic evaluation to document the presence of varices and should be treated with propranolol or nadolol, as indicated. In advanced disease, orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) could be considered. Of note, individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis undergoing OLT display an overall lower survival than individuals undergoing OLTs for other causes of liver disease. Because most post-transplantation deaths occur in the perioperative period from cardiac disease or infection, it is advisable to remove as much of excess iron stores as possible before OLT even though the effect of excess tissue iron on survival post-OLT is not known [Tavill 2001].

Diabetes mellitus may require insulin administration; successful iron removal may improve its course [Angelopoulos et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Individuals with biochemical evidence of iron overload but without evidence of organ dysfunction or failure should be encouraged to undergo regular phlebotomies until excess iron stores are depleted to prevent the development of complications associated with excess iron stores.

Treatment by phlebotomy in presymptomatic stages can prevent organ damage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

HRT prevents the development of osteoporosis.

Surveillance

Whenever hepatic cirrhosis is identified, monitoring for hepatocellular cancer is recommended. Most hepatologists propose twice-yearly screening with abdominal ultrasound examination and serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration [Tavill 2001].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Alcohol consumption, which has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage in individuals with liver damage

Iron-containing preparations and supplemental vitamin C

Handling or eating uncooked shellfish or marine fish, because of susceptibility to fatal septicemia from the marine bacterium V vulnificus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a diagnosis of JHH has been made in a family, all at-risk family members (i.e., sibs) should be tested for the pathogenic variants identified in the affected individual. Family members with two HJV or HAMP pathogenic variants should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload.

If a molecular diagnosis was not made or the genetic status of the sibs of an affected individual is unknown, the sibs should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload.

If juvenile hemochromatosis is detected before evidence of organ damage, either by molecular genetic testing in relatives at-risk or by biochemical testing (i.e., serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation), treatment via phlebotomy can reverse or prevent many of the secondary complications resulting from organ damage.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

All pregnant women with JHH should be under the care of a maternal-fetal medicine specialist, an endocrinologist, and a cardiologist. Preferably women with JHH should be seen by these specialists prior to becoming pregnant.

Pregnancy in women with untreated JHH is high risk because the increased hemodynamic burden of pregnancy can precipitate cardiac failure in women with an underlying cardiomyopathy. Of note, it is critically important for specialists in endocrinology and infertility to be aware of JHH as a cause of infertility and to evaluate patients for iron overload prior to correcting the underlying hormonal imbalance. In a case report, a young woman who became pregnant following correction of her hypogonadotropic hypogonadism developed fatal cardiogenic shock; she was only identified as having JHH with severe iron overload at the time of presentation of her heart disease [Filali et al 2004].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Formal audiology evaluation for extent of hearing loss

Cardiac examination including calculation of QTc

A three-generation family history that focuses on cardiac disease, syncope, and hearing ability

Complete blood count to screen for anemia. If anemia is present, screening for iron deficiency is recommended.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

Hearing loss in JLNS may be treated successfully with cochlear implantation, an intervention that does not interfere with bipolar pacemakers [Green et al 2000, Chorbachi et al 2002] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). To date, the cumulative published experience includes approximately 20 individuals with JLNS who have received cochlear implantation. Of note, the diagnosis of JLNS was only verified with molecular genetic testing in four Norwegian individuals, all of whom had pathogenic variants in KCNQ1. An increase in sound-related syncopal episodes was noted after cochlear implantation in one child [Al-Aama et al 2015].

Note: Although cochlear implantation appears to be safe, special precautions are necessary during anesthesia because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008]. One affected individual died during a perioperative cardiac arrest [Broomfield et al 2010].

Cardiac issues. The main goal in management of JLNS is prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. Note that efficacy of beta-blocker treatment is only partial: 51% of treated individuals had cardiac events and 27% had cardiac arrest or sudden death. Even with additional therapies (e.g., pacemaker, implantable cardioverter/defibrillator, left sympathetic denervation), 18 (56%) of 32 individuals experienced additional symptoms, including sudden death in seven [Schwartz et al 2006].

Administration of beta-adrenergic blockers has been the traditional first-line medical therapy for cardiac events, but more aggressive, immediate treatment may be appropriate. Cardiac events in JLNS frequently occur despite beta blockade [Schwartz et al 2006]. Goldenberg et al [2006] demonstrated markedly increased mortality in individuals with JLNS treated exclusively with beta blockers in comparison to individuals with Romano-Ward syndrome. A mortality rate of 35% over five years was observed for individuals receiving beta blockers exclusively; 86% of individuals treated exclusively with beta blockers experienced a cardiac event. The interactions of beta blockers with other medical conditions (e.g., asthma, diabetes mellitus, depression) should also be considered. Propranolol and nadolol have been shown to be more effective than metoprolol in suppressing cardiac events [Chockalingam et al 2012, Winbo et al 2014]. A recent consensus statement advocates use of nadolol as the preferred beta blocker for drug therapy of individuals with long QT syndrome [Ackerman et al 2017].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) should be considered in individuals with a history of cardiac arrest or failure to respond to other treatments [Goel et al 2004]. More recent recommendations have strongly urged ICD placement for high-risk individuals, defined by the following criteria [Schwartz et al 2006]:

QTc interval >550 msec

Syncope before age five years

Male gender, age >20 years with KCNQ1 pathogenic variant

The risk for sudden cardiac death appears to be low in individuals younger than age five years, but medical therapy should be administered early in these high-risk individuals and ICD placement considered after age five years [Richter & Brugada 2006].

In certain cases, the availability of automated external defibrillators in the home, workplace, or school may be applicable, as is appropriate CPR training of family members and those who have regular contact with individuals with JLNS.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation has been effective for some individuals.

Iron deficiency anemia. The treatment of iron deficiency anemia should follow standard guidelines.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations regarding prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Special precautions during anesthesia are necessary because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008].

Surveillance

Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects, and doses altered as needed. Because dose adjustment is especially important in growing children, evaluation is appropriate every three to six months during rapid growth phases.

Regular, periodic evaluation of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes; see www.crediblemeds.org for a complete and updated list (registration required).

Triggers for intense or sudden emotion; activities that are known to precipitate syncopal events in individuals with long QT syndrome, including:

Competitive sports

Amusement park rides

Frightening movies

Jumping into cold water

A cardiologist should make recommendations for activity restrictions based on the effectiveness of medical intervention.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs and parents of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, ECG testing should be undertaken to evaluate for QT prolongation.

Standard newborn screening programs are sufficient to identify hearing loss in children with JLNS.

Because of the relationship between JLNS and long QT syndrome, ECG should be considered for relatives at risk for JLNS even if they have normal hearing.

If the JLNS-causing pathogenic variants in an affected family member are known, molecular genetic testing of a relative with congenital profound sensorineural hearing loss is recommended to confirm the diagnosis of JLNS.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Consideration should be given as to whether a mother who has a fetus affected with JLNS herself has long QT syndrome [Seth et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Family members of individuals with JLNS should be trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) as up to 95% of individuals with JLNS have a cardiac event before adulthood [Schwartz et al 2006].

Affected individuals should wear an ID bracelet explaining their diagnosis.

It is appropriate to notify local emergency medical services (EMS) of high-risk persons, including those with JLNS [Hazinski et al 2004].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Joubert syndrome (JS), the following baseline evaluations to identify the extent of disease in affected infants/children are recommended [Parisi et al 2007] (full text). Recommendations were developed by a consensus panel and are outlined on the Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site.

Examination of high-quality MRI scan to assess for cerebral malformations, neuronal migration disorders, or cephaloceles that could portend a poorer prognosis or seizures, if not done at the time of diagnosis

A baseline neurologic evaluation with particular attention to tone, respiratory pattern (tachypnea and apnea), eye movements, development, and cerebellar function

Sleep history with polysomnogram as baseline evaluation and particularly if symptomatic apnea is present

Assessment of oromotor function by a speech therapist and/or by fluoroscopic swallowing studies

Developmental assessment with age-appropriate tools

Evaluation by a pediatric ophthalmologist via dilated eye examination for colobomas and retinal changes, as well as strabismus and ptosis, with consideration of specialized testing such as visual-evoked potentials, electroretinogram, and ocular motility testing

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for hepatic fibrosis or renal cysts and/or findings consistent with nephronophthisis (e.g., loss of corticomedullary differentiation)

Tests of renal function, including blood pressure, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine concentration, complete blood count (CBC), and urinalysis from first-morning void for specific gravity to test concentrating ability (if feasible)

Liver function tests including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin, and prothrombin time

For males with micropenis or any child with signs of growth hormone deficiency, endocrine evaluation for other pituitary abnormalities

Skeletal survey and/or limb radiographs if there is suspicion of a skeletal dysplasia such as short-rib polydactyly or JATD

Consultation with a clinical geneticist to document family history, to evaluate growth and head size, and to evaluate for other anomalies including polydactyly, dysmorphic facial features, tongue tumors/lobulations, and micropenis

Treatment of Manifestations

Respiratory

Infants and children with abnormal breathing patterns should be considered for apnea monitoring if the abnormality is severe. Supportive therapy may include stimulatory medications such as caffeine or supplementary oxygen, particularly in the newborn period.

Anesthetic management during surgical procedures for infants with significant respiratory disturbance may be accomplished in some cases by the use of:

Regional anesthesia without opioids to avoid exacerbation of apneic episodes [Vodopich & Gordon 2004];

Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine or dexmedetomidine to avoid respiratory depression and other complications of opioids while achieving motion-free images [Sriganesh et al 2014].

In rare cases, mechanical support and/or tracheostomy may be considered in a child with severe respiratory dysfunction.

Aggressive treatment of middle ear infections is indicated to avoid conductive hearing loss.

Hypotonia and therapeutic interventions

Appropriate management and therapy of oromotor dysfunction by a speech therapist

Nasogastric feeding tubes or gastrostomy tube placement for feeding in children with severe dysphagia

Occupational, physical, and speech therapy through early intervention programs

Individualized educational assessment and support for school-aged children to maximize school performance

Periodic neuropsychologic and developmental testing at appropriate ages

Other CNS malformations

Neurosurgical consultation is indicated for those with evidence of hydrocephalus (rapidly increasing head circumference and/or bulging fontanel). Note: When hydrocephalus occurs in JS, it rarely requires shunting.

Posterior fossa cysts and fluid collections rarely require intervention.

Encephalocele may require primary surgical closure.

Seizures should be evaluated and treated by a neurologist using standard antiepileptic drugs.

A variety of psychotropic medications have been used to treat the behavioral complications in Joubert syndrome; no single medication has been uniformly effective for all children.

Ophthalmologic

Surgery as needed for symptomatic ptosis, strabismus, or amblyopia

Corrective lenses for refractive errors

Possible vision therapies for oculomotor apraxia, although specific studies are lacking in this disorder

Interventions for the visually impaired when congenital blindness or progressive retinal dystrophy are present

Renal disease

Consultation with a nephrologist is indicated.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) resulting from nephronophthisis frequently requires dialysis and/or kidney transplantation during the teenage years or later.

Hypertension, anemia, and other complications of ESRD require specific treatment.

Hepatic fibrosis

Consultation with a gastroenterologist is indicated.

Liver failure and/or fibrosis should be managed by a gastroenterologist with arrangements for surgical intervention such as portal shunting for esophageal varices and portal hypertension, as appropriate.

Some individuals have needed orthotopic liver transplantation.

Skeletal

Surgical treatment for polydactyly

Appropriate medical management by an orthopedic specialist for scoliosis

Other

Orofacial clefting is treated by standard surgical interventions.

Tongue tumors that impair normal swallowing or cause respiratory obstruction may require surgical resection.

Symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea and/or tongue hypertrophy in older individuals may require evaluation with a polysomnogram and/or by an otolaryngologist for consideration of adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy, or surgical tongue reduction. Some children have used BiPAP or C-PAP at night.

Consultation with an endocrinologist for menstrual irregularities and for pituitary hormone deficiency (with hormone replacement as indicated) is appropriate.

Obesity should be managed with appropriate measures, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies

Congenital heart defects and situs abnormalities should be treated by conventional therapies.

Surgical correction of Hirschsprung disease (if present) is indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.

Surveillance

Because no uniformly reliable distinguishing characteristics allow prediction of the complications that may develop in an infant or young child with Joubert syndrome, a number of annual evaluations are recommended (see also Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site):

Pediatric and neurologic evaluation and monitoring of growth, sexual maturation, breathing (including apnea symptoms), and motor function

Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation and testing, as appropriate

Ophthalmologic evaluation for visual acuity, tracking ability, and development of retinal dystrophy

Abdominal ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible liver and kidney abnormalities

Liver function tests

Evaluation of renal function: measurement of blood pressure, serum concentrations of BUN and creatinine, CBC, and assessment of first-morning void urinalysis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with renal impairment should avoid nephrotoxic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Individuals with liver impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs or relatives who have clinical features similar to those of an individual with JS warrant genetic consultation. If the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in a proband, testing symptomatic relatives for these pathogenic variants is appropriate.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assess the presence and the severity of parkinsonian signs, non-motor features and treatment-related complications using the Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (UPDRS) [Fahn & Elton 1987] or the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) UPDRS [Goetz et al 2008].

Assess the presence of atypical signs, such as hyperreflexia and dystonia.

Evaluate the degree of response to treatment.

Assess for cognitive or behavioral problems.

Consider clinical genetics consultation.

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, the treatment of parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease. No specific guidelines are currently available.

The motor impairment usually responds very well to low doses of dopaminergic medication and is typically sustained even after long disease duration.

The most relevant treatment-related problem is the early occurrence of levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and motor fluctuations. The management of treatment-related complications is not different from the strategies applied in idiopathic Parkinson disease and includes deep brain stimulation in selected cases [Moro et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa doses should not exceed the levels required for satisfactory clinical response.

Surveillance

Neurologic follow-up every six to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in women with Parkinson disease is a rare event. Only one case of a successful pregnancy in a woman with parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease has been reported [Serikawa et al 2011]. The 27-year old woman successfully gave birth to spontaneously conceived dichorionic/diamnionic male twins. Exacerbation of her motor disabilities was noted during late pregnancy. She was treated with levodopa/carbidopa only during the period of organogenesis. Both babies were born healthy, without any evidence of psychomotor impairment two years after birth.

Worsening of parkinsonian symptoms could in part be explained by the reduction of dopaminergic replacement therapy. If possible, dopaminergic medication should be limited to levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor to minimize the potential risk for teratogenicity at least over the course of the embryonic phase.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS), the following evaluations are recommended if not already completed:

History for abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color

Complete blood count (CBC), colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

All individuals with an SMAD4 pathogenic variant should be evaluated for complications related to hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)

Treatment of Manifestations

JPS. The most effective management is routine colonoscopy with endoscopic polypectomy. Early endoscopic polypectomy may reduce morbidity by reducing the risk for cancer, bleeding, or intestinal obstruction.

In some individuals, removal of all or part of the colon or stomach may be necessary to alleviate symptoms and/or reduce cancer risk when a large number of polyps are present. The preferred procedure is debated: some experts prefer subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis, whereas others prefer proctocolectomy with an ileoanal pouch. The number of colonic or rectal polyps does not appear to correlate with the need for proctectomy [Oncel et al 2005].

JPS/HHT. Treat manifestations of HHT as needed; see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Increased awareness, education, and screening have helped successive generations benefit from early detection of JPS and cancer prevention/risk reduction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

When present, anemia may be improved by polypectomy or surgery.

Surveillance

For individuals with JPS who have undergone surgical resection of bowel, endoscopic follow up is required regardless of the surgical procedure because of the high rate of subsequent development of polyps in the rectum and the pouch [Oncel et al 2005].

For individuals with an SMAD4 or BMPR1A pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing, individuals with a clinical diagnosis of JPS, or individuals with a family history of JPS who have not undergone molecular genetic testing or whose molecular genetic test results were uninformative [Howe et al 1998a] (see NCCN guidelines):

Monitor for rectal bleeding and/or anemia, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color. These symptoms may warrant additional screening.

CBC, colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy screening should begin in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier.

If negative, screening should be repeated in three years.

If only one or a few polyps are identified, the polyps should be removed. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

If many polyps are identified, removal of most of the colon or stomach may be necessary. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant, predictive molecular genetic testing may be appropriate before age 15 years because surveillance for potential complications of HHT begins in early childhood [Gallione et al 2004]. Until the frequency and spectrum of HHT complications in JPS/HHT syndrome are known, it may be appropriate to follow the HHT surveillance guidelines for individuals with JPS/HHT syndrome or a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant.

Precautionary screening for individuals at risk for JPS who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant was previously recommended [Howe et al 1998a]; however, this screening is unnecessary if molecular genetic testing was performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory. Family members who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be screened for colon cancer as recommended for the normal U.S. population.

For surveillance recommendations for individuals with HHT, see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

In families in which findings suggest JPS or families with a known BMPR1A pathogenic variant, evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing in the first to second decade of life if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the familial pathogenic variant is not known, CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations).

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant:

Molecular genetic testing before age 15 years for children at risk for an SMAD4 pathogenic variant should be offered because the surveillance for HHT-related findings begins earlier in childhood than the surveillance for polyps.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome but the familial pathogenic variant is not known:

CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations).

Individuals older than age 40 years, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT. The absence of mild but recurrent epistaxis and subtle telangiectases in characteristic locations on careful examination is reassuring (see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia).

In individuals age 40 years and younger, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT as well as initial evaluation for brain and pulmonary AVMs, as features of HHT may not be identified by medical history and clinical examination in younger individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

See Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia, Pregnancy Management

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

No known chemoprevention options are effective for juvenile polyps.To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome (KS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Height, weight, and head circumference are measured and plotted on standard growth charts. Evaluation for a hormone deficiency, including hypothyroidism or growth hormone deficiency, is recommended in children with abnormal growth velocity.

If feeding problems are severe and/or failure to thrive is apparent, an esophageal pH probe study can be considered. A barium swallow study may assist in determining whether the suck and swallow mechanism is normal.

Evaluation for developmental milestones is recommended and referral for formal developmental evaluation is indicated if delays are identified.

A physical therapy evaluation is indicated in those children with KS who exhibit hypotonia.

Evaluation by a neurologist is recommended in those individuals with suspected seizure activity.

Brain imaging at the time of diagnosis (if not already performed) is recommended in those with headaches, ocular disturbances, otoneurologic disturbances, lower cranial nerve signs, cerebellar ataxia, spasticity, or seizures to evaluate for a Chiari 1 malformation or for a brain malformation.

As the incidence of cardiac malformations is high, echocardiogram with good visualization of the aortic arch is indicated in all individuals at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a pediatric cardiologist for management should be considered if a cardiac defect is present.

Because of the frequency of ocular findings, formal ophthalmologic examination at the time of diagnosis is recommended for all individuals with KS.

A directed evaluation of the palate at the time of diagnosis is indicated. Individuals with cleft lip, cleft palate, submucous cleft palate, or any evidence of velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred for otorhinolaryngology evaluation.

A directed physical examination to evaluate for evidence of gastrointestinal abnormalities is indicated in neonates with KS. Evidence of cholestasis should prompt a full workup, as it would in any other child. By recognizing that eventration of the diaphragm is seen in this condition, the medical care provider can avoid further evaluation for possible phrenic nerve paralysis.

Because of the frequency of renal/urinary tract anomalies, renal ultrasound examination is indicated in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a nephrologist and/or urologist is recommended for those individuals with hydronephrosis. Referral to a urologist is indicated in those individuals with cryptorchidism.

Referral for evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon in those children with congenital dislocation of the hip(s) and other joints is recommended.

Spine radiographs at the time of diagnosis are indicated in all individuals with KS. If scoliosis is noted and/or vertebral abnormalities are detected, orthopedic evaluation should be considered.

Obtaining T cell count, T cell subsets, and serum immunoglobulin levels in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis or at one year of age (whichever comes second) is recommended. An evaluation by an immunologist is indicated if the levels are abnormal or if the affected individual has a history of recurrent infections.

Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Comprehensive management guidelines are also available online (pdf).

Treatment of Manifestations

Thickened feedings and appropriate positioning after meals may improve reflux symptoms.

Gastrostomy tube placement is typically considered in those with severe feeding difficulties, especially if a poorly coordinated suck and swallow are noted.

Thorough psychoeducational testing is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Special education services are tailored to address strengths and weaknesses for each child with KS since no characteristic pattern of disabilities has been identified.

Formal evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or psychiatrist may be helpful in those children who exhibit features suggestive of autism spectrum disorders, since educational interventions may be influenced by the result.

Standard antiepileptic treatment is efficacious in treating seizures in individuals with KS.

Evidence of sensorineural hearing loss is typically followed up with referral to an otorhinolaryngologist and imaging to screen for inner ear anomalies.

Persistent, unexplained head and neck pain or other evidence of intracranial abnormality could be secondary to Chiari I malformation and is a clear indication for brain imaging in affected individuals.

Monitoring for nocturnal lagophthalmos by parents or caregivers is recommended. If present, evaluation by an ophthalmologist is indicated.

A dental evaluation as a toddler is indicated in every child with KS. Referral for orthodontic assessment should be arranged if abnormalities such as hypodontia or significant malocclusion are noted at any point in childhood.

Individuals with documented immunoglobulin deficiency may benefit from scheduled intravenous immunoglobulin infusions.

Treatment of premature thelarche is not warranted unless other signs of premature puberty are apparent.

At least one individual has shown no change in linear rate of growth when treated with human growth hormone [Kawame et al 1999].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As with many cases of congenital heart disease, prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be indicated prior to and during any procedure (e.g., dental work) that could lead to bacteremia.

Surveillance

The following are recommended for individuals with KS:

Frequent monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference (at each well-child visit and, at a minimum, yearly)

Evaluation of developmental milestones at each well child visit; referral for formal developmental evaluation if delays are identified

Following prepubertal girls expectantly for possible premature thelarche, so that the healthcare provider can reassure parents if this finding becomes apparent

Annual monitoring of vision

Annual hearing evaluation

Expectant monitoring for otitis media in children. An ear examination is indicated at all well-child visits; prompt evaluation for all children with symptoms suggestive of otitis media.

Regular follow up by an immunologist for those with abnormal immunologic studies or those who have recurrent infections

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with KAT6B-related disorders, the following are recommended:

GPS and SBBYSS

Clinical genetics consultation

Evaluation by developmental specialist

Feeding evaluation

Baseline hearing evaluation

Thyroid function tests

GPS

Evaluation of males for cryptorchidism

Orthopedic evaluation if contractures are present or feet/ankles are malpositioned

Hip radiographs to evaluate for femoral head dislocation

Renal ultrasound examination for hydronephrosis and cysts

Echocardiogram for congenital heart defects

Evaluation for laryngomalacia if respiratory issues are present

Evaluation by gastroenterologist as needed, particularly if bowel malrotation is suspected

SBBYSS

Ophthalmologic evaluation for lacrimal duct abnormalities, amblyopia, and other issues

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay

Skeletal features

Referral to an orthopedist for consideration of surgical release of contractures

Early referral to physical therapy to help increase joint mobility

Genital anomalies. Orchiopexy in males with undescended testes

Anal anomalies. Surgery as required

Renal anomalies. Referral to an urologist or nephrologist as indicated

Heart defects. Routine management

Facial features. In SBBYSS, ptosis surgery and cleft palate repair if present

Other features

Hearing aids as needed for hearing loss

Thyroid hormone replacement as needed

Intervention for respiratory and feeding issues as needed in the neonatal period

Referral to a gastroenterologist for evaluation and treatment of feeding difficulties and bowel malrotation

Surveillance

The following should be assessed annually:

Developmental progress

Ophthalmologic conditions such as amblyopia (which develops in a majority of patients with SBBYSS)

Thyroid function

Cardiac function if malformations are present

Renal function if hydronephrosis or multiple renal cysts are present

Contractures and/or scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with KCNK9 imprinting syndrome, the recommended evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) are summarized in Table 3.

Table 3. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Comment

Oropharynx

Assessment by a cleft/craniofacial team if cleft palate, bifid uvula, or velopharyngeal insufficiency is present

Feeding

Feeding & swallowing evaluation

Consider gastrosotomy tube placement if clinically indicated by significant microretrognathia and/or recurrent aspiration

Pulmonary

Polysomnogram if obstructive apnea is suspected

Musculoskeletal

Evaluation for skeletal manifestations (i.e. joint contractures, scoliosis)

Consider referral to an orthopedist, if indicated

Neurological

Assessment of strength & motor skills

EEG if seizures are suspected

Spinal ultrasound of a pilonidal dimple or sinus to assess for filar cyst & lipoma in the sacral region

Endocrine

Assessment for hypoglycemia during neonatal period & infancy

If present, consider consultation w/an endocrinologist to discuss possible treatment w/diazoxide

Misc/Other

Developmental assessment

Consultation w/a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific management guidelines have been developed. Management is mostly supportive.

A multidisciplinary team of specialists in clinical genetics, plastic surgery, ophthalmology, pulmonology, gastroenterology, feeding, endocrinology, and neurology is recommended depending on the affected individual’s manifestations.

Table 4. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Lacrimal duct obstruction

Tear duct massage; consider lacrimal duct stent placement

Cleft palate, bifid uvula, or velopharyngeal insufficiency

Management by a cleft/craniofacial team; retrognathia & underdevelopment of the mandible may require mandibular distraction osteogenesis.

Obstructive sleep apnea

CPAP or BiPAP; ENT evaluation for tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy

Pulmonary consultation; consider treatment w/mefanamic or flufenamic acid (see Therapies Under Investigation)

Feeding difficulties or signs of aspiration

Use of a special nipple or bottle with cleft palate; short-term nasogastric feeding tube; consideration of gastrostomy tube

Gastroesophageal reflux disease

Standard positioning & pharmacologic treatment

Musculoskeletal findings (i.e., contractures, scoliosis)

Ankle-foot orthoses or other assistive devices; standard treatment for scoliosis

Physical therapy and/or occupational therapy evaluation; consultation w/an orthopedist

Seizure disorder

Evaluation of blood sugar & electrolytes; standard treatment for seizures

Consider EEG and referral to a neurologist

Unexplained hypoglycemia or suspected hyperinsulinism

Consideration of diazoxide therapy

Consider referral to an endocrinologist

Developmental delay

Early referral for developmental support/special education, which may include physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and/or cognitive therapy

Consider referral to a neurodevelopmental specialist and/or neuropsychiatric testing

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Surveillance

Table 5. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Growth

Evaluation of nutritional status & growth

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess for evidence of decreased lacrimation & increased risk for corneal dryness

At least annually

ENT/Mouth

Evaluation of feeding difficulties

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Respiratory

Sleep study (if history of sleep disturbance)

Pulmonary evaluation every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Musculoskeletal

Evaluate for scoliosis

At least annually

Endocrine

Monitor serum glucose levels to monitor for hypoglycemia secondary to poor feeding & increased risk for hyperinsulinemia

Every 6 months until age 2 years

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

KCNK9, which is imprinted and expressed from the maternal allele with paternal silencing, encodes a member of the two pore-domain potassium channel (K2p9.1 or TASK3). The only KCNK9 pathogenic variant reported to date, p.Gly236Arg, reduces the outward current of the TASK3 channel by approximately 80% [Veale et al 2014].

Three members of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory fenamic acid class of drugs – flufenamic acid (FFA), niflumic acid (NFA) and mefanamic acid (MFA) – have been shown to stimulate two pore-domain potassium channels [Takahira et al 2005]. The reduced outward current through abnormal p.Arg236-containing TASK3 channels has been shown to be partially rescued by FFA, suggesting that fenamic acid compounds could be useful in treating this condition [Veale et al 2014].

Two affected individuals to date have been treated with oral MFA starting at age 14 months, with noted increased energy while on the medication and no adverse reactions. Clinical features are still present, and long-term studies are necessary to predict the outcome of individuals treated with MFA [Graham et al 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a KCNQ3-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

In-depth neurologic examination

Developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE). The seizures of BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants (e.g., levetiracetam and topiramate) are often used in neonates with refractory seizures, despite limited data and off-label use [Tulloch et al 2012]. However, refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ3-related BFNE.

A recent study has been performed to evaluate treatment responses in a small cohort of 19 individuals presenting with clinical features suggestive of BFNE. All but three had family histories of neonatal seizures. Of the 19 individuals, pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 were found in 14; pathogenic variants in KCNQ3 were present in two. Seventeen (88%) of 19 individuals were seizure free within hours of receiving oral carbamazepine (CBZ) or oxcarbazepine (OXC). Earlier initiation of CBZ was associated with shorter hospitalization. No side effects of CBZ were reported. All individuals had normal development and remain seizure free at a mean follow-up period of six months to 16 years (mean: 7.8 years). The authors concluded that CBZ is safe and rapidly effective in neonates with BFNE, even in status epilepticus, and that CBZ should be the drug of choice in benign familial neonatal seizures [Sands et al 2016].

Interictal EEG is generally normal and does not influence treatment duration.

Antiepileptic drugs are usually withdrawn at age three to six months.

Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE). The seizures of BFIE are usually completely controlled with the AEDs phenobarbital, carbamazepine, or valproate. If adequately treated, very few individuals show recurrent seizures; seizure recurrence is often caused by a low starting dose of AEDs.

Antiepileptic medication is usually withdrawn after one to three years with no relapses.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Issues

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The potential complications of the disease treatment are those related to AED use.

Surveillance

BFNE. EEG at onset, age three, 12, and 24 months is recommended. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

BFIE. EEG at onset, 12, 24, and 36 months is recommended. The EEG at 36 months should be normal.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The management of a pregnant woman with a KCNQ3 pathogenic variant is the same as that of any other pregnant woman with a history of (or at risk for) epilepsy:

No medication is indicated if (a) the woman has been seizure free and is not taking medication or (b) the woman has no history of seizures.

Antiepileptic drug treatment may be continued for active epilepsy during pregnancy.

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from antiepileptic medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication to treat a maternal seizure disorder during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

See MotherToBaby for more information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

The selective neuronal KCNQ potassium channel opener ezogabine (US-approved name; retigabine in the EU and Canada), an AED introduced in 2013 as adjunctive treatment of partial epilepsy in adults [Porter et al 2012], may represent a targeted therapy for KCNQ3-related seizures arising from variants that reduce channel activity. However, the discovery of additional side effects in the early post-marketing studies (blue discoloration of skin and retina) raised concerns about its use in children. Ezogabine has been commercially withdrawn as of June 2017.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), the following are recommended:

Assessment of/for:

Neurologic findings; attention to distal muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes

Speech

Swallowing

Androgen responsiveness: male pattern hair growth, testicular size, and fertility

Gynecomastia

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Physical therapy and rehabilitation approaches, including the use of braces and walkers, offer the best prospect for remaining ambulatory as the disease progresses.

Some individuals with SBMA have breast reduction surgery for gynecomastia [Sperfeld et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There are currently no effective treatments to prevent development of disease manifestations in an asymptomatic individual known to possess an expanded CAG repeat after presymptomatic diagnosis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most worrisome complications in SBMA result from bulbar weakness, as these complications (asphyxiation and aspiration pneumonia) can be life threatening. Individuals with bulbar weakness must be counseled in the importance of carefully cutting their food into small pieces for eating and avoiding items that may be difficult to chew and then swallow.

Surveillance

Appropriate measures include:

Strength testing (annually)

Pulmonary function tests (annually in advanced cases)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with a tendency to fall should avoid slippery or rough walking surfaces.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

High-dose testosterone. At least one clinical trial of high-dose oral testosterone has been undertaken; no significant benefit was derived for the androgen treatment group [Goldenberg & Bradley 1996]. Based on research in Drosophila and mouse models of SBMA, many investigators believe that androgen treatment can be harmful.

Anti-androgen therapy. There is no consensus or clear evidence as to whether anti-androgen therapy is an effective form of treatment for the neurologic complications.

Anti-androgen therapy shows promise based on studies in Drosophila and mouse models as well as knowledge of the molecular basis of SBMA. For these reasons, a Japanese group [Banno et al 2009] performed a clinical trial of leuprorelin in individuals with SBMA who were followed over 48 weeks: significant improvement was observed in cricopharyngeal opening duration, but in no other outcome measures. In particular, there was no effect on the primary outcome measure (the ALS Functional Rating Scale or ALSFRS) in the period of randomization. Although the trial was continued as an open label extension, and encouraging results were reported, the conclusion was that this clinical trial did not establish efficacy for anti-androgen therapy in SBMA [Fischbeck & Bryan 2009].

A larger subsequent study with swallow function as the primary outcome measure also did not show an overall benefit, except in post hoc analysis of subjects in whom disease duration was less than ten years [Katsuno et al 2010].

Another anti-androgen therapy approach was attempted [Fernández-Rhodes et al 2011]: individuals with SBMA were randomized to placebo or dutasteride, a drug that blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The rationale was that DHT may mediate many of the toxic effects, and this drug would permit affected individuals to retain the anabolic effects of testosterone, thereby diminishing the side effects of anti-androgen therapy. However, this study did not show a significant effect of dutasteride on the progression of muscle weakness in SBMA.

Hence, the utility of anti-androgen therapy as a treatment for SBMA remains unclear. Furthermore, it is possible that anti-androgen therapies, even if effective, would need to be administered prior to disease onset or early on in the neurodegenerative process. More importantly, the side effects of anti-androgen therapies would probably far outweigh the therapeutic benefit for most individuals, and likely should be reserved for people with SBMA who are wheelchair bound or exhibit pronounced bulbar weakness.

Creatine supplementation. Studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) suggest that creatine supplementation may temporarily enhance muscle strength and exercise performance in this motor neuron disease [Mazzini et al 2001], prompting speculation that it may offer a similar benefit to individuals with SBMA; this remains to be tested.

Experimental therapies in animal models

Other interventions that have been shown to have benefit in mouse models of SBMA include the HSP-90 inhibitors 17-AAG and 17-DMAG, the synthetic curcumin derivative ASC-J9, and insulin-like growth factor 1 (reviewed in Fischbeck [2012]).

More recently, one group directly examined the role of muscle expression of mutated AR in SBMA disease pathogenesis by developing a BAC transgenic mouse model featuring a floxed first exon to permit cell-type specific excision of a human AR transgene [Cortes et al 2014]. They engineered the human AR transgene to carry 121 CAG repeats (BAC fxAR121), and found that BAC fxAR121 mice develop a gender-restricted, progressive neuromuscular phenotype, characterized by weight loss, motor deficits, muscle atrophy, myopathy, and shortened life span. By terminating expression of mutated AR in the skeletal muscles of BAC fxAR121 male mice, this study revealed a crucial role for muscle expression of mutated AR in SBMA disease pathogenesis. Hence, this work predicts that muscle-directed therapies hold great promise as definitive treatments for SBMA motor neuron degeneration.

Another study sought to ameliorate toxicity in mouse models of SBMA by suppressing polyQ-AR expression using antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) [Lieberman et al 2014]. This investigation developed compounds to specifically target AR expression in the periphery, and using two mouse models, found that peripheral gene suppression of mutated AR rescues deficits in muscle weight, fiber size, and grip strength; reverses changes in muscle gene expression; and extends the life span of mutant males. Interestingly, delivery of an anti-AR ASO to the CNS also elicited a modest improvement in these disease read-outs in a SBMA mouse model, but was much less effective than peripheral delivery. Hence, this report, together with the genetic rescue study of SBMA [Cortes et al 2014], strongly suggests that peripheral administration of therapies directed to muscle should be explored in humans with SBMA. Preparations are underway to initiate a clinical trial of anti-AR ASO therapy via peripheral delivery in males with SBMA.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Administration of male hormones (testosterone and its analogs) is not effective in overcoming the androgen insensitivity.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the Kleefstra syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended following the initial diagnosis:

Complete review of systems

Physical and neurologic examination

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for possible renal/urologic anomalies

Echocardiogram and ECG to evaluate for possible structural cardiac anomalies and atrial rhythm defects; follow-up depending on the severity of any cardiac anomaly identified

Speech/language evaluation including audiologic examination

Assessment for signs and symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux (GER)

Physical and/or occupational therapy assessment

Sleep history

EEG if seizures are suspected

Neuroimaging (MRI) especially in the presence of findings such as seizures and/or movement disorder, extreme apathy/catatonia, and/or regression in psychomotor development

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Ongoing routine pediatric care by a pediatrician or neurologist, psychiatrist, and/or (for adults) specialist in the care of adults with intellectual disability

Depending on the age of the affected individual, referral to an early childhood intervention program, ongoing special education programs, and/or vocational training

Speech/language therapy, physical and occupational therapy, and sensory integration therapy

Specialized neurologic and psychiatric care for individuals with extreme behavior problems and/or movement disorder. Behavioral therapies include special education techniques that may help minimize behavioral outbursts in the school setting by emphasizing individualized instruction, structure, and a set daily routine.

Therapeutic management of the sleep disorder. No well-controlled treatment trials have been reported

Specialized neurologic care for individuals with epilepsy; management of seizures in accordance with standard practice

Standard treatment for cardiac, renal, urologic, and other medical issues

Auditory amplification if hearing loss is identified

Surveillance

Cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities should be monitored as needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with IGD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of clinical manifestations of hypogonadism based on the age and sex of the individual, if not already performed as part of the diagnostic work up (see Diagnosis and Table 1)

Assessment of laboratory findings* of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism if not already performed as part of the diagnostic work up

* Serum concentration of LH (luteinizing hormone) and FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) and in males total testosterone (T) <100 ng/dL and in females estradiol (E2) <50 pg/mL

Assessment for presence of possible non-reproductive features including: renal ultrasound examination (to detect unilateral renal agenesis), hearing tests (to detect sensorineural hearing loss), skeletal survey (to detect limb/spine bony abnormalities), dental exam (to detect dental agenesis), eye exam (to detect iris and/or chorioretinal coloboma) and developmental assessment (if there is evidence of developmental delay)

In addition to assessing the degree of hypogonadism/GnRH deficiency, potential deterioration in bone health that may have resulted from periods of low-circulating sex hormones needs to be addressed. Depending on the timing of puberty, duration of GnRH deficiency, and other osteoporotic risk factors (e.g., glucocorticoid excess, smoking), one should consider obtaining a bone mineral density study (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

An expert European consensus statement on the management of IGD has recently been published [Boehm et al 2015] (full text).

Typically, a definitive diagnosis of IGD is made around age 18 years. Occasionally, however, a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty or in an infant with microphallus and cryptorchidism.

Males with IGD Age ≥18 Years

Treatment options include sex steroids, gonadotropins, and pulsatile GnRH administration. Choice of therapy in adults is determined by the goal(s) of treatment (i.e., to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and/or to induce and maintain fertility). The selection of hormone replacement therapy is also based on the preference of the individual being treated; however, when fertility is not immediately desired, replacement with testosterone therapy is the most practical option. As the majority of individuals with IGD have not progressed through puberty at the time of diagnosis, initial therapy should be started at low doses and gradually increased to adult doses once the development of secondary sexual characteristics is achieved.

Hormone replacement therapy for males not desiring fertility

Testosterone therapy in the form of injectable and transdermal routes of testosterone administration is typically used to both induce puberty and maintain adult levels of testosterone. Recently nasal testosterone has become available but use has not been reported in patients with IGD.

The injectable testosterone preparations have a “roller-coaster” pharmacokinetic effect, with peak and trough levels that can go to extraphysiologic levels; thus, the transdermal preparations have the added benefit of offering a more favorable pharmacokinetic profile. A typical adult dose of testosterone replacement is 200 mg of testosterone ester injection every two weeks or 5 g of a 1% testosterone gel every day. Doses do vary with newer testosterone preparations; manufacturer’s instructions should be followed for individual testosterone preparations.

Men using topical androgen replacement must take care to avoid exposing other individuals to treated skin. Anecdotal reports suggest that the transmission of clinically effective levels of testosterone from the patient to other family members (including women and children) is possible with undesirable side effects.

Once puberty is initiated, testosterone replacement therapy is usually required indefinitely to ensure normal sexual function and maintenance of proper muscle, bone, and red blood cell mass.

However, in approximately 10% of males, reversal of IGD may occur; thus, if clinical evidence shows endogenous activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-axis (e.g., testicular growth on testosterone, maintained testosterone levels despite missing/withholding therapy), a brief washout of testosterone therapy should be done with monitoring of testosterone levels. If testosterone levels fall, therapy should be reinitiated. If levels are normal, no further testosterone therapy will be required; serial monitoring of levels should be undertaken, as some individuals may require reinitiation of therapy.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). An alternative to testosterone therapy, hCG injections promote testicular growth, normalize serum concentration of testosterone, and induce development of secondary sexual characteristics.

In adults, treatment with hCG is usually initiated at 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day to normalize serum testosterone concentrations. Dose should be increased by increments of 250 IU if serum testosterone levels remain low.

Treatment with hCG must be weighed against the increased risk of developing gynecomastia (resulting from the estrogen produced by stimulation of the testes with hCG). To some extent the risk of gynecomastia can be minimized by gradually reducing the dose of hCG to the minimum required to sustain a serum testosterone concentration in the mid-normal range (~500 ng/dL).

Male Infants/Adolescents with Suspicion of IGD

If IGD is clinically suspected (e.g., low testosterone levels with low/normal gonadotropins) low-dose testosterone or hCG therapy can be given in early infancy to boys with microphallus to increase penile length [Bin-Abbas et al 1999, Young 2012].

Since a definitive diagnosis of IGD may not be possible until age 18 years, after infancy these boys do not generally need to be treated until around the time of puberty. At this time, if a high suspicion of IGD remains (e.g., associated anosmia and delay in onset puberty), these subjects may benefit from early initiation of hormonal replacement therapy with either testosterone or hCG treatment early in the pubertal period. A suggestive puberty induction regimen in adolescents is to start a long-acting testosterone ester at a dose of 25-50 mg, given intramuscularly every two weeks. The doses can be gradually increased by 25-50 mg every two to three months until full virilization is achieved. Once adult doses (~200 mg/2 weeks) are reached, further adjustments are based on serum testosterone levels.

Hormone replacement therapy for males desiring fertility (fertility induction in males). As testosterone replacement therapy suppresses spermatogenesis in the testes, gonadotropins or pulsatile GnRH therapy is usually required to realize the fertility potential in males.

Gonadotropin therapy. In most males with IGD, a combination of gonadotropins (hCG along with either human menopausal gonadotropins [hMG] or recombinant FSH) is used to stimulate spermatogenesis. In males with very low testicular volumes (≤~8 mL) the initiating dose of hCG is usually 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day; FSH is added at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or recombinant formulation. Trough serum testosterone concentrations (target: mid-normal range [~500 ng/dL]), trough serum FSH levels (target: mid-normal reference range), and sperm count are monitored to assess response. Recent trials show that in those with lower testicular volumes, priming with FSH prior to combination therapy may improve spermatogenic outcomes [Dwyer et al 2013].

In males with higher baseline testicular volumes, treatment with hCG alone may be sufficient to achieve spermatogenesis and conception [Burris et al 1988]. However, if after six to nine months, semen analysis reveals persistent azoospermia or marked oligospermia, FSH is added to the regimen at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or a recombinant formulation.

In either treatment, testicular volume must be tracked, as this is one of the primary determinants of successful spermatogenesis. In fact, sperm are rarely seen in the semen analysis until testicular volume reaches 8 mL [Whitcomb & Crowley 1990]. In most males without a history of cryptorchidism, sperm function is usually normal and conception can occur even with relatively low sperm counts. Note: Liu et al [2009] have noted that previous treatment with gonadotropins may reduce the period of subsequent gonadotropin treatment required for initiation of spermatogenesis.

If a pituitary defect exists, gonadotropin therapy becomes the treatment of choice.

Pulsatile GnRH stimulation vs. gonadotropin therapy. While either gonadotropin therapy or pulsatile GnRH stimulation can induce spermatogenesis in approximately 90%-95% of men with IGD, some men have a better response to pulsatile GnRH stimulation than to gonadotropin therapy.

Subcutaneous administration of GnRH in a pulsatile manner through a portable pump that delivers a GnRH bolus every two hours is an efficient way of inducing testicular growth and spermatogenesis [Pitteloud et al 2002b]. As the primary defect of IGD is typically localized to the hypothalamus, the pituitary responds appropriately to physiologic doses of GnRH. Note: In the US, pulsatile GnRH therapy is not currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of infertility in men and, thus, is available for such treatment only at specialized research centers.

Females with IGD

Hormone replacement therapy for females not desiring fertility. Although a definitive diagnosis of IGD in females is usually made around age 18 years, occasionally a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty, and therapy may need to be initiated earlier (age ~14 years)

To allow optimal breast development, initial treatment should consist of unopposed estrogen replacement via oral or topical preparations. Many formulations of estrogens are available; a suggested oral regimen is using premarin 0.3 mg daily to be increased gradually to an adult replacement dose of 1-1.25 mg daily.

Once breast development is optimal, a progestin should be added for endometrial protection (e.g., cyclical Prometrium® 200 mg daily for 10-12 days).

Although preference of the individual plays an important role in choice of treatment plan, low-estrogen formulations should be considered in women with clotting abnormalities (see Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia and Prothrombin Thrombophilia).

Hormone replacement therapy for females desiring fertility (fertility induction in females). Pulsatile GnRH stimulation and exogenous gonadotropins are FDA approved for folliculogenesis in women with IGD. Either therapy should be administered with close supervision by physicians specializing in ovulation induction. Intravenous administration of GnRH at various frequencies throughout the menstrual cycle closely mimics the dynamics of normal menstrual cycles resulting in ovulation of a single follicle [Santoro et al 1986]. This therapy offers a clear advantage over the traditional treatment with exogenous gonadotropins, which results in higher rates of both multiple gestation and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. For either approach, however, the rate of conception is approximately 30% per ovulatory cycle [Martin et al 1990].

Fertility Options in Patients with IGD if Fertility Induction is Unsuccessful

In vitro fertilization. Although successful spermatogenesis can be obtained in most males with IGD through pulsatile GnRH therapy or combined gonadotropin therapy, some men with KS caused by an ANOS1 (KAL1) pathogenic variant may have an atypical response to therapy [Sykiotis et al 2010a]. In those who respond to therapy, low sperm numbers can often result in conception; however, if infertility continues despite successful spermatogenesis or if spermatogenesis fails to occur, in vitro fertilization (IVF) is an option.

Similarly, if spontaneous conception fails to occur in women with IGD who have undergone ovulation induction, IVF may be an option.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Optimal calcium and vitamin D intake should be encouraged and specific treatment for decreased bone mass with bisphosphonates should be considered depending on the degree of bone mineralization (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis).

Surveillance

Children of both sexes with findings suggestive of IGD (e.g., microphallus, anosmia) should be monitored at regular intervals from age 11 years onwards with the following:

Assessment of sexual maturation by Tanner staging (Table 1)

Measurement of serum concentrations of LH, FSH, and total testosterone (T) in males and estradiol (E2) in females

Bone age determinations

In individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of IGD, serum sex steroid levels (to guide optimal hormone replacement) and bone mineral density should be monitored at regular intervals.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and prompt initiation of treatment.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known. However, a prepubertal child with a known pathogenic variant may progress through puberty in a normal fashion, delayed fashion, or not at all. Therefore, reevaluation of such individuals over time is important, and hormone treatment should be initiated only when IGD with impaired pubertal development is diagnosed.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, clinical review of at-risk relatives of pubertal age to assess clinical onset of signs of puberty and if delayed, to initiate appropriate therapy for pubertal induction.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome (KOS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Growth assessment, including assessment of feeding and nutrition

Ophthalmologic evaluation for microcornea, cataract, ptosis, coloboma

Hearing evaluation for sensorineural or mixed sensorineural/conductive hearing impairment

Echocardiogram for congenital heart defects

Evaluation for laryngomalacia if respiratory issues are present

Evaluation for the presence of gastrointestinal reflux, bowel malrotation if indicated

Evaluation of males for cryptorchidism

Renal ultrasound examination for structural renal abnormalities and vesicoureteral reflux

Hip ultrasound examination to evaluate for femoral head dislocation

Evaluation of thyroid function; other hormone levels if clinically indicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment recommendations are appropriate:

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy

Failure to thrive. Intervention for feeding problems as needed in infancy and childhood

Eyes. Cataract and ptosis surgery if indicated

Hearing loss. Hearing aids or cochlear implant if needed

Cardiac Function assessment and treatment if needed

Genital anomalies. Orchidopexy in males with undescended testes

Renal anomalies. Treatment of vesicoureteral reflux if indicated

Skeletal. Referral to an orthopedist if joint dislocations or scoliosis is present, early referral to physical therapy

Endocrine. Thyroid hormone replacement as needed

Other facial. Cleft palate repair if present

Surveillance

The following should be assessed at least annually:

Growth

Developmental progress

Vision, hearing

Contractures and/or scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Krabbe disease:

Neurologic examination

EEG

Brain MRI and MRS

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of individuals with infantile-onset Krabbe disease who are diagnosed in stage II or III is limited to supportive care to control irritability and spasticity.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in presymptomatic infants [Escolar et al 2005] and older individuals with mild symptoms [Krivit et al 1998] provides a benefit over symptomatic treatment only. Treated individuals show improved and preserved cognitive function; however, many show progressive deterioration of peripheral nervous system findings.

The availability of suitable donors has changed considerably with the use of umbilical cord blood for HSCT.

The identification of newborns with the potential to develop Krabbe disease by newborn screening (presently in place in New York State) facilitates the initiation of treatment before neurologic damage has occurred. Concerns remain regarding the age at which to start treatment, prediction of clinical course without treatment, and long-term consequences of treatment.

Given the significant clinical variability among individuals with late-onset forms (even those with the same genotype), evaluation of treatment effectiveness is difficult.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the disease has been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to test siblings so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment with HSCT using umbilical cord blood [Escolar et al 2005].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Studies using the well-characterized animal models to investigate other treatment options including gene therapy, enzyme replacement therapy, neural stem cell transplantation, substrate reduction therapy, and chemical chaperone therapy are being conducted. However, at this time HSCT (bone marrow transplantation) is the most effective method of therapy in the mouse models of Krabbe disease. None of these other methods is ready for human trials.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In utero HSCT in fetuses predicted to be affected with Krabbe disease has been tried three times with little success [Bambach et al 1997].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a mitochondrial DNA deletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic, cardiologic, ophthalmologic, and endocrinologic evaluations for KSS and PEO in children and adults

Complete hematologic and gastroenterologic evaluations for Pearson syndrome in infants

Complete neurologic, cardiac, gastrointestinal, endocrinologic, and renal evaluations for Leigh syndrome.

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Placement of cardiac pacemaker in individuals with cardiac conduction block to reduce the risk of sudden death

Placement of eyelid slings for severe ptosis

Cochlear implants and hearing aids for neurosensory hearing loss

Hormone replacement for endocrinopathies

Dilation of the upper esophageal sphincter to alleviate cricopharyngeal achalasia

Folinic acid supplementation in individuals with KSS with low CSF folic acid

Replacement of pancreatic enzymes in Pearson syndrome

Administration of coenzyme Q10 (50-200 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (330 mg 3x/day)

Physical and occupational therapy

Treatment of depression

Ventilatory support for respiratory abnormalities in Leigh syndrome.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antioxidants may ameliorate damage from reactive oxygen species (ROS).

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) may improve nutritional intake and prevent aspiration pneumonia in individuals with severe dysphagia.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

ECG and echocardiogram every six to 12 months to monitor cardiac conduction and contractility

Yearly audiometry and endocrinologic evaluation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications to avoid:

Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria, including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors

Dichloroacetate (DCA) as a lactate-lowering agent, as DCA has been proven to cause peripheral neuropathy [Kaufmann et al 2006]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Symptomatic maternal relatives should be screened for the specific mtDNA deletion.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with L1 syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Head imaging study

Complete neurologic evaluation

Developmental evaluation

Evaluation for Hirschsprung disease if there is a history of constipation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Optimal management involves a multidisciplinary team with expertise in pediatrics, child neurology, neurosurgery, rehabilitation, and medical genetics.

Hydrocephalus. Surgical treatment should be performed as needed. Shunting of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is indicated to reduce intracranial pressure. Of note, prenatal shunting procedures offer no advantage [Pinckert & Golbus 1988].

Intellectual disability. Developmental progress should be monitored and stimulated. Developmental outcome is variable and individual educational programming is important.

Adducted thumbs. Surgical intervention is not generally indicated. . A splint may help reduce the degree of adduction. In some milder cases, tendon transfer may improve thumb function.

Spastic paraplegia. Neurologic features should be monitored. Follow up and treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physiotherapy is recommended.

Surveillance

Evaluation by a child neurologist at regular intervals is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Prenatal recognition of an affected fetus in case of an ungoing pregnancy requires multidisciplinary planning for a safe delivery for both mother and infant and for early evaluation and possible treatment for hydrocephalus shortly after birth.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant leukodystrophy with autonomic disease (ADLD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a neurologist for evidence of autonomic dysfunction (e.g., orthostatic hypotension), abnormal tone, and/or tremor

Psychological evaluation and neuropsychological assessment

Assessment by rehabilitation specialists including equipment needs

Evaluation of swallowing function and communication

Gastroenterology evaluation for bowel dysfunction

Urologic evaluation for urinary dysfunction, recurrent urinary tract infection, and erectile dysfunction

Audiologic assessment

Consultation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Primary treatment is not possible, but management of symptoms can improve the comfort and care of individuals with this disorder [Van Haren et al 2015].

Autonomic dysfunction

Neurogenic bladder:

Recurrent urinary tract infections should be addressed with attention to bladder regimens for managing neurogenic bladders and in rare case antibiotic prophylaxis.

Urinary urgency may require spasmolytics (e.g., solifenacine succinate).

Constipation can be managed by good hydration and dietary fiber, although sometimes stool softeners (e.g., docusate) or a laxative is needed.

Hypotensive events can be minimized by pharmacologic treatment (mineralocorticoids such as fludrocortisone or vasopressors such as hydrochloride), compressive stockings, physical therapy (to help with rising from supine positions), and increased salt in the diet.

Feeding difficulties can be managed with speech therapy and appropriate feeding interventions to assure adequate nutrition while preventing aspiration pneumonia.

Sexual dysfunction can be alleviated with sildenafil.

Anhidrosis is managed by avoiding overheating.

Intensive management of infections should include adequate antipyretic treatment, as symptoms may worsen significantly with fever.

Spasticity. Medications that can help reduce muscle tone include oral baclofen or diazepam (GABA agonists) and injectable botulinum toxin for focal muscle spasticity. A good physical therapy regimen can be beneficial in improving joint mobility and function.

Ataxia. Although ataxia is difficult to treat, frequent falls can be managed with strategies to minimize falls and increase strength and adaptive equipment such as walkers or wheelchairs.

Cognitive dysfunction can affect social interactions and financial management. A social worker and financial planner can help anticipate issues of guardianship that may accompany progressive decline.

Family and patient support/advocacy groups can help address psychosocial consequences.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Physiotherapy and orthopedic follow-up to address bone health including Vitamin D and calcium supplementations and management of spasticity to prevent joint contractures and dislocation

Attention to pulmonary care, including the use of measures to address chronic lung disease from recurrent aspiration events

Yearly influenza immunizations

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because disease manifestations may be exacerbated with fever and infection, care should be taken to avoid whenever possible exposure to those with infections.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lafora disease (LD), the following are recommended:

Clinical evaluation

Evaluation of speech, walking, coordination, handwriting, school performance, and emotional status

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have a major effect against generalized seizures, sometimes controlling seizures for many months. Generalized seizures are rare in individuals who are treated, even years after disease onset.

Valproic acid is the traditional antiepileptic treatment for LD; because it is a broad-spectrum AED, it controls both the generalized tonic-clonic seizures and myoclonic jerks.

Clonazepam can be used as an adjunctive medication for control of myoclonus, as in other forms of PME, although the literature does not provide clear evidence for its effect on myoclonus in LD.

Zonisamide has had a significant effect on both seizures and myoclonus in a small number of individuals with Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora disease.

Both piracetam and levetiracetam have been effective, sustained, and well tolerated as add-on treatment for myoclonus in progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) [Koskiniemi et al 1998, Genton et al 1999, Fedi et al 2001, Crest et al 2004]. Levetiracetam had a significant effect on myoclonus in two sisters with LD [Boccella et al 2003]. Lohi et al [2006] reported that levetiracetam exacerbated seizures while improving myoclonus in two persons with LD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because the myoclonus associated with LD may be drug resistant, overmedication may be a risk in individuals with LD .

Placement by percutaneous endoscopy of a gastrostomy tube for feeding can be helpful in decreasing the risk of aspiration pneumonia in individuals with advanced disease.

Surveillance

Clinical and psychosocial evaluation should be performed at three- to six-month intervals throughout the teen years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

As in other forms of progressive myoclonus epilepsies, the use of phenytoin should be avoided.

Anecdotal reports describe possible exacerbation of myoclonus with the following:

Carbamazepine [Nanba & Maegaki 1999]

Oxcarbazepine [Kaddurah & Holmes 2006]

Lamotrigine [Cerminara et al 2004, Crespel et al 2005]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Work in animal models has shown that glycogen synthesis is requisite for glycogen accumulation and Lafora body formation; such glycogen accumulation is pathogenic [Turnbull et al 2011, Pederson et al 2013, Duran et al 2014, Turnbull et al 2014]. This suggests a therapeutic window for potential treatments using known and future small-molecule inhibitors of glycogen synthesis in individuals with LD.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count

Complete fasting lipid profile, if not done at the time of diagnosis

Liver function tests

Upper endoscopy to evaluate individuals with severe liver disease for the presence of esophageal varices

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with sebelipase alfa was approved by the FDA in late 2015.

Results from a Phase III clinical trial of 66 affected individuals demonstrated that ERT can be life saving for those with severe Wolman syndrome and life improving with prolonged survival in those who have cholesterol ester storage disease [Burton et al 2015].

ERT is administered intravenously at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight every other week.

Wolman Disease

Symptoms should generally be treated in a routine manner, while keeping in mind the limited life expectancy of infants with untreated Wolman disease.

Malabsorption and malnutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided in an attempt to limit malnutrition to the extent possible. Parenteral nutrition is offered in many instances of intractable malabsorption.

Hepatomegaly and liver disease. Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure.

Adrenal cortical insufficiency. Corticosteroid and mineralocorticoid replacement is indicated in the presence of insufficiency.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has overall had mixed results, and requires further study [Gramatges et al 2009]. While successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect [Stein et al 2007, Tolar et al 2009], HSCT can be associated with morbidity and mortality [Yanir et al 2013].

Consider discussion of comfort care options.

CESD

Hyperlipidemia. Attempts should be made to reduce cholesterol through the use of statins, cholestyramine, ezetimibe,and a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides [Gasche et al 1997, Dalgiç et al 2006, Chatrath et al 2009, Abello et al 2010].

Lipophilic vitamin supplementation may also be beneficial.

Aggressive reduction of additional cardiovascular disease risk factors should be encouraged.

Nutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided to children experiencing failure to thrive and to adults experiencing weight loss. Additionally, a nutrition team can assist individuals in the implementation of a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides.

Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. At least four case reports of successful liver transplantation for CESD have been reported, with post-operative improvement of lipid profiles and successful transplant out to five years in one individual [Ambler et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals found to have esophageal varices should be placed on nonspecific beta-blockers to reduce the risk of bleeding; beta-blockers have not been shown to prevent the formation of esophageal varices.

Surveillance

No standard guidelines for the surveillance of individuals with LAL deficiency have been developed. The following screening practices can be considered to monitor for the most common symptoms associated with CESD.

Children

Special attention should be paid to growth and nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or failure to thrive could indicate malabsorption.

Consider monitoring fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes every six months.

Adults with CESD should be evaluated every six to 12 months depending on disease severity.

Special attention should be paid to nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or weight loss could indicate malabsorption.

Monitor routinely fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes.

Individuals with severe liver disease should be evaluated for esophageal varices by upper endoscopy every three years.

Individuals with hepatosplenomegaly should be monitored and treated for thrombocytopenia to prevent bleeding complications.

Both children and adults. Obtain serial liver and spleen imaging to monitor for hepatosplenic volume and to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma which has arisen in the setting of advanced cirrhosis [Riva et al 2008]. Consensus on optimal screening protocols has not been published.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Those with thrombocytopenia should avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband in order to identify those who would benefit from early institution of treatment.

If the LIPA pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the LIPA pathogenic variants in the family are not known, assay of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) enzyme activity can be used to assist in the identification of affected sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Clinical trials are underway for enzyme replacement therapy [Valayannopoulos et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LBSL, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain and spinal cord MRI

If possible, proton MRS of abnormal cerebral white matter

Physical therapy/occupational therapy assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive therapy includes the following:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation to improve motor function

The following as needed:

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) if epileptic seizures are present

Special education

Speech therapy

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Rehabilitation and physical therapy are helpful in the prevention of secondary complications, such as contractures and scoliosis.

Surveillance

LBSL is very slowly progressive in most cases. Annual clinical evaluations suffice. In case of rapid worsening more frequent evaluations are appropriate. Follow-up MRI can be performed once every few years. Only in severe, early-onset cases are more frequent evaluations necessary.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The authors are aware of several affected mothers who have had children. There do not appear to be specific risks for the mother or fetus other than the risk of recurrence of LBSL in the fetus (see Genetic Counseling).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Studies of muscle biopsies, fibroblasts, and lymphoblasts show no evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction; therefore, there is no rationale for the “mitochondrial cocktail” of vitamins and cofactors, often given to persons with mitochondrial dysfunction.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Electroretinogram (ERG) to confirm the diagnosis and to assess retinal function

Clinical genetic assessment to evaluate for the presence of systemic abnormalities

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Except for RPE65-related LCA (see Therapies Under Investigation), no substantial treatment or cure for LCA exists, and, thus, care is supportive. Parents should be referred to programs for the visually impaired child within their state or locality.

Affected individuals benefit from correction of refractive error, use of low-vision aids when possible, and optimal access to educational and work-related opportunities.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children should be discouraged from repeatedly poking and pressing on their eyes, although attempts to alter such behavior are not always successful.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be periodically seen for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and when residual vision is present, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma, or cataract.

Rarely, vision appears to improve beyond expectations; in such cases, a repeat ERG is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In a naturally occurring Briard dog model of LCA resulting from mutation of RPE65, gene therapy utilizing AAV-mediated RPE65 was shown to restore visual function, an effect that has been documented to last for more than five years [Acland et al 2005]. More than 50 dogs have now been treated, with sustained success in 95% of treated eyes. The results of three simultaneous Phase I clinical treatment trials of AAV-mediated RPE65 gene therapy in humans were recently reported [Bainbridge et al 2008, Cideciyan et al 2008, Hauswirth et al 2008, Maguire et al 2008]. Initial results demonstrated safety, and showed slight improvement in vision in both bright and dim light.

Clinical and laboratory studies suggest that persons with CEP290-related LCA may also be good candidates for gene therapy. =Cideciyan et al [2008] studied the retinal architecture of CEP290-mutant mice and humans. In the mouse retina, dramatic retinal remodeling was evident by age four to six weeks. Cross-sectional imaging of affected human retinas performed using optical coherence tomography (OCT) indicated preservation of foveal cones. The relative sparing of foveal cone cells, despite severe visual dysfunction, suggests an opportunity for cell rescue.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Referral to an ophthalmologist (preferably one familiar with distichiasis) for slit-lamp examination, as the extra lashes may be subtle and easily missed on clinical examination

Physical examination to document the presence of manifestations and identify evidence of cellulitis

Isotope lymphoscintigraphy to confirm underlying abnormality of the lymphatics as the cause of the edema

Physical examination of the heart and possible echocardiography if murmur or arrhythmia is identified

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Conservative management of symptomatic distichiasis with lubrication or epilation (plucking), or more definitive management with cryotherapy, electrolysis, or lid splitting [O'Donnell & Collin 1993]. Recurrence is possible even with more definitive treatment.

Referral to a lymphedema therapist for management of edema (fitting hosiery, massage). Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement may be possible with the use of carefully fitted hosiery and/or bandaging, which may reduce the size of the swelling as well as the discomfort associated with it.

Surgery for ptosis if clinically indicated (e.g., obscured vision, cosmetic appearance)

Referral to neurosurgery for individuals with symptomatic spinal cysts (i.e., any neurologic signs or symptoms especially in the lower limbs)

Conservative management of varicose veins if possible, as surgery could aggravate the edema and increase the risk of infection or cellulitis

Standard treatment for scoliosis

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The implementation of hosiery prior to the development of lymphedema may be beneficial in reducing the extent of edema [P Mortimer, personal communication].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Prevention of secondary cellulitis in areas with lymphedema, particularly as cellulitis may aggravate the degree of edema. Prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily) are recommended for recurrent cellulitis.

Prompt treatment of early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics (See the British Lymphology Society Consensus Statement for information on appropriate antibiotics.) It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously if there is severe systemic upset.

Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema by treatment with appropriate creams/ointments

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Edema may be exacerbated during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Diuretics are not effective in the treatment of lymphedema.

Cosmetic surgery is often associated with disappointing results.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual with a confirmed molecular diagnosis of Legius syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Age-appropriate developmental assessment

Neuropsychiatric evaluation on entry into school system or sooner based on clinical findings

Detailed dermatologic evaluation for supportive findings

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Consideration of behavioral modification or pharmacologic adjuvant therapy for individuals with ADHD

Adjuvant therapies such as physical, speech, and occupational therapy for individuals with identified developmental delays

Individualized education plans for learning disorders and school performance issues

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Age-appropriate developmental assessment and neuropsychiatric evaluations could potentially result in the initiation of therapies to prevent developmental and behavioral complications.

Surveillance

Consider periodic evaluation by a clinical geneticist to discuss manifestations associated with disorders of the Ras/MAPK pathway that may eventually be associated with Legius syndrome

Routine screening for developmental delays and behavioral and learning problems is appropriate.

Although vascular abnormalities have been reported in a few individuals with Legius syndrome, hypertension has not been reported. However, given the prevalence of vascular abnormalities and hypertension in NF1, it would seem appropriate to have regular blood pressure monitoring at each physician visit.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the SPRED1 pathogenic variant found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk (e.g., parents, younger and older sibs of a proband) with café au lait macules to identify as early as possible those who could benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome (LMS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination for the presence of anomalies associated with the disorder

Cranial MRI to estimate the size of the globes for prognosis regarding potential visual function and to detect concurrent CNS malformations such as hypoplastic corpus callosum and cingulate gyrus

Visual evoked response testing and ophthalmologic examination to help determine visual acuity and/or the potential for vision

Consideration of echocardiogram if physical exam detects findings suggestive of a congenital cardiac malformation. (A single case report from Japan described an infant with a molecularly confirmed LMS (BCOR p.Pro85Leu) dying of an unspecified cardiac defect at age six months [Suzumori et al 2013].)

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal aplasia, hypoplasia, and hydroureter

Consideration of hearing evaluation during infancy if:

Head and neck examination reveals malformations of the auricle or ear canal, presence of skin tags or dimples around the ear, presence of cleft lip or palate, asymmetric facies, and microcephaly

The parents have concerns that the child cannot hear (e.g., infant does not startle to loud noises, awaken to sound). The type of examination should be adjusted for the individual's cognitive level to allow for cooperation and maximize the chance of an informative test (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Consideration of sleep evaluation if parents report excessive daytime somnolence, altered sleep-wake cycles, difficulty awakening the child or getting the child to fall asleep, apnea, loud snoring, and/or difficulty breathing while asleep

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with anophthalmos or extreme microphthalmos benefit from regular evaluations by an ocularist for placement of serial enlarging orbital expanders to prevent deformation of facial structures and to encourage normal development of eye lashes and lid margins.

Early intervention with physical therapy and occupational therapy helps to address disturbances of the sleep-wake cycle caused by lack of light perception and problems of delayed gross motor development often observed in children with visual impairment.

Early intervention with special education maximizes cognitive development.

Referral to services for the visually impaired is recommended.

Treatment for hearing loss and sleep disorders is dependent on the specific defect and similar to the general population.

Referral to a sleep disorder specialist may be necessary depending on the individual's history and presentation to determine the appropriate tests.

Dental examinations and cleaning should be instituted to monitor dental hygiene, especially when the affected individual has cognitive developmental delay. Missing and irregularly shaped teeth and wide spacing of teeth are common. Treatment is the same as for the general population in restoring masticatory function.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No special preventative care is recommended. Follow-up care is personalized based on the physical impairments found in the individual.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual ophthalmologic examination for those with residual vision given the predisposition to glaucoma and high hyperopia from foreshortening of the globe

Monitoring of renal function (BUN, creatinine, and urine analysis) in those with known renal/ureteral anomalies

Developmental assessments performed with each well-child visit as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics. More frequent and specialized assessments are tailored to each child if development is not on track.

Lifelong case management to help affected individuals gain access to social services and assistive devices for the blind

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In those with residual vision, dilating drops and medications that may dilate the pupils (i.e., antihistamines, decongestants, tricyclic antidepressants) should be used in consultation with an ophthalmologist because of the narrow anterior chamber and risk for angle closure glaucoma.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on Noonan syndrome growth charts by Witt et al [1986] (Specific growth charts for NSML are not available.)

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography and electrocardiography

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Hearing evaluation including complete assessment of auditory acuity using age-appropriate tests (e.g., ABR testing, auditory steady-state response [ASSR] testing, pure tone audiometry)

Renal ultrasound examination; urinalysis if urinary tract abnormalities are identified

Clinical and radiographic assessment of spine and rib cage

Brain and cervical spine MRI if neurologic symptoms are present

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies and cryptorchidism is usually the same as in the general population.

Treatment of hearing loss may include the following:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration for cochlear implantation, a promising habilitation option for persons with profound deafness

Recognition that, as distinct from many clinical conditions, the management and treatment of severe-to-profound congenital deafness involves primarily the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

Any developmental disability should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

Treatment of cryptorchidism in males is usually the same as in the general population.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, certain physical activities may be curtailed in order to reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death.

For individuals diagnosed in infancy, early intervention may limit the extent of intellectual and developmental disabilities.

Surveillance

If anomalies are found in any system, periodic follow up should be planned and lifelong monitoring may be necessary, especially of cardiovascular abnormalities.

For hearing loss, twice-yearly examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment and repeat audiometry to confirm the stability of the hearing loss is recommended.

Surveillance for intellectual and developmental disabilities as per routine pediatric care is of particular importance due to the higher prevalence of these issues in individuals with NSML.

Surveillance for growth delay as per routine pediatric care is important due to the higher prevalence of poor linear growth in affected children.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, treatment with growth hormone must be undertaken with great caution, if at all, to avoid exacerbating a cardiac condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the PTPN11, RAF1,

BRAF, or MAP2K1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a thorough physical examination with particular attention to the features of NSML may clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For affected women, cardiac status should be monitored during pregnancy. Those with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or valve dysfunction may be at risk for the development or exacerbation of heart failure during pregnancy, especially during the second and third trimesters.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with calpainopathy, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Complete physical evaluation including the grading of muscle strength in single upper, lower, proximal, and distal muscles and the analysis of several functional performances

Orthopedic examination when gait is severely impaired

When walking ability is compromised, an evaluation for physical therapy and orthoses, especially in later stages of the disease

Baseline pulmonary function testing (including forced vital capacity measurement)

Baseline cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate management, tailored to each individual, can improve quality of life and prolong survival. The general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995], Bushby [1999], and Norwood et al [2007], and revised by the Committee of the American Academy of Neurology [Narayanaswami et al 2014]:

A passive physical therapy program [Oygard et al 2011] and stretching exercises should be instituted early after diagnosis to promote mobility, prolong walking, and slow the disease progression, in particular by maintaining joint flexibility. Individuals usually benefit from strengthening and gentle [Sveen et al 2013], low-impact aerobic exercise (swimming, stationary bicycling) with a supervised sub-maximal effort, which improves cardiovascular performance, increases muscle efficiency, and lessens muscle fatigue. Although there are no specific reports on supportive care, physical and occupational therapies are important [Eagle 2002].

Avoidance of prolonged immobility is recommended.

Technical aids can also compensate for the loss of certain motor abilities; canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs enable individuals to regain independence. The use of knee-ankle-foot orthoses at bedtime is recommended to prevent contractures. Scoliosis occurs mainly after wheelchair dependence and attention should be paid to seating [Norwood et al 2007].

Surgical intervention may be required for correction of orthopedic complications including foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures. Occasionally, scapular fixation may be required for particularly problematic scapular winging.

In the late stage of the disease, chronic respiratory insufficiency may occur and the use of respiratory aids may be indicated to prolong survival [Pollitt et al 2001, Norwood et al 2007, D’Angelo et al 2011, Richard et al 2016, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Individuals should be monitored for signs of nocturnal hypoventilation (sleep disturbances, early morning headache, daytime drowsiness).

Overnight pulse oxymetry is recommended if forced vital capacity is lower than 60% and the demonstration of nocturnal hypoventilation should lead to noninvasive nocturnal ventilation [Norwood et al 2007].

Intervention in the form of nocturnal ventilator assistance for respiratory failure (by noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, NIV, by nasal masks) may be life saving in severely affected individuals [Dirik et al 2001, Hashiguchi et al 2014, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Wheelchair-bound individuals may also develop weak cough efforts, placing them at risk of atelectasia, pneumonia, progressive mismatch, and respiratory failure.

Annual influenza vaccination and prompt treatment for chest and respiratory infections should be eventually addressed using a mechanical in-ex-sufflator [Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Social and emotional support help to improve the quality of life, to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity, and to reduce the sense of social isolation [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Clinicians should anticipate and facilitate decision-making for affected individuals and their families as the disease progresses, including decisions regarding loss of mobility and need of assistance with activities of daily living, medical complications, and end-of-life care [Narayanaswami et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

There are a number of measures that decrease disease manifestations in a symptomatic individual: control of weight gain, prevention of joint contractures by means of physical therapy and stretching exercises, and in the advanced stage, control of respiratory insufficiency. Physical therapy and stretching exercises can help to slow disease progression; therefore, a physical therapy program should be instituted early after diagnosis.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, such as foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures

Referral for pulmonary evaluation (eventually including pulmonary function tests) when there are complaints of excessive daytime somnolence, non-restorative sleep, early morning headache [Narayanaswami et al 2014]. Measurement of forced vital capacity should be made in sitting and supine position.

Examination of cardiac function in the advanced stage of disease (although it is not frequently compromised) [Dirik et al 2001, Okere et al 2013].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Strenuous and eccentric muscle exercise should be discouraged as it exacerbates muscle necrosis and could precipitate the onset of weakness or accelerate muscle wasting. Although individuals with minimal muscle weakness and functional limitation may be able to perform strenuous exercise, in some cases this may result in rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria [Lahoria & Milone 2016] which may lead to severe complications such as acute renal failure and compartment syndrome.

Body weight should be controlled to avoid obesity as well as excessive weight loss (atrophy of muscles can be accelerated by loss of muscle proteins).

Physical trauma, bone fractures, and prolonged immobility can induce disuse atrophy and thus should be avoided.

Although no association of the disease with malignant hyperthermia is reported, the use of succinylcholine and halogenated anesthetic agents should be avoided when possible (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

While the specific mechanism whereby cholesterol-lowering agents (e.g., statins) may produce muscle damage causing pain or weakness is unknown, such drugs should be avoided when possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CAPN3 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of evaluation and subsequent surveillance. With the associated intrafamilial phenotype variability, the possibility of calpainopathy should not be excluded in sibs on the basis of absence of symptoms alone.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with calpainopathy do not have impaired uterine smooth muscle strength or function and typically have uncomplicated pregnancies. A higher incidence of abnormal fetal presentation was reported in wheelchair-bound individuals with LGMD [Awater et al 2012]. Epidural blockade can be difficult in those with severe spine deformities and appropriate general anaesthesia may be necessary. About half of persons with LGMD reported deterioration of clinical symptoms in pregnancy [Awater et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of best corrected visual acuity

Assessment of visual fields with static or kinetic perimetry

ECG. Although a relatively rare finding, an ECG may reveal a pre-excitation syndrome in both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals who have a LHON-causing mtDNA variant. Even when present, such an ECG finding does not necessitate further intervention in the absence of cardiac symptoms.

Screening for possible associated neurologic complications, which can further compound the visual impairment among individuals with LHON

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of affected individuals is supportive and includes provision of visual aids, occupational rehabilitation, and registration with the relevant local social services.

A minority of individuals with LHON develop neurologic features including ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, nonspecific myopathy, and movement disorders. This group of affected individuals should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of physicians and allied professionals to minimize the functional consequences of these neurologic complications.

In those individuals who are found to have pre-excitation syndrome on ECG, referral to a cardiologist can be considered; treatment for symptomatic individuals with pre-excitation syndrome is the same as in the general population.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There is evidence that raised intraocular pressure could be a risk factor triggering visual loss in individuals at risk for developing LHON. Until further evidence becomes available, it is reasonable to set a lower threshold for initiating treatment for raised intraocular pressure in individuals with a LHON-causing variant given the possible deleterious consequences of raised intraocular pressure on mitochondrial function and retinal ganglion cell survival [Thouin et al 2013].

Surveillance

Ongoing surveillance of asymptomatic individuals harboring LHON-causing mtDNA variants is not necessary; however, they should be advised to seek immediate medical attention should they experience any visual disturbance.

The frequency of follow-up for affected individuals varies depending on the individual’s personal circumstances and the availability of healthcare locally.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals harboring established LHON-causing mtDNA variants should be strongly advised not to smoke and to moderate their alcohol intake, avoiding binge-drinking episodes. Although based largely on anecdotal evidence, avoidance of other environmental factors that have been implicated in precipitating visual loss in LHON (e.g., head trauma, industrial toxins, drugs with mitochondrial toxic effects) would seem reasonable.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Idebenone. Small case series have reported that oral administration of idebenone (a short-chain synthetic benzoquinone; 2,3-dimethoxy-5-methyl-6-(10-hydroxydecyl)-1,4-benzoquinone) and/or vitamin supplementation (B12 and C) can accelerate visual recovery and improve final visual outcome in patients with LHON [Mashima et al 2000, Carelli et al 2001]. A subsequent report of two individuals with LHON showed no visual benefit from idebenone and multivitamin supplementation [Barnils et al 2007].

To address these conflicting anecdotal findings, a Phase II double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial was conducted to investigate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of oral idebenone in LHON: RHODOS (Rescue of Hereditary Optic Disease Outpatient Study). In total, 85 affected individuals harboring one of the three primary mtDNA LHON-causing variants (m.3460G>A, m.11778G>A, and m.14484T>C) were successfully enrolled in this multicenter study [Klopstock et al 2013]. Research subjects were assigned in a two-to-one randomization ratio to receive either idebenone (at a dose of 300 mg/3x/day) or placebo. This dose of idebenone was found to be safe with no significant drug-related adverse events. Affected individuals with discordant visual acuities (defined as a difference of >0.2 LogMAR between the two eyes) and at highest risk for further visual loss in the least affected eye were more likely to benefit from treatment with idebenone [Klopstock et al 2011].

In the follow-up study (RHODOS-OFU), the beneficial effect of six months of treatment with idebenone appeared to persist despite discontinuation of the active medication at the end of the trial [Klopstock et al 2013]. In a large retrospective study involving 103 individuals with LHON, 44 with visual loss of one year’s duration or less were treated with idebenone and followed up for at least five years. A greater proportion of those in the treated group recovered vision compared with the untreated group, and the most consistent factor associated with visual recovery was an early initiation of treatment during the acute phase of the disease process [Carelli et al 2011]. It must be stressed that idebenone will not completely reverse the significant damage already sustained to the optic nerve, but in those affected individuals who do respond, there is an increased rate and likelihood of visual recovery compared with the known natural history.

There is no evidence to support the prophylactic use of idebenone among asymptomatic individuals with LHON-causing mtDNA variants.

EPI-743. In an open-label study of five individuals with acute LHON treated within 90 days of disease conversion, the antioxidant α-tocotrienol-quinone (EPI-743), a vitamin E derivative, has shown early promise [Sadun et al 2012]. An adequately powered, double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled trial is needed to confirm the visual benefit of this agent in both acute and chronic LHON [Sadun et al 2012].

Gene therapy. Targeted gene therapy for LHON is being actively explored for affected individuals harboring the m.11778G>A pathogenic variant [Qi et al 2003, Qi et al 2004, Qi et al 2007, Ellouze et al 2008, Lam et al 2010]. Promising pre-clinical data based on in vitro and rodent models have resulted in the recent launch of pivotal clinical trials for affected individuals with the m.11778G>A pathogenic variant involving the intravitreal injection of a modified adeno-associated virus (AAV2) vector carrying the replacement MTND4 subunit (see ClinicalTrials.gov).

Hormone therapy. The marked male bias in LHON could reflect a protective influence of female sex hormones, and this hypothesis was recently investigated using LHON cybrid cell lines. Treatment with estrogens was found to reduce reactive oxygen species levels in these LHON cybrids, with increased activity of the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase. These beneficial estrogenic effects translated into more efficient mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation [Giordano et al 2011]. Further research is needed to determine whether females with a LHON-causing variant are at increased risk for visual loss in the perimenopausal period and following the onset of menopause.

Mitochondrial replacement. In vitro fertilization (IVF) techniques aimed at preventing the maternal transmission of mtDNA pathogenic variants from mother to child are being developed. Pronuclear transfer and metaphase II spindle transfer are the two approaches that are being investigated, and further experimental work to validate the safety and potential clinical applicability of these IVF strategies is currently ongoing [Tachibana et al 2009, Craven et al 2010, Chinnery et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI), the following are recommended:

Examination for evidence of infection

Evaluation for problems relating to prematurity

Evaluation by a dermatologist familiar with congenital ichthyosis

Assessment of transepidermal water loss and hydration status

Assessment of corneal hydration in babies with ectropion

Assessment of feeding and nutrition status

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

For neonates, providing a moist environment in an isolette, preventing infection by hygienic handling, and treating infection are paramount.

Petrolatum-based creams and ointments are used to keep the skin soft, supple, and hydrated.

As the child becomes older, humidification with long baths, lubrication, and keratolytic agents such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations may be used to promote peeling and thinning of the stratum corneum. Topical salicylic acid preparations should be used very cautiously because of absorption.

For individuals with ectropion, lubrication of the cornea with artificial tears or prescription ophthalmic ointments, especially at night, is helpful in preventing dessication of the cornea.

Topical or oral retinoid therapy is recommended for those with severe skin involvement; however, side effects include bone toxicity and ligamentous calcifications from long-term use. Oral retinoid therapy should be used with great caution in women of child-bearing age because of concerns about teratogenicity. A detailed review of choice of retinoid, dosage, treatment duration, toxicity, monitoring, and disease-specific considerations for ARCI are provided by Digiovanna et al [2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following measures are appropriate:

Prevention of infection in the newborn (pivotal to outcome)

Prevention of dehydration

Maintenance of body temperature; prevention of overheating

Prevention of corneal drying

High caloric diet

Release of collodion membrane on digits, when necessary, to prevent reduced circulation leading to loss of digits

Prevention of chest constriction resulting from tautness of membrane to assure adequate respiration

Surveillance

Regular physical examination for evidence of infection and control of skin involvement is appropriate; frequency depends on the severity. In adults, regular surveillance for skin cancer is appropriate (cases with atypical melanocytic nevi, malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinoma have been reported) [Fernandes et al 2010, Natsuga et al 2011].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Skin irritants and overheating should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected mothers are at no specific disease-related risks during pregnancy. Anecdotal improvement of the ichthyosis with return to baseline after delivery has been reported.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Evaluation for cancer in an individual diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) should be based on personal medical histories and to some extent, the specific pattern of cancer in the family. Testing can include comprehensive physical examination, neurologic examination, blood counts, imaging studies, endoscopies, and/or biopsies. Individuals diagnosed with or suspected of having LFS based on molecular or clinical criteria should seek a clinical genetics consultation to review the diagnosis and medical management recommendations.

Treatment of Manifestations

Women with LFS who develop breast cancer are encouraged to consider bilateral mastectomies (rather than lumpectomies) in order to reduce risks of developing a second primary breast tumor and avoid exposure to radiation therapy. However, most experts recommend that treatment efficacy be prioritized above concerns about late effects after careful analysis of risks and benefits. Aside from avoiding radiation therapy, LFS-related tumors are treated according to standard protocols.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Females with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have the option of prophylactic mastectomy to reduce the risk for breast cancer [Thull & Vogel 2004]. Recent recommendations for colonoscopy may be considered surveillance as well as primary prevention of colorectal cancer. Counseling for avoidance of sun exposure, tobacco use, and exposure to other known or suspected carcinogens is encouraged.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Persons with a TP53 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid radiation therapy whenever possible in order to limit the risk for secondary radiation-induced malignancies [Evans et al 2006]. However, when radiation is considered medically necessary to improve the chance of survival from a given malignancy, it may be used at the discretion of the treating physician and patient. The concern regarding radiation carcinogenesis is based on older data. There is interest in examining risks associated with more modern techniques, which may be less carcinogenic.

Data on possible sensitivity to the carcinogenic effects of modern chemotherapy regimens are considerably more limited. In rare cases, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants have developed myelodysplastic syndrome and/or acute myeloid leukemia after treatment with radiation or chemotherapy for a prior tumor [Hisada et al 2001, Kuribayashi et al 2005, Talwalkar et al 2010].

Surveillance

Clinicians and families need to be aware that currently no monitoring regimens have been definitively proven as beneficial for children or adults with germline TP53 pathogenic variants. Nonetheless, this is an important area of ongoing investigation.

The following is recommended:

Children and adults should undergo comprehensive annual physical examination including careful skin and neurologic examinations. Clinicians should be aware of the high risks for rare, early-onset cancers and also for second malignancies in cancer survivors [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should pay close attention to any lingering symptoms and illnesses, particularly headaches, bone pain, or abdominal discomfort. When present, the individual should see a physician promptly for evaluation [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

Women should undergo breast cancer monitoring, with annual breast MRI and twice-yearly clinical breast examination beginning at age 20-25 years. The use of mammograms has been controversial because of radiation exposure and limited sensitivity. When included, annual mammograms should alternate with breast MRI, with one modality every six months [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

The following is suggested:

Adults should consider routine screening for colorectal cancer with colonoscopy every two to three years beginning no later than age 25 years [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should consider organ-targeted surveillance based on the pattern of cancer observed in their family [NCCN 2012].

In adults with LFS, a pilot trial of screening [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scans detected tumors in three of 15 individuals. However, significant concerns were raised regarding the potential adverse consequences of the radiation exposure associated with PET/CT scans [Masciari et al 2008]. For this reason, attention has shifted to the utilization of whole-body MRI for adults with TP53 pathogenic variants.

Several groups have begun to utilize an intensive screening strategy including rapid whole-body MRI, brain MRI, abdominal ultrasound examination, and biochemical markers of adrenal cortical function. Preliminary data suggest that such a surveillance protocol may improve survival of individuals with LFS through presymptomatic detection of tumors [Villani et al 2011]. However, further prospective studies are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of this protocol in adults and children with LFS.

Individuals with LFS have been surveyed regarding their attitudes toward cancer surveillance, given its lack of known clinical benefit. Most individuals believed in the value of surveillance to detect tumors at an early stage and also reported psychological benefits (specifically, a sense of control and security) associated with participation in a regular surveillance program [Lammens et al 2010b].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

There is some evidence that TP53 pathogenic variants confer an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation [Hisada et al 1998, Varley 2003, Wang et al 2003, Cohen et al 2005]. Thus, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants should avoid or minimize exposure to diagnostic and therapeutic radiation whenever possible [Varley 2003, Evans et al 2006]. Radiation-induced second malignancies have been reported among individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants [Hisada et al 1998, Limacher et al 2001, Cohen et al 2005]. Detailed studies to more formally assess this risk are in development.

Individuals with LFS are also encouraged to avoid or minimize exposures to known or suspected carcinogens, including sun exposure, tobacco use, occupational exposures, and excessive alcohol use, because the effects of carcinogenic exposures and germline TP53 pathogenic variants may be cumulative. For example, individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who smoke cigarettes have been shown to be at significantly increased risk of developing lung cancer than individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who do not smoke [Hwang et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a TP53 pathogenic variant has been identified in a family, testing of at-risk relatives can identify those family members who also have the familial pathogenic variant and thus need increased surveillance and early intervention when a cancer is identified. However, families with LFS need to be cautioned that currently no definitive evidence demonstrates a benefit for increased surveillance or early intervention.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with LFS who are pregnant should bring any potential symptoms of cancer to the attention of their physicians. Women with LFS who are pregnant can continue to have clinical breast exams and/or breast imaging studies if indicated.

There are no special recommendations for screening a fetus identified as having a germlineTP53 pathogenic variant. Once the infant is born, he or she can be evaluated for signs of cancer.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

The Li-Fraumeni Exploration (LiFE) Research Consortium, formed in 2010, is a collaborative group of clinicians, scientists, genetic counselors, and psychologists who work with families with LFS and individuals from families with LFS [Mai et al 2012].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with lipoid proteinosis (LP), the following are recommended:

Consultation with a dermatologist (or pediatric dermatologist)

Consultation with an otolaryngologist if vocal cord infiltration leads to airway obstruction, recurrent upper respiratory infections, and/or impaired speech

Evaluation for evidence of seizures if clinical findings are suggestive

Evaluation for neuropsychiatric manifestations

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no curative therapy for LP.

Microlaryngoscopic excision of laryngeal deposits improves airway access and voice quality [Harper et al 1983].

Tracheostomy on occasion is required to ensure a safe airway in patients with significant airway obstruction [Richards & Bull 1973].

Seizures should be assessed and managed by a neurologist, using antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Treatments of unproven efficacy. Although several reports have described variable success in treatment of skin and vocal cord lesions with dermabrasion, carbon dioxide laser surgery, D-penicillamine, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), corticosteroids, etretinate, acitretin, carbon dioxide laser, and surgical intervention, they are not widely used and their efficacy is unproven. Click here (pdf) for further details.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine follow up of children to monitor general health as well as psychomotor, emotional, and cognitive development

Monitoring of the airway and vocal cords by an otolaryngologist

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with lateral meningocele syndrome (LMS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Spine MRI to assess for meningoceles (if not performed at time of diagnosis) and neurosurgical assessment to evaluate the effect of lateral spinal meningocele size and location on neurologic function

Brain MRI to assess for Chiari I malformation or hydrocephalus, if not performed at time of diagnosis

Thorough physical and neurologic examination for signs of neuropathy, joint abnormalities, and abdominal hernias

Neurocognitive assessment

Assessment by general surgery for abdominal hernia repair

Assessment by orthopedic surgery for symptomatic skeletal deformities.

Visualization of the aortic arch by echocardiogram or MRI

Urologic assessment for cryptorchidism if present

Feeding assessment

Hearing assessment

Ophthalmologic assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Specific treatment for LMS does not currently exist. Supportive management of the clinical finding depends on the involved system as outlined below.

Lateral spinal meningoceles. Symptomatic treatment of neurologic sequelae (e.g., neurogenic bladder, paresthesias, back pain, and/or paraparesis) is as per routine.

Although rarely required, surgical intervention may be necessary for neurologic manifestations secondary to meningocele size and location. When required, surgical approach is individualized and can include laminectomy for smaller meningoceles and costotransversectomy for larger meningoceles [Kim et al 2011]. Of note, the 55-year-old woman with LMS experienced irreversible nerve damage following surgery for two lumbosacral meningoceles (to manage back and referred neuropathic pain) [Castori et al 2014].

Psychomotor development. Provide timely supportive interventions as needed to optimize development through occupational therapy and education resources.

Musculoskeletal

Management by specialists in chronic pain management or rehabilitation medicine as needed

Physiotherapy to reduce risk for joint subluxation and dislocation

Routine management of the following:

Cleft palate

Hearing loss

Congenital cardiac defects

Genitourinary abnormalities

GERD. Note that a feeding tube may be necessary if persistent feeding difficulties result in failure to thrive.

Surveillance

No surveillance guidelines for LMS have been published.

Ongoing monitoring by the appropriate subspecialists for neurologic, developmental, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, genitourinary, and/or gastrointestinal issues is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count to evaluate for megaloblastic anemia

Chemistry screen for uric acid concentration

Neurologic examination

Developmental/behavioral assessments

Evaluation for renal calculi, usually by ultrasound examination of the abdomen

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Hyperuricemia. The overproduction of uric acid must be controlled to reduce the risk for nephrolithiasis, urate nephropathy, gouty arthritis, and tophi. Overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid catalyzed by xanthine oxidase. The dose of allopurinol is adjusted to maintain the uric acid within normal limits.

Note: Control of serum concentration of uric acid from birth using allopurinol has no effect on behavioral and neurologic symptoms.

Allopurinol therapy results in the accumulation of hypoxanthine and xanthine; xanthine may also form stones. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid periods of relative dehydration that could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system. Stones that develop in allopurinol-treated patients are usually composed of xanthine. A uric acid stone is an index of too little allopurinol. Hypoxanthine is soluble. Therefore, oxypurine analysis is useful in adjusting doses to maximize hypoxanthine. The allopurinol metabolite oxypurinol is also insoluble, and oxypurinol crystalluria has been observed with dehydration. Its concentration can also be monitored by oxypurine analysis of the urine.

Renal stones that form despite allopurinol may require lithotripsy or surgery.

Neurologic dysfunction. Spasticity can be managed by the administration of baclofen or benzodiazepines.

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Currently, no uniformly effective intervention for managing the neurobehavioral aspects of the disease exists. Self-injurious and other deleterious behaviors are best managed by a combination of physical, behavioral [Olson & Houlihan 2000], psychiatric [Harris 2007], and medical interventions.

Because stress increases self-injury, behavioral management through aversive techniques (which reduce self-injury in other conditions) actually increases self-injury in individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Virtually all affected individuals require physical restraints to prevent self-injury and are restrained more than 75% of the time, often at their own request and sometimes with restraints that would appear to be ineffective as they do not physically prevent biting. Families report that affected individuals are at ease when restrained.

Sixty percent of individuals have their teeth extracted to avoid self-injury through biting. Families have found this to be an effective management technique. More conservative than tooth extraction are vital pulpotomy and coronal resection, which maintain the root portion of the tooth in the bone, an approach that may preserve alveolar bone [Lee et al 2002].

Behavioral extinction methods may be useful in a controlled setting for reducing self-injury, but seldom transfer well to the home setting [Harris 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Adjustment of the dose of allopurinol is required to minimize the complication of nephrolithiasis. Virtually any reduction of hyperuricemia will prevent urate nephropathy.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Monitor plasma uric acid concentration and urinary excretion of oxypurines.

Review medical history for signs or symptoms of silent or active renal stones.

Monitor affected individuals for early signs of self-injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Probenecid and other uricosuric drugs designed to reduce the serum concentration of uric acid are contraindicated because they augment the delivery of uric acid into the urinary system and raise the risk for acute anuria from deposition of uric acid crystals in the renal collecting system.

Periods of relative dehydration are to be avoided because they could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system and increase the risk for renal stones or urate nephropathy with resulting oliguria/anuria.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Prenatal testing or testing of males at risk for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome immediately after birth enables prompt initiation of allopurinol therapy.

Some carrier females develop gout in later years; thus, establishing carrier status of female relatives through genetic testing may be valuable to their clinical management.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Elimination of self-injury and partial improvement of dystonia after deep brain stimulation in the globus pallidus was reported in a single patient [Taira et al 2003]. Of the small number of other individuals who have received this treatment, only one was successful; at least one died as a result of the procedure [Author, personal observation]. Deep brain stimulation must be considered experimental at present; evaluation of more affected individuals over longer periods is required to determine its effectiveness.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Recent studies suggesting that gabapentin and carbamazepine may help attenuate self-injury and other behavioral disturbances have not been confirmed in a long-term study. Treatment with S-adenosylmethionine has led to mixed results [Dolcetta et al 2013]. Treatment with intravenous AICAR was without effect on the behavior [Page et al 1995].

No medication has been consistently effective in controlling the extrapyramidal motor features of the disease. The following have been unsuccessful in reducing neurologic or behavioral symptoms:

Partial exchange transfusion in two individuals

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). BMT in a mouse model of HPRT deficiency has had no effect on the neurologic manifestations [Wojcik et al 1999]. Bone marrow transplantation was also ineffective in humans [Nyhan et al 1986].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiography. Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size [Roman et al 1989]. Select findings may require the immediate attention of a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon (e.g., severe aortic dilatation).

MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to identify arterial aneurysms and arterial tortuosity throughout the arterial tree

Note: Approximately half of the individuals with LDS studied had an aneurysm distant from the aortic root that would not have been detected by echocardiography.

Radiographs to detect skeletal manifestations that may require attention by an orthopedist (e.g., severe scoliosis, cervical spine instability)

Craniofacial examination for evidence of cleft palate and craniosynostosis

Eye examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders that includes: slit-lamp examination through a maximally dilated pupil for exclusion of lens (sub)luxation; careful refraction and visual correction, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia; specific assessment for retinal detachment and blue sclerae

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of LDS is most effective through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a medical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Cardiovascular

All individuals with LDS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Two important considerations when managing cardiovascular features of LDS:

Aortic dissection occurs at smaller aortic diameters than observed in Marfan syndrome.

Vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root. Imaging of the complete arterial tree from the head through the pelvis by MRA or CTA is necessary.

Beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications are used to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Aneurysms are amenable to early and aggressive surgical intervention (in contrast to EDS, vascular type, in which surgery is used as a last resort because of the extremely high rate of intraoperative complications and death). Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Given the safety and the increasing availability of the valve-sparing procedure:

For young children with the most severe systemic findings of LDS, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension exceeds the 99th percentile and the aortic annulus exceeds 1.8-2.0 cm, allowing the placement of a graft of sufficient size to accommodate growth. Additional factors including family history, rate of aortic root growth and aortic valve function can influence the timing of surgery.

For adolescents and adults, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension approaches 4.0 cm. This recommendation is based on both numerous examples of documented aortic dissection in adults with aortic root dimensions at or below 4.0 cm and the excellent response to prophylactic surgery. An extensive family history of larger aortic dimension without dissection could alter this practice for individual patients.

Note: This practice may not eliminate risk of dissection and death, and earlier intervention based on family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit may be indicated.

Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary to prevent damage to the spinal cord.

Clubfeet require surgical correction by an orthopedic surgeon.

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Surgical intervention for protusio acetabulae is rarely indicated. Treatment focuses on pain control.

Orthotics are only indicated for severe pes planus. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports; others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or successful.

Craniofacial. Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team. Treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis is the same as in all other disorders with these malformations.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of LDS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Optimal management of pneumothorax to prevent recurrence may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.

Counseling regarding other life-threatening manifestations including spontaneous rupture of the spleen and bowel and the risks associated with pregnancy is recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis should be considered for individuals with connective tissue disorders and documented evidence of mitral and/or aortic regurgitation undergoing dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria.

Because of a high risk of cervical spine instability, an x-ray of the cervical spine should be performed prior to intubation or any other procedure involving manipulation of the neck.

Surveillance

All individuals with LDS require echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta. The frequency of MRA or CTA evaluations should be tailored to clinical findings.

Individuals with cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against a resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the causal TGFBR1,

TGFBR2, SMAD3, or TGFB2 pathogenic variant is identified in the proband, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify genetic status of family members at risk to identify those individuals who need regular cardiovascular follow-up screening to detect aortic aneurysm early and initiate appropriate medical or surgical intervention.

If the causal pathogenic variant is not known, relatives at risk should be evaluated for signs of the disorder. Echocardiography and extensive vascular imaging of relatives is indicated upon appreciation of any suspicious signs of LDS, and even in apparently unaffected individuals if findings are subtle in the index case.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy can be dangerous for women with LDS. Complications include aortic dissection/rupture or uterine rupture during pregnancy or delivery, or aortic dissection/rupture in the immediate postpartum period. Increased frequency of aortic imaging is recommended, both during pregnancy and in the weeks following delivery. However, with appropriate supervision and high-risk obstetrical management, women with Loeys-Dietz syndrome can tolerate pregnancy and delivery [Gutman et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Experimental evidence suggests that many manifestations of LDS relate to excess activation of and signaling by the growth factor TGFβ.

Animal trials are underway to determine whether TGFβ antagonizing agents, such as angiotensin II receptor type 1 blockers, can slow or prevent manifestations of LDS. The safety and efficacy of such interventions has not been addressed for persons with LDS.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Lowe syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Infants should be evaluated for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux, including a pH probe study.

Growth parameters should be measured and plotted on a growth chart.

An ophthalmologic evaluation is needed to assess for cataract and glaucoma. Behavior problems may necessitate the use of anesthesia for eye examinations.

Renal tubular function should be assessed by measurement of serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus and creatinine, and simultaneous urinalysis and random urine pH, electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, amino acids, protein and retinol binding protein, and/or N-acetyl glucosaminidase, if available. Interpretation of these results allows diagnosis of type 2 renal tubular acidosis, hypokalemia, phosphate wasting with decreased tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP), hypercalciuria (urine calcium/creatinine ratio >0.02), amino aciduria, albuminuria (urine dipstick positive albumin and urine protein/creatinine ratio >0.2), low molecular-weight proteinuria, and renal glomerular insufficiency (serum creatinine).

If acidosis or phosphaturia is present, serum concentration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and parathyroid hormone should be measured and bone radiographs should be obtained to evaluate for renal rickets. Bone radiographs should also be obtained in boys with bone pain or point tenderness to evaluate for fractures in the absence of rickets.

If hematuria or hypercalciuria is present, a renal ultrasound examination should be performed to screen for nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis.

Plasma carnitinine may be measured to evaluate for carnintine deficiency.

Developmental and behavioral evaluations should be completed.

An electroencephalogram (EEG) is often needed to document the exact type of seizures and to determine appropriate anticonvulsant therapy.

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of the varying clinical problems usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatric ophthalmology, nephrology, clinical biochemical genetics, metabolism, nutrition, endocrinology, neurology, child development, behavior, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved.

Eyes. Treatment of the eye problems usually requires an experienced (preferably pediatric) ophthalmologist; cataract surgeons and glaucoma specialists may also be needed.

Early removal of cataracts is recommended to promote proper visual stimulation and development. Postoperatively, eyeglasses or contact lenses help to improve vision. Surgical implantation of artificial lenses is not recommended because of the high prevalence of infantile glaucoma.

Despite management with medical and surgical measures, glaucoma is often difficult to control.

Special services for the visually handicapped should be included in any rehabilitation plan.

Central nervous system. In infancy, feeding and nutrition problems related to hypotonia may be substantial. Occasionally, nasogastric tube feedings or feeding gastrostomy, with or without fundoplication, may be necessary to achieve appropriate nutrition. Occupational or speech therapists who specialize in feeding problems may be of assistance.

Gastroesophageal reflux usually responds to standard anti-reflux measures such as thickened feedings and elevation of the head of the bed. Some individuals need medications to control gastric acidity and to promote gastric emptying; others require surgery.

Most seizure disorders can be controlled with anticonvulsant therapy.

Programs to promote optimal psychomotor development should be started in early infancy. Early childhood and preschool intervention programs, e.g., First Steps or Head Start, and later public or private school programs should evaluate the abilities and specific needs of the child and formulate an individualized educational plan (IEP). Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and language therapy, special education services, and services for the visually impaired are usually included in the plan.

A behavior modification plan along with antidepressant and/or antipsychotic medications may be needed for behavior control.

Kidney. Those individuals with renal Fanconi syndrome and type 2 renal acidosis should be treated with oral supplements of sodium and potassium bicarbonate or citrate to correct acidosis and hypokalemia. Doses need to be titrated to individual needs based on "trough" blood concentrations of serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, and total carbon dioxide). (Trough levels are blood concentrations measured just before a scheduled dose.)

Treatment with oral phosphate, along with oral calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3), is needed to correct hypophosphatemia and renal rickets of the Fanconi syndrome. Doses should also be titrated to individual needs based on trough blood concentration for phosphorus and serum concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, calcium, and intact parathyroid hormone.

An increased requirement for fluids, along with the electrolyte and bicarbonate requirements, places affected individuals at high risk for metabolic imbalance during illness (especially those associated with vomiting or diarrhea) or when fasting, e.g., with surgical procedures. At such times, intravenous replacement of fluids, bicarbonate, and electrolytes is important and may need to be done in anticipation of problems to prevent severe electrolyte disturbances and dehydration.

Progressive glomerulosclerosis likely results from progressive renal tubular injury, which eventually may lead to chronic renal failure and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) between the second and fourth decades of life [McSpadden 2000, Nussbaum & Suchy 2001]. Treatment of ESRD with chronic dialysis and renal transplant may be successful in selected patients [Tricot et al 2003]. Although experience is limited, at least seven adult men with Lowe syndrome and ESRD have been treated successfully over a few years, including three with chronic hemodialysis, one with chronic home peritoneal dialysis, and three with renal transplants [E Brewer, personal observation].

Other. Human growth hormone therapy has been used successfully to improve growth velocity in some boys [McSpadden 2000]. The potential benefits of such therapy must be weighed against its costs/limitations.

Most undescended testes descend with time into the scrotum; some require hormone therapy and/or surgical correction.

In older individuals, bracing or surgery may be needed to arrest or correct severe or progressive scoliosis and joint hypermobility.

Resection of fibromas and cutaneous cysts may be needed if they are painful, have recurrent infections, or limit function.

Surveillance

Eye evaluations should be done at regular intervals, depending on the type and severity of abnormality. No formal guidelines exist. Because approximately 50% of males either present with glaucoma or develop glaucoma in time, regardless of cataract surgery, intraocular pressure should be monitored at least every six months life-long. Presence of clinical findings suggestive of increased intraocular pressure (e.g., excessive tearing, eye rubbing, change in the clarity/transparency of the cornea) warrant prompt evaluation.

Kidney function should be assessed at least yearly with measurement of serum concentrations of electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, intact parathyroid hormone, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.

If the patient has Fanconi syndrome requiring therapy with supplemental bicarbonate or citrate, serum concentrations of phosphate or calcitriol should be measured every three to six months or more often after dose changes.

BUN and serum creatinine are appropriate screening tests to detect the onset of chronic renal failure and to monitor its progression.

Urinalysis and random urine protein, calcium, and creatinine are useful to follow proteinuria and hypercalciuria.

If the patient has renal Fanconi syndrome and bone disease, radiographs of the long bones and growth plates should be obtained at regular intervals as needed, but no more than every six months.

Growth should be monitored regularly with height/length and weight plotted on growth charts for age. Height/length and weight should be measured more frequently in infants (every 2-3 months) than in older children and adolescents who are still growing (every 3-6 months). If patients are treated with growth hormone, growth assessment every three months is indicated.

Developmental progress should be assessed and the educational plan updated twice yearly for the first three years and annually after that. Any regression in abilities should be investigated with high-resolution imaging studies of the central nervous system.

Scoliosis and joint problems should be monitored as part of a routine annual physical examination.

Dental examinations should be performed twice a year by a pediatric dentist experienced in treating children with developmental delay.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Corneal contact lenses. Because of the associated risks of corneal keloid formation and the inherent difficulties that the person with Lowe syndrome has in managing personal contact lens care, conventional eye glasses seem safer than corneal contact lenses.

Artificial lens implants. Although some infants have had primary intraocular lens implantation at the time of cataract surgery, the associated risk of glaucoma appears higher in those infants with artificial lens implants. Therefore, artificial lens implants should be used with extreme caution, with intraocular pressure carefully monitored (under anesthesia if required) on a continual basis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

To date, no effective treatment for the conjunctival and corneal keloids has been found.

Families of affected individuals are often among the most knowledgeable about the problems and needs of their son(s) and must be advocates for them. Interested professionals, families, and other caregivers may contact the Lowe Syndrome Association for literature and additional information.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with lysinuric protein intolerance, the following evaluations are recommended:

History for evidence of hyperammonemic crises with overt neurologic manifestations (vomiting, drowsiness, coma) and of respiratory involvement (cough, dyspnea, recurrent lower respiratory tract infections)

Neurologic evaluation to detect secondary neurologic damage

Respiratory evaluation including chest x-ray, pulmonary high-resolution computed tomography, and function tests

Evaluation and follow-up of growth parameters

Liver and spleen ultrasound examination to monitor liver structural changes and spleen enlargement

Hematologic evaluation (bone marrow aspirate may be required)

Immunologic assessment including plasma concentrations of immune globulins and, when clinically indicated, detection of autoimmune antibodies and immune complexes

Renal function studies

Bone density evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of individuals with LPI is similar to that described in urea cycle disorders. In LPI, the severity of hyperammonemic crises rarely requires extreme treatments such as dialysis and hemofiltration. It is recommended that individuals with LPI be cared for by a specialized metabolic team.

Treatment of Acute Hyperammonemic Crises

Pharmacologic management. Blocking the production of ammonia is accomplished by the intravenous administration of arginine chloride and of a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. An intravenous loading dose is followed by an oral maintenance dose of nitrogen scavenger drugs when the individual is stable. Depletion of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) may occur as a consequence of the therapy with sodium phenylacetate [Scaglia 2010]. Persistence of BCAA deficiency hampers protein synthesis and induces catabolism. Therefore, careful evaluation of BCAA serum levels is recommended and specific supplementation may be required. Various detailed protocols for the treatment of intercurrent hyperammonemia in individuals with urea cycle disorders and, more generally, with hyperammonemia may be adopted [Singh 2007, Häberle 2011].

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of energy supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, energy should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free formula.

Patients should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. Nasogastric tube feeding may be required to ensure adequate caloric and nutritional intake. Therapy with ondansetron can be started to decrease vomiting.

Complete restriction of protein for more than 24-48 hours is not recommended as the individual will become protein catabolic for essential amino acids.

Long-Term Treatment

Dietary protein restriction and citrulline supplementation. Current treatment consists of dietary protein restriction (0.8-1.5 g/kg/day in children and 0.5-0.8 g/kg/day in adults) and supplementation with citrulline (100 mg/kg/day, in four doses taken with meals). Nitrogen scavenger drugs such as sodium benzoate (100-250 mg/kg/day in four divided doses) should be added to keep the lowest effective dosage of citrulline. As in the management of other inherited metabolic disorders, diet must be tailored on the basis of individual tolerance for the protein charge and carefully monitored to avoid disturbances of both growth and nutritional status.

Measurement of orotic aciduria appears to be a sensitive tool for adjustment of treatment.

Lysine supplementation. As lysine deficiency may contribute to the development of pathologic signs in LPI, oral supplementation with L-lysine-HCl should be attempted. Taking into account the defective intestinal absorption of lysine in LPI, small doses of L-lysine-HCl (0.05-0.5 mmol/kg, three times per day) are given and may normalize plasma lysine concentrations [Lukkarinen et al 2003].

Carnitine supplemetation. In a recent survey of 37 Finnish patients, hypocarnitemia was found to be associated with female sex, renal insufficiency, and the use of ammonia-scavenging drugs. When documented, hypocarnitemia should be corrected (25-50 mg/kg/day) [Korman et al 2002, Tanner et al 2008].

Additional therapies. Modification of the diet and fish oil supplementation should be tried in individuals with dyslipidemia before pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia is started.

Treatment of Late Complications

While hyperammonemia can be efficiently prevented and treated, no effective therapy has been established for late complications.

Treatment of lung disease in LPI remains controversial: high-dose corticosteroid treatment was effective in a few patients when started early, whereas no response was noted in others.

In individuals with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), treatment with granulocyte/monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was shown to be ineffective or even to worsen the clinical course [Santamaria et al 2004]. Recently, increased GM-CSF and decreased bioavailability of surfactant protein D have been proposed as a part of the mechanism underlying PAP in LPI [Douda et al 2009]. Whole lung lavage still remains the best therapeutic approach for PAP in LPI [Ceruti et al 2007]; however, relapses may require serial lavage.

Heart-lung transplantation was attempted with a temporary successful result, but it did not prevent a fatal return of the lung disease [Santamaria et al 2004].

Bone marrow transplantation has been discussed as a possible treatment for PAP in LPI. The rationale of this therapeutic approach would rely on the hypothesis of a defective function of lung macrophages [Barilli et al 2010, Sebastio et al 2011].

Treatment of renal disease in LPI should follow the standard guidelines under direction of the nephrologist.

Treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/macrophagic activation syndrome in LPI should be planned under the direction of the specialist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The prevention of metabolic abnormality is the goal of the treatment. Long-term management is based on protein-restricted diet and administration of citrulline (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The onset and the clinical course of the secondary complications, such as lung and renal involvement, seem to be poorly influenced by early treatment.

Efforts to minimize the risk of respiratory infections should be promoted.

An individual with LPI without previous history of chickenpox or varicella zoster should be vaccinated or, if exposed to varicella, treated as an immune-compromised person.

Some individuals with LPI may respond poorly to polysaccharide-containing vaccines. Therefore, revaccination may be required if specific antibody titers are non-protective.

Surveillance

Individuals with LPI should be referred for follow-up to physicians with expertise in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism. The age of the patient and the severity of the clinical features determine the frequency of clinical visits and monitoring.

Monitoring should include the following:

Plasma concentrations of amino acids to identify deficiencies of essential amino acids induced by the protein-restricted diet (similar to that used in urea cycle disorders)

Attention to early signs of hyperammonemia including lethargy, nausea, vomiting, and poor feeding in young children, and headache and mood changes in older children

Fasting and postprandial blood ammonia concentrations

Urinary orotic acid excretion

Evaluation of renal function

Attention to early clinical signs of lung involvement

Serum concentrations of LDH and ferritin

The development of a multiorgan pathology in LPI requires careful surveillance of several complications including lung and renal diseases and osteoporosis. No specific guidelines have been proposed. Therefore, a tailored approach is necessary for the follow-up of a specific complication.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Large boluses of protein or amino acids should be avoided.

It is not clear whether prolonged fasting may trigger hyperammonemic crises.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk sibs in order to reduce morbidity and mortality through early diagnosis and treatment.

When molecular testing is not available, early diagnosis of at-risk sibs relies on careful clinical evaluation and determination of plasma and urinary amino acid concentrations and orotic acid urinary excretion.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Alendronate. Osteopenia leading to osteoporosis is a major feature of LPI. Many individuals with LPI show osteopenia or osteoporosis despite treatment. Treatment with alendronate has recently been attempted in a child with LPI [Gömez et al 2006].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No treatment, including strict compliance with dietary regimen, citrulline supplementation, or high-dose corticosteroids, is effective in influencing the clinical course of the renal disease.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency, measurement of plasma triglyceride concentration is recommended.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Medical nutrition therapy. Morbidity and mortality can be prevented by maintaining plasma triglyceride concentration at less than 2000 mg/dL; a good clinical goal is less than 1000 mg/dL [Viljoen & Wierzbicki 2012]. Restriction of dietary fat to no more than 20 g/day or 15% of total energy intake is usually sufficient to reduce plasma triglyceride concentration and to keep the individual with familial LPL deficiency free of symptoms.

Medium-chain triglycerides may be used for cooking, as they are absorbed directly into the portal vein without becoming incorporated into chylomicron triglyceride.

The success of therapy depends on the individual's acceptance of the fat restriction, including both unsaturated and saturated fat. Note: Fish oil supplements, which are effective in disorders of excess hepatic triglyceride production, are not effective in LPL deficiency and are contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

The enlarged liver and spleen can return to normal size within one week of lowering of triglyceride concentrations.

The xanthomas can clear over the course of weeks to months. Recurrent or persistent eruptive xanthomas indicate inadequate therapy.

Pancreatitis associated with the chylomicronemia syndrome is treated in the manner typical for other forms of pancreatitis.

Discontinuation of oral fat intake stops chylomicron triglyceride formation, and replacement with hypocaloric parenteral nutrition decreases VLDL triglyceride production.

Administration of excess calories, as in hyperalimentation, is contraindicated in the acute state. The intravenous administration of lipid emulsions may lead to persistent or recurrent pancreatitis.

If recurrent pancreatitis with severe hypertriglyceridemia occurs, total dietary fat intake needs to be reduced.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of recurrent acute pancreatitis decreases the risk of developing diabetes mellitus. Fat malabsorption is very rare.

Surveillance

Plasma triglyceride levels need to be followed over time to evaluate the affected individual’s success in following the very low-fat dietary recommendations. When the triglyceride level is above 1000 mg/dL, a fasting sample is not required for this evaluation. Other components of the lipid profile do not need to be routinely measured.

Affected individuals who develop abdominal pain need to contact their physician.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoidance of agents known to increase endogenous triglyceride concentration such as alcohol, oral estrogens, diuretics, isotretinoin, glucocorticoids, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and beta-adrenergic blocking agents is recommended.

Fish oil supplements are contraindicated as they contribute to chylomicron levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs during infancy. Early diagnosis and implementation of dietary fat intake restriction can prevent symptoms and related medical complications.

Evaluations can include:

Measurement of plasma triglyceride concentration;

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

During pregnancy in a woman with LPL deficiency, extreme dietary fat restriction to less than two grams per day during the second and third trimester with close monitoring of plasma triglyceride concentration can result in delivery of a normal infant with normal plasma concentrations of essential fatty acids [Al-Shali et al 2002].

One woman with LPL deficiency delivered a normal child following a one-gram per day fat diet and treatment with gemfibrozil (600 mg/day) [Tsai et al 2004]. Despite concerns about the possibility of essential fatty acid deficiency in the newborn, normal essential fatty acids were found in cord blood, as were normal levels of fibrate metabolites.

See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

LPL gene therapy is available in Europe and the US for the treatment of familial LPL deficiency. It consists of the LPL Ser447Ter variant in an adeno-associated virus serotype 1 (alipogene tiparvovec). Twenty percent of the general population has the Ser447Ter allelic variant, which results in a prematurely truncated LPL that is associated with increased lipolytic function and an anti-atherogenic lipid profile and can therefore be regarded as a naturally occurring gain-of-function variant (reviewed by Gaudet et al [2013]). Note that the standard nomenclature for this variant is NP_000228.1:p.Ser474Ter (NM_000237.2:c.1421C>G). Several other targeted therapies are in development or under investigation, including inhibitors of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) [Sacks et al 2014], diacylglycerol acyl transferase 1 (DGAT1) [Meyers et al 2015], apoC-III [Gaudet et al 2014], and angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3) [Gryn & Hegele 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The lipid-lowering drugs that are used to treat other disorders of lipid metabolism are not effective in individuals with familial LPL deficiency.

Although plasmapheresis and antioxidant therapy have been suggested as treatment for pancreatitis, they do not appear to be needed for either acute therapy or long-term care.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LRRK2-related Parkinson disease (PD), neurologic examination should include assessment of the following:

Tremor

Rigidity

Bradykinesia

Gait

Mental status

Medical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment of individuals with LRRK2-related PD does not differ from that of idiopathic PD.

The mainstay of treatment is pharmacologic replacement of dopamine, most commonly accomplished with the precursor of dopamine, L-dopa, combined with carbi-dopa.

Dopamine agonists may also be used, as well as inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B).

The motor impairment generally responds well to dopamine therapy (agonists and levodopa).

Other medications include anticholinergics, selegiline, and amantadine [Lang & Lozano 1998a, Lang & Lozano 1998b, Hristova & Koller 2000, Marjama-Lyons & Koller 2001, Olanow & Stocchi 2004].

Neurosurgical procedures such as deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus/globus pallidus interna or pallido-pontine nucleus benefit some individuals in whom dyskinesias or gait disoders are especially problematic. Less commonly, pallidotomy (or, rarely, fetal brain transplant to the caudate nucleus) may also provide benefit [Esselink et al 2004, Schüpbach et al 2007, Gómez-Esteban et al 2008, Munhoz et al 2009].

Individuals with Parkinson disease may benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.

To date, limited effective treatment exists for non-motor findings, which can be extremely disabling.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most common complication from L-dopa therapy is dyskinesias, for which deep-brain stimulation has proven helpful [Aasly et al 2005, Gosal et al 2005, Hernandez et al 2005, Goldwurm et al 2006, Ishihara et al 2006, Tomiyama et al 2006].

Other preventions for L-dopa induced dyskinesias include constant drug delivery/stimulation (CDD/CDS) [Jenner 2008], reduction of levodopa doses [Goetz et al 1982] and the use of dopamine receptor agonists [Holloway & Frank 2004, Holloway et al 2004].

Surveillance

Annual neurologic examination should assess gait, tremor, rigidity, cognition, and mood.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism in LRRK2-related PD, as in PD in general.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Lrrk2 protein is a fusion of Rab (Roc), COR and kinase (MAPK) domains, and pathogenic variants are postulated to augment kinase activity [Kachergus et al 2005, West et al 2005, Gloeckner et al 2006, Greggio et al 2006]. Hence, the development of specific kinase inhibitors offers an attractive therapeutic target for neuroprotection in asymptomatic and affected LRRK2 heterozygotes, and for idiopathic PD [Albrecht 2005, Toft et al 2005]. A number of inhibitors are being developed; however, selectivity, specificity, and delivery into the central nervous system remain difficult issues to address [Lee et al 2010b]. Moreover, LRRK2 kinase inhibition may lead to complications that affect the lung and kidney [Herzig et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LTBP4-related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of lung function, including oxygen saturation, spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity

Chest x-ray or high-resolution CT scan

Ultrasound examination of the genitourinary tract

Bladder ultrasound examination to diagnose multiple bladder diverticula

Echocardiography

Physiotherapeutic evaluation (hypotonia, hyperlaxity)

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

On clinical indication:

Bronchoscopy

Visualization of the gastrointestinal tract by gastrographin ingestion or enema

Pulmonary vessel angiogram

If necessary, bladder ultrasound can be complemented with a voiding cystoureterogram. Due to the potential presence of urethral diverticula, catheterization should be done carefully. Intravenous pyelogram may be an alternative.

Treatment of Manifestations

Experience in treating patients with LTBP4-related cutis laxa is very limited. Treatment is largely symptomatic. A reasonable approach to treatment could include the following:

Pulmonary

Symptomatic treatment of pulmonary emphysema with inhaled corticosteroids, atropine, and selective β2-adrenergic bronchodilation

Oxygen supplementation if necessary

Gastrointestinal

Medical treatment of gastroesophageal reflux to reduce discomfort and reactive bronchospasms

Feeding of mother’s milk in infants to maximize passive immunization

Dietary advice, sufficient fluid intake and, if necessary, osmotic laxatives to avoid chronic constipation

Genitourinary

Education on complete bladder emptying when voiding

Antibiotic prophylaxis in case of incomplete voiding and recurrent urinary tract infections

Pelvic floor strengthening by physical therapy may help to prevent prolapse of pelvic organs

Consideration of artificial bladder implantation (performed in 1 patient)

Cardiovascular

Care by a (pediatric) cardiologist with experience in connective tissue pathology

Treatment of clinically relevant pulmonary artery stenosis (preferably by catheterization which is minimally invasive and needs a shorter period of anesthesia)

Medical treatment of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., by sildenafil)

Other

Surgical treatment of congenital diaphragmatic hernia or severe hiatal hernia

Caution in surgical treatment of cutis laxa and inguinal or umbilical hernia, as the risk of recurrence is likely to be high (i.e., similar to that observed in other cutis laxa syndromes) and mechanical ventilation used during the procedure may aggravate pulmonary emphysema

Physical therapy for muscle strength and joint stability

Psychosocial support

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Immunize against respiratory infections (influenza, Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influenza).

Passive immunization for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) with palivizumab may be considered during the RSV season.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of pulmonary function and oxygenation, at least yearly, or more frequently if indicated clinically

Repeat imaging of:

Gastrointestinal tract

Urinary tract

Cardiovascular system

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Positive pressure ventilation unless needed to treat life-threatening conditions

Isometric exercise and contact sports or activities that increase the risk for blunt abdominal trauma and/or joint injury or pain

People with respiratory infections

Sunbathing or tanning in order to preserve any residual skin elasticity

Smoking, which can result in rapid, severe loss of lung function in persons with LTBP4-related cutis laxa

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. In one family, recurrent spontaneous abortions have been noted.

Pregnancy Management

Affected mother. To date pregnancy has been observed in one affected female with an unaffected fetus. The pregnancy was uneventful, but delivery was induced because of elevated maternal blood pressure. Delivery was vaginal with normal healing and no signs of prolapse. Two years after delivery both the mother and her son were doing well.

Despite evidence for the possibility of relatively normal pregnancy, a risk of aggravation of cardiopulmonary manifestations, and increased risk of both uterine rupture and exacerbation of pelvic floor/organ insufficiency including uterine, bladder, and rectal prolapse cannot be excluded based on this single case. Therefore, it is recommended that follow up of pregnancy and the postnatal period be done in a high-risk obstetric care unit with experience in connective tissue disorders.

Affected fetus

Major complications, such as preterm premature rupture of membranes, have not been reported during pregnancy with affected fetuses.

Polyhydramnios has been described in two instances in association with esophageal tortuosity or diverticulosis [Callewaert et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SHOX deficiency, physical examination with attention to the following is indicated [Rappold et al 2007, Binder 2011]:

Growth parameters. Height, arm span, and sitting height. Calculate extremities to trunk ratio or sitting height to height ratio (see Diagnosis).

Assessment of pubertal stage in preadolescents to determine if use of recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) is appropriate

Madelung deformity. Prominence of distal ulna, limitation of forearm pronation and supination, and wrist pain

Scoliosis

Body mass index that is frequently above the mean; mainly because of shortening of the legs

Treatment of Manifestations

Short stature

For prepubertal children with short stature, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH therapy) (dose 50 µg/kg body weight/day) should be offered. The therapeutic effect is a gain in final height of 7 to 10 cm. Hand/wrist radiographs for bone age determination should be taken at the initial visit and annually during rhGH therapy to assess maturation tempo.

Treatment with high-dose rhGH augments the growth of children with SHOX deficiency to the same extent as in Turner syndrome according to a two-year randomized controlled trial [Blum et al 2007]. This effect caused a similar gain in final height as well [Blum et al 2013]. No adverse radiologic effects were noted in those who were treated.

Painful bilateral Madelung deformity (uncommon)

Conservative management consists of wrist splints and supports during periods of increased discomfort and the use of ergonomic devices, such as ergonomic computer key boards. These measures may reduce wrist discomfort, but do not alter the natural history of the deformity [Fagg 1988, Schmidt-Rohlfing et al 2001].

Different operative procedures have been attempted to decrease pain, and restore wrist function [Anton et al 1938]; although Anton et al did not recommend operating until skeletal maturity because of concern that surgery at an early age may result in further deformity, Vickers & Nielsen [1992] and Schmidt-Rohlfing et al [2001] reported encouraging results from prophylactic physiolysis of the ulnar (lateral) aspect of the distal radius and excision of the Vickers ligament during mid-to-late childhood. Their rationale for early intervention is to alter the natural history of the deformity by excising the area of dyschondrosteosis in the distal radius, thus restoring growth in the distal radius [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. They reported decreased pain, increased function, and a reduction in wrist deformity following surgery over a period of 15 months to 12 years of follow up. They also speculate that MRI may allow for the early detection and subsequent removal of the Vickers ligament, an abnormal fibro-elastic ligament that runs from the lunate to the ulna aspect of the distal radius that may play a central role in the development of Madelung deformity [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. Similar results have been reported by Carter & Ezaki [2000] when a dome osteotomy of the radial metaphysis is combined with release of the Vickers ligament [Carter & Ezaki 2000].

Surveillance

The growth of a child with SHOX deficiency should be monitored every six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

If Madelung deformity is associated with discomfort, physical activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and sports that strain the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought [Fagg 1988].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the siblings of a patient with SHOX deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those who would also benefit from recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with craniofacial microsomia (CFM), the authors recommend the following evaluations:

Upper airway obstruction. Evaluate all individuals with CFM for clinical findings of upper-airway obstruction with physical examination to assess for tachypnea, stridor, stertor, glossoptosis (e.g., tongue-based upper airway obstruction) increased work of breathing with visible retractions, and/or episodic upper-airway obstruction with apnea.

Children with findings of upper-airway obstruction should be referred to a craniofacial center and/or otolaryngologist.

For those without obvious findings of upper-airway obstruction, a sleep history should be obtained from caretakers to screen for airway obstruction during sleep, and a sleep study and/or sleep medicine consultation should be pursued in those with concerning reports.

Clinical feeding and nutrition evaluation. Assess the nutritional status of the infant/child as part of the general physical examination with weight and height plotted on standard growth charts.

If the child demonstrates both normal parameters for age and normal rate of growth, no further studies are needed.

If the child’s rate of growth and/or current measurements is below the fifth percentile, consultation with a clinical dietitian/nutritionist should be considered. Caretakers should be queried regarding feeding history with particular attention to inadequate suction with breast/bottle feeding, nasal regurgitation, coughing or choking during meals, or recurrent pneumonia. If any of these findings are reported, evaluation by a clinical feeding specialist (often occupational therapist or speech pathologist) and/or videofluoroscopic swallowing study is indicated.

Hearing evaluation. An ear-specific diagnostic hearing evaluation (with either brain stem auditory evoked response or otoacoustic air emissions) in the first two months of life is recommended (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss). Timing of subsequent hearing evaluations should be determined by the patient’s results and medical history.

Cervical spine films. Perform screening cervical spine imaging at age three years, or earlier if there are concerns (e.g., torticollis). If there are abnormalities on the radiographs, referral to an orthopedist is indicated.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis and yearly thereafter with annual physical examination. Radiographs should be obtained for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Echocardiogram. If there are concerns based on history or physical examination, obtain an echocardiogram.

Renal ultrasound examination. A screening renal ultrasound examination should be obtained at the time of diagnosis.

Treatment of Manifestations

For optimal outcome children with CFM require timely and coordinated assessments and interventions. Ideally, children should be managed by an experienced multidisciplinary craniofacial team that includes the following (in alphabetical order):

Audiologist

Dietitian

Clinical geneticist and genetic counselor

Nurse coordinator

Ophthalmologist

Oral and maxillofacial surgeon

Orthodontist

Orthopedist

Otolaryngologist

Pediatric dentist

Pediatrician

Plastic and reconstructive surgeon

Psychosocial professionals (psychologist, social worker)

Speech pathologist

The goals of treatment for CFM are to assure adequate respiratory support and nutritional status, maximize hearing and communication, optimize development, improve facial symmetry, and treat dental malocclusion. Treatment is age dependent, with time-sensitive interventions at appropriate stages of craniofacial growth and development. Treatment plans should be individually tailored to ensure the best results.

The phenotype in CFM is quite variable (see Table 1 for associated anomalies). Details of common surgical interventions have been reviewed elsewhere [Birgfeld & Heike 2012]. The following medical issues may need to be addressed in an individual with CFM:

Feeding. Infants with significant micrognathia, macrostomia, or a cleft palate may have difficulty with feeding and may require specialized bottles designed for infants with cleft palate and/or dysphagia (e.g., Habermann feeder, Mead-Johnson Squeeze bottle, Pigeon nipple, Dr. Brown nipples), supplemental nasogastric (NG) feedings, and gastrostomy tube placement. Consultation with an infant feeding specialist and/or dietitian should be considered.

Respiratory

Infants with severe mandibular hypoplasia may have significant upper-airway compromise and require tracheostomy placement and/or early mandibular advancement. Referral to a craniofacial center or otolaryngologist is recommended.

Those children with moderate mandibular hypoplasia may develop obstructive sleep apnea and require either medical (CPAP) or surgical (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy or mandibular surgery) intervention.

Face. Surgical repair is often recommended for facial tags and macrostomia within the first year. Surgery for palatal clefts typically occurs within the first year although this may be deferred for children with respiratory compromise.

Jaw and teeth

Good oral hygiene is especially important for children with CFM. Children should have consistent primary preventative dental care.

Orthodontic evaluations are important to assess for missing teeth, dental crowding, jaw growth, and dental malocclusion. Some children may need one or more dental appliances or braces to optimize facial growth, dental appearance, and function.

Children with mandibular hypoplasia may require a bone graft and/or mandibular distraction osteogenesis to lengthen the mandible and/or create a functional TMJ. In a child without airway compromise, these options may be considered when the child is between ages five and seven years.

The use of functional dental appliances to try and influence facial growth, vertical alveolar growth, and dental eruption in the younger patient may be considered, depending on the patient. When facial and jaw growth is nearly complete (age 13 to 16 years), most children with CFM require orthodontics, and many benefit from a final orthognathic surgery to create skeletal symmetry.

Hearing

All infants with CFM should have a diagnostic hearing evaluation (brain stem auditory evoked response [BAER]) within the first six months of life (regardless of whether the child passed the newborn hearing screen). Timing and type of additional testing depend on results from this initial evaluation and the child’s medical history. Early referral to an otolaryngologist is recommended. Early intervention for infants with hearing loss is important to optimize speech and language outcome.

Children with hearing impairment should receive guidance regarding recommendations for hearing aids, appropriate academic accommodations, and avoidance of ototoxic medications to prevent further hearing loss.

Conductive hearing loss, related to aural atresia in which the ossicles may be poorly formed or absent, may be treated with hearing aids. Children with unilateral conductive hearing loss and normal hearing in the contralateral ear are frequently not treated with amplification; however, their speech and language should be monitored closely.

Prior to planning external ear surgery, the authors recommend obtaining a CT scan to assess the middle- and inner-ear structures to help determine if atresia repair is likely to improve hearing. This surgery typically occurs after age five years. The CT may also reveal cholesteatomas, which occur in a small proportion of children with aural atresia.

Children with unilateral aural atresia should have serial screening (with hearing evaluations and tympanoscopy) to ensure maximal hearing of the unaffected ear.

Individuals with eustachian tube dysfunction should continue to have hearing and otologic status monitored, with a low threshold for placing tympanostomy tube(s).

Speech. Children with CFM may have cranial nerve palsies, clefts of the palate, malocclusion, and muscular deficiencies that can contribute to abnormal speech patterns (including velopharyngeal insufficiency). The authors recommend a speech evaluation prior to age two years, and ongoing monitoring by a speech and language pathologist.

Ears. Surgical options for treating ear malformations include auricular reconstruction or creation of a prosthetic ear. Options for management of microtia include the following:

No action

Prosthetic management, either adhesive or implant-retained

Staged surgical reconstruction, using autogenous rib or a synthetic framework

Because adult ear height is achieved by age six to eight years, surgical reconstruction or prosthetic management is often considered after age six years. Ear reconstruction should be coordinated with jaw surgeries for optimal long-term outcomes.

Eyes. Individuals with congenital or acquired epibulbar dermoids (pinkish-white growth on the sclerae) should be referred to the ophthalmologist. Large epibulbar dermoids and those that interfere with vision may require excision.

Cardiac. Children with physical examination findings suggestive of a cardiac anomaly should receive a timely referral to a pediatric cardiologist.

Renal. Individuals with renal anomalies should be referred to a nephrologist.

Skeletal

Children should undergo screening with four-view cervical spine radiographs (i.e., AP, lateral, flexion, and extension) at age three years when the bones are ossified. Those with anomalies should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis with annual physical examination. The authors recommend obtaining radiographs for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Family and social support. Children with CFM may be at increased risk for psychosocial difficulties [Maris et al 1999]. Social workers can provide support and guidance to children and their families, such as accessing community resources, making decisions about surgery, and adjusting to having facial differences.

Surveillance

Click here (pdf) for an overview of the common medical and surgical management recommendations for children with craniofacial microsomia (Adapted from Birgfeld & Heike [2012], published with permission from Semin Plast Surg).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with any degree of hearing loss. Avoid exposure to ototoxic drugs.

Individuals with cervical spine anomalies. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

Individuals with a single kidney. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

For subsequent pregnancies of a woman who has had a child with CFM

Avoid vasoactive medications (pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, ibuprofen, and aspirin);

Manage diabetes mellitus to maintain good control and avoid hyperglycemia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Majeed syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Skeletal radiographs, if not already performed

CBC, if not already performed

Bone marrow biopsy if significant anemia is present

Examination of the skin

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Because of the rarity of Majeed syndrome, treatment is empiric.

CRMO is treated as follows:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which provide moderate improvement. If there is an inadequate response to NSAIDs, corticosteroids are useful in controlling CRMO and skin manifestations; however, their long-term use in children is limited by side effects such as growth delay and cataracts.

Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors and bisphosphonates have been reported to improve sporadic CRMO; however, the two individuals with Majeed syndrome treated with TNF-alpha inhibitors did not improve [Herlin et al 2013]. To date, bisphosphonates have not been used to treat individuals with Majeed syndrome; thus, their efficacy in this disorder is unknown.

The same two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al who failed to improve with TNF blockade did respond to IL-1 blockade (IL-1 receptor antagonist [anakinra] and IL-1β antibody [canakinumab]) with clinical, radiographic, and laboratory evidence of improvement [Herlin et al 2013].

Physical therapy to avoid disuse atrophy of muscles or contractures

CDA is treated with periodic monitoring with complete blood count (CBC) and blood transfusion if indicated. One patient had a splenectomy, after which the anemia markedly improved. In the two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al [2013] it is unclear if the CDA completely resolved, as a repeat bone marrow biopsy was not performed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical therapy can help to prevent contractures.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine CBC to determine if red blood cell transfusion is necessary

Regular pediatric care

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged bed rest should be avoided because it can result in joint contractures and disuse atrophy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Three patients were treated with colchicine for four months with no improvement.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with MUTYH -associated polyposis (MAP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of personal medical history with emphasis on those features related to MAP (or colorectal cancer): colon polyps with the majority being adenomas, colon cancer, rectal bleeding, abdominal pain and discomfort, bloating, diarrhea

Colonoscopy and review of pathology

Upper endoscopy and review of pathology

Baseline thyroid ultrasound examination at time of diagnosis as suggested by the Cleveland Clinic study [LaGuardia et al 2011]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

In general, the treatment regarding gastrointestinal tumors is similar to that of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and atypical familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) (see APC-Related Polyposis).

Colon polyps and colon cancer. Colonoscopy is effective surveillance for colon cancer; suspicious polyps should be removed (polypectomy) until polypectomy alone cannot manage the large size and density of the polyps. At that point either subtotal colectomy or proctocolectomy is performed based on polyp features and location [Lipton & Tomlinson 2006, Sampson & Jones 2009].

Duodenal polyps. Management of polyps is similar to individuals with FAP. In particular, large polyps or those polyps showing dysplasia or villous changes should be excised during endoscopy.

Abnormal thyroid findings should be evaluated by a thyroid specialist to determine what combination of monitoring, surgery, and/or fine needle aspiration (FNA) is appropriate [Cleveland Clinic study: LaGuardia et al 2011].

Surveillance

Individuals with Biallelic Germline 

In the US-based National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines [NCCN 2012]:

Pan colonoscopy should be performed every one to two years beginning at age 25-30 years. Following surgery, endoscopy of any remaining colon or rectum should be performed every one to two years.

Upper endoscopy and side viewing duodenoscopy should be performed every three to five years beginning at age 30-35 years.

At this time there is no consensus regarding screening intervals for thyroid abnormalities [LaGuardia et al 2011].

Regarding extraintestinal malignancies, to date no specific surveillance beyond existing protocols that are offered to the general population in most Western countries is recommended.

In Europe:

Recommended ages at which screening should begin differ based on the consensus meeting in Mallorca [Vasen et al 2008] (full text; registration or institutional access required):

Pan colonoscopy beginning at age 18-20 years

Upper endoscopy with side viewing duodenoscopy beginning at age 25-30 years

Recommended intervals between screenings depend on disease severity [Spigelman et al 1989]

Individuals Heterozygous for a Germline 

NCCN guidelines do not propose specific screening recommendations for individuals heterozygous for a germline MUTYH pathogenic variant.

Available data suggest that heterozygous relatives of individuals with MAP have a two- or at most threefold increase in their risk for colorectal cancer at an age similar to that in the general population (see Clinical Description, MUTYH heterozygotes). Thus, they are expected to benefit from population screening measures or could be offered average moderate-risk colorectal screening based on their family history [Jones et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an individual with genetically confirmed MAP by molecular genetic testing of the MUTYH pathogenic variants identified in the proband in order to reduce morbidity and mortality in those who would benefit from appropriate surveillance, early diagnosis, and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Marfan syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome, including:

Slit lamp examination through a maximally dilated pupil to see lens subluxation

Refraction and visual correction, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia

Specific assessment for glaucoma and cataract

Evaluation for skeletal manifestations that may require immediate attention by an orthopedist (e.g., severe scoliosis)

Echocardiography

Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size. Click here.

Selected findings may require the immediate attention of a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon (e.g., severe valve dysfunction, severe aortic dilatation, congestive heart failure, history or evidence suggestive of arrhythmia).

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is most effectively accomplished through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Eye

The ocular manifestations should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome.

Most often, eye problems can be adequately controlled with eyeglasses alone.

Lens dislocation can require surgical aphakia (removal of lens) if the lens is freely mobile or the margin of the lens obstructs vision. An artificial lens can be implanted once growth is complete. While this procedure is currently considered quite safe when performed in specialized centers, major complications, including retinal detachment, can occur.

Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Skeletal

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; in rare circumstances, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Protusio acetabulae can be associated with pain or functional limitations. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated.

Pes planus is often associated with inward rotation at the ankle, contributing to difficulty with ambulation, leg fatigue, and muscle cramps. Orthotics are indicated only in severe cases. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports, while others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or fully successful.

Dental crowding may require orthodontia or use of a palatal expander.

Use of hormone supplementation to limit adult height is rarely requested or considered. Complications can include the psychosocial burden of accelerated puberty, an accelerated rate of growth prior to final closure of the growth plate, and perhaps the undesirable consequences of the increased blood pressure associated with puberty on progression of aortic dilatation. This treatment should only be considered when an extreme height is anticipated. Marfan syndrome-specific growth curves now allow accurate prediction of adult height [Erkula et al 2002].

Cardiovascular

Cardiovascular manifestations should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with Marfan syndrome.

Surgical repair of the aorta is indicated once: (1) the maximal measurement approaches 5.0 cm in adults or older children, (2) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (3) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. More aggressive therapy may be indicated in individuals with a family history of early aortic dissection. Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Surgical guidelines for young children with Marfan syndrome are based upon far less clinical experience than for adults and older children, and need to be tailored to the clinical situation at hand. Aortic root surgery should be considered once: (1) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (2) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. While there is no agreed upon absolute size threshold for the aortic root, many centers use the adult guideline of 5.0 cm given the extreme rarity of aortic dissection in young children. Every effort is made to allow the aortic annulus to reach a size of at least 2.0 cm, allowing placement of an aortic graft of sufficient size to accommodate body growth. Severe and progressive mitral valve regurgitation with attendant ventricular dysfunction is the leading indication for cardiovascular surgery in children with Marfan syndrome. In this circumstance, caution is warranted when considering concomitant aortic root surgery, as the increased length and complexity of the procedure can put extra strain on the myocardium and delay or compromise postoperative recovery.

When congestive heart failure is present, afterload-reducing agents (in combination with a beta-blocker) can improve cardiovascular function, but surgical intervention may be indicated in refractory cases. Most often the mitral valve can be repaired, rather than replaced.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize this risk.

Pneumothorax can be a recurrent problem. Optimal management may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Medications that reduce hemodynamic stress on the aortic wall, such as beta-blockers, are routinely prescribed. This therapy should be managed by a cardiologist or geneticist familiar with its use. Therapy is generally initiated at the time of diagnosis with Marfan syndrome at any age or upon appreciation of progressive aortic root dilatation even in the absence of a definitive diagnosis. The dose needs to be titrated to effect, keeping heart rate after submaximal exercise or agitation lower than 110 in young children or lower than 100 in older children or adults.

Verapamil or other calcium channel blockers have been suggested if beta-blockers cannot be used (e.g., in individuals with asthma) or are not tolerated (e.g., prolonged lethargy, depression). Data documenting either the efficacy or safety of this approach in people with Marfan syndrome are very limited.

Yetman et al [2005] suggested that use of ACE inhibitors may be more beneficial than beta-blockers. Of note, the treatments were not randomized and the dose of beta-blocker was not titrated to effect. ACE inhibitors have been used for decades in Marfan syndrome to manage volume overload resulting from valve dysfunction, and (unlike beta-blockers) have not previously been reported to provide notable protection from progressive aortic enlargement.

There is at least some theoretic concern that reducing afterload without a concomitant reduction in inotropy (as provided by a beta-blocker) could increase hemodynamic stress in the ascending aorta. Currently, afterload-reducing agents are only commonly used in conjunction with a beta-blocker to manage volume overload in the setting of valve dysfunction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Judicious use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is indicated for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria in the presence of mitral or aortic valve regurgitation.

Surveillance

Eye. An annual ophthalmologic examination should include a specific assessment for glaucoma and cataracts.

Skeletal. Individuals with severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.

Cardiovascular. Echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta is indicated:

Yearly examinations when the aortic dimension is relatively small and the rate of aortic dilation is relatively slow

More frequent examinations when the aortic root diameter exceeds approximately 4.5 centimeters in adults, the rate of aortic dilation exceeds approximately 0.5 cm per year, and significant aortic regurgitation is present

More frequent evaluations by a cardiologist are indicated with severe or progressive valve or ventricular dysfunction or with documented or suspected arrhythmia.

All individuals with Marfan syndrome should begin intermittent surveillance of the entire aorta with CT or MRA scans in young adulthood. Such imaging should be performed at least annually in anyone with a history of aortic root replacement or dissection.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise. Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants. Caffeine can aggravate a tendency for arrhythmia.

Agents that cause vasoconstriction, including triptans

LASIK correction of visual deficits

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Relatives of an individual with Marfan syndrome should be evaluated for signs of the disorder. Molecular genetic evaluation of relatives at risk is possible if the FBN1 pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband.

Echocardiography of relatives is indicated upon appreciation of any suspicious signs of Marfan syndrome, and even in apparently unaffected individuals if findings are subtle in the index case. It is generally appropriate to delay echocardiography for infants and toddlers until they can cooperate with the examination without needing sedation. Exceptions include those with evidence of valve dysfunction and/or congestive heart failure.

Note: All first-degree relatives of an individual with apparent isolated aortic enlargement should be evaluated by echocardiography.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy should only be considered after appropriate counseling from a clinical geneticist or cardiologist familiar with this condition, a genetic counselor, and a high-risk obstetrician because of the risk of more rapid dilation of the aorta or aortic dissection either during pregnancy or delivery, or in the immediate postpartum period. This is especially relevant to women who begin pregnancy with a maximal aortic dimension that exceeds 4.0 cm. Note: Some women with Marfan syndrome and aortic root dilatation opt for elective aortic repair with a valve-sparing procedure prior to reaching a conventional threshold for surgical intervention (i.e. at a root dimension <5.0cm) before becoming pregnant.

Pregnant women with Marfan syndrome should be followed by a high risk obstetrician both during pregnancy and through the immediate postpartum period.

In women with Marfan syndrome who anticipate pregnancy or become pregnant, beta blockers should be continued, but some other classes of medications such as ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers should be stopped because of the risk for fetal loss and birth defects.

Effort should be made to minimize cardiovascular stress through pregnancy and delivery.

Cardiovascular imaging with echocardiography should be performed every two to three months during pregnancy to monitor aortic root size and growth. Monitoring should continue in the immediate postpartum period due to an increased risk for aortic dissection.

The choice between a controlled vaginal delivery and cesarean section remains controversial.

Therapies Under Investigation

Studies in animal models of Marfan syndrome have demonstrated excessive activation of and signaling by the growth factor TGFβ. Systemic administration of TGFβ antagonists can attenuate or prevent many disease manifestations in fibrillin-1-deficient mice including emphysema, skeletal muscle myopathy, myxomatous valve disease, and aortic aneurysm. Losartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker, can also decrease TGFβ signaling. Losartan has shown the ability to halt abnormal aortic root growth in mouse models of Marfan syndrome [Habashi et al 2006]. This effect associates with both a reduction in hemodynamic stress and antagonism of TGFβ signaling in the vessel wall. A small observational study of losartan in children with severe Marfan syndrome showed a reduction in aortic root growth with the combination of beta blockers and losartan, when compared to prior medical monotherapy including both beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors [Brooke et al 2008]. Subsequently, multiple prospective trials have shown that the combination of beta blockers and losartan affords better protection against aortic root enlargement than beta blockers alone in both children and adults with Marfan syndrome [Chiu et al 2013, Groenink et al 2013, Pees et al 2013]. A large multicenter clinical trial of losartan versus atenolol in Marfan syndrome is ongoing in the United States [Lacro et al 2007].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MBD5 haploinsufficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical and neurologic examination

Developmental assessment including assessment by a physical therapist and/or occupational therapist

Speech evaluation including feeding evaluation and nutrition consultation as needed

Hearing assessment (as part of the routine evaluation of children with speech delay)

EEG if seizures are suspected

Cardiac evaluation

Sleep history

Behavioral assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach to manage the features and specific issues identified is recommended. Specialists in the following fields are often involved: clinical genetics, neurology, child development, behavioral therapy, nutrition/feeding, speech and language therapy, and occupational and physical therapy.

Neurologic

Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program.

School-age children benefit from an individualized educational program.

Speech therapy with early introduction of nonverbal methods of communication (e.g., sign language and computer-assisted technologies) is appropriate given the high risk for poor or absent speech.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as valproate, clonazepam, zonisamide and clobazam appear to be effective in reducing the incidence of seizures [Jaillard et al 2009, van Bon et al 2010, Williams et al 2010, Chung et al 2011, Talkowski et al 2011, Motobayashi et al 2012, Noh & Graham 2012, Bonnet et al 2013, Hodge et al 2014]. No information is available on response to specific AEDs.

Behavior

Routine management of behavioral issues associated with severe intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder is indicated.

Management of sleep disturbance through a combined approach of targeted sleep hygiene (to develop firm daily schedules) and use of daily medications such as melatonin, clonidine, and trazadone may be considered [Mullegama et al 2015b].

Routine management is necessary for constipation (which can affect behavior).

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and behavioral evaluations to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems;

Periodic reevaluations by a clinical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information regarding MBD5 haploinsufficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an asymptomatic individual diagnosed with medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Plasma acylcarnitine analysis

Plasma free and total carnitine measurement

Urine acylglycine analysis

Urine organic acid analysis

MCAD activity assay in leukocytes (where available)

In a symptomatic individual diagnosed with MCAD deficiency the following additional laboratory studies should be considered:

Blood glucose concentration

Blood gas analysis

Ammonia

Lactic acid

CBC with differential

Electrolytes

Liver function tests

Blood cultures (in case of fever)

Although development is typically normal for individuals treated prospectively, those who experience metabolic decompensations requiring hospitalization often demonstrate developmental and neurologic disabilities. Neurodevelopmental assessments and intervention should therefore be considered for such individuals [Derks et al 2006].

Treatment of Manifestations

The most important aspect of treating symptomatic patients is reversal of catabolism and sustained anabolism by provision of simple carbohydrates by mouth (for example, glucose tablets, or sweetened, non-diet beverages) or IV if the patient is unable or unlikely to maintain or achieve anabolism through oral intake of food and fluids. IV administration of glucose should then be initiated immediately with a bolus of 2 mL/kg 25% dextrose, followed by 10% dextrose with appropriate electrolytes at a rate of 10-12 mg glucose/kg/minute and to achieve/maintain a blood glucose level higher than 5 mmol/L [Saudubray et al 1999].

All affected individuals should have a frequently updated "emergency" letter to be given, if needed, to health care providers who may not be familiar with MCAD deficiency. This letter should include a detailed explanation of the management of acute metabolic decompensation, emphasizing the importance of preventive measures (e.g., intravenous glucose regardless of "normal" laboratory results, overnight in-hospital observation), and the telephone numbers of the individual's metabolic specialist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The mainstay in the treatment of MCAD deficiency is avoidance of fasting. Derks et al [2007] studied the length of time that MCAD-deficient but asymptomatic individuals should be able to fast. Based on their findings, they recommend maximum fasting times of:

Up to eight hours in infants between ages six and 12 months

Up to ten hours during the second year of life

Up to 12 hours after age two years

To avoid excessive fasting:

Infants require frequent feedings.

Toddlers could receive 2 g/kg of uncooked cornstarch as a source of complex carbohydrates at bedtime to ensure sufficient glucose supply overnight. A relatively low-fat diet (e.g., <30% of total energy from fat) may be beneficial.

Additional consideration of the patient’s MCAD enzyme activity led Derks et al [2007] to suggest that when residual MCAD enzyme activity in leukocytes is greater than 10% of normal, prevention of fasting is not necessary for otherwise healthy individuals older than age six months [Touw et al 2013]. However, Sturm et al [2012] consider that residual MCAD enzyme activity lower than 30% requires treatment and follow up. Whether possible variability in MCAD enzyme activity assays plays a role in these different assessments is uncertain.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Recent long-term outcome studies revealed that persons treated for MCAD deficiency are prone to excessive weight gain [Derks et al 2006]. Accordingly, follow up should include weight control measures such as regular education about proper nutrition and allowed physical exercise.

Surveillance

A metabolic specialist should be consulted immediately during intercurrent illness, especially when it involves fever and/or poor calorie in-/uptake.

During the first months of life, monthly visits should be considered to ensure that families understand and are comfortable with treatment while the infant is otherwise well. A dietician should be involved to ensure proper nutrition in terms of quality and quantity.

The frequency of routine follow-up visits is individualized based on comfort level of the patients, families, and health care providers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Hypoglycemia must be avoided by frequent feedings to avoid catabolism, if necessary by intravenous administration of glucose.

Infant formulas containing medium-chain triglycerides as the primary source of fat are contraindicated in MCAD deficiency.

Alcohol consumption, in particular acute alcohol intoxication (e.g., binge drinking), often elicits a metabolic decompensation in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Lang 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs and parents of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures [Leydiker et al 2011].

If the ACADM pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the ACADM pathogenic variants in the family are not known, plasma acylcarnitine and urine acylglycine analysis can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women who have MCAD deficiency must avoid catabolism. This is supported by several case reports describing carnitine deficiency, acute liver failure, and HELLP syndrome in pregnant women with MCAD deficiency [Nelson et al 2000, Santos et al 2007, Leydiker et al 2011].

Therapies Under Investigation

The need for reduction of dietary fat to less than 20% of total calories and the need for L-carnitine supplementation or increase of the L-carnitine dose during metabolic stress are controversial.

Several authors recommend oral supplementation with 100 mg/kg/day of carnitine to correct the frequently observed secondary carnitine deficiency and to enhance the elimination of toxic metabolites [Roe & Ding 2001].

Two exercise studies of persons with MCAD deficiency before and after L-carnitine supplementation suggested improved exercise tolerance with supplementation of 100 mg/kg/day [Lee et al 2005] and statistically insignificant benefit with supplementation of 50 mg/kg/day [Huidekoper et al 2006]. More recently, low-intensity exercise for one hour on a cycle ergometer showed reduced fatty acid oxidation rates in patients vs. controls that were not improved by carnitine administration (100 mg/kg/day), while carnitine concentrations in muscle and plasma increased among those receiving carnitine supplementation [Madsen et al 2013].

Carnitine-mediated detoxification of medium-chain fatty acids, assessed by urinary excretion of medium-chain acylcarnitines, is quantitatively negligible in individuals who are MCAD deficient [Rinaldo et al 1993]; carnitine supplementation does not under controlled circumstances improve the response to a fasting challenge [Treem et al 1989]. Note: The cost of long-term supplementation with carnitine could be significant. Furthermore, while no severe untoward effects of L-carnitine have been reported in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Potter et al 2012], some patients have complained about nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and a fishy odor when treated with 100 mg/kg/day of L-carnitine [Madsen et al 2013].

Gene therapy has been suggested; however, aside from promising studies in fibroblast cultures of a patient with MCAD deficiency gene therapy has not been attempted in vivo [Schowalter et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.After the initial diagnosis, all individuals with fibrous dysplasia/McCune-Albright syndrome (FD/MAS) should be evaluated to determine the extent of disease. The authors recommend the following studies:

Skeleton

FD evaluation. See Fibrous Dysplasia Evaluation (pdf).

Total body bone scintigraphy to identify and determine the extent of FD [Collins et al 2005]. The majority of clinically significant skeletal lesions are apparent on bone scan by age five years.

Imaging of areas of FD identified with bone scintigraphy with radiographs (axial and appendicular FD) and/or computed tomography (craniofacial FD) to more clearly evaluate the extent and anatomy of the lesions

Baseline ophthalmologic, otolaryngologic, and audiologic evaluations in persons with craniofacial FD

Endocrine

In individuals with clinical signs or a previous history of precocious puberty: biochemical screening, pelvic ultrasound examination (females), and bone age examination. See Gonadal Evaluation in Girls (pdf).

Ultrasound examination of the testes (in all males) to evaluate for subclinical disease. See Gonadal Evaluation in Boys (pdf).

Growth hormone excess evaluation (pdf)

A thorough history and physical examination and review of a growth chart (if available) to evaluate for clinical signs of endocrinopathies

Biochemical screening for hyperthyroidism, growth hormone excess (IGF-1 level), and FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia

Ultrasound examination of the thyroid gland to evaluate for subclinical disease. See Thyroid Evaluation (pdf).

Adrenal evaluation (pdf)

Less common manifestations. Consideration should be given to the less common manifestations cited in Clinical Description with appropriate clinical evaluations and imaging/biochemical studies performed as indicated. See Gastrointestinal Evaluation (pdf).

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is most effectively accomplished through the input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including an endocrinologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiatrist, ophthalmologist, audiologist, endocrine surgeon, craniofacial surgeon, and medical geneticist.

Fibrous Dysplasia

There are no available medical therapies capable of altering the disease course in fibrous dysplasia. Current management is focused on optimizing function and minimizing morbidity related to fractures and deformity. The primary elements of management include the following. See Fibrous Dysplasia Management (pdf):

Orthopedic surgery to repair fractures and to prevent and correct deformities. A surgeon experienced in FD should be consulted, as approaches previously considered “standard,” (e.g., curettage, grafting, and external fixation) are frequently ineffective [Stanton et al 2012].

Diagnosis and treatment of scoliosis is of particular importance, as it may be rapidly progressive and in rare cases may lead to fatal respiratory compromise. For this reason all individuals with spinal FD should be monitored closely by an orthopedic surgeon or physiatrist for possible progression. Surgical fusion has been shown to be effective at stabilizing the spine [Leet et al 2004b, Mancini et al 2009].

Aneurysmal bone cysts, best detected by MRI, are rapidly expanding fluid-filled lesions that form within preexisting areas of FD. Patients experience acute onset of severe pain, rapidly expanding localized deformity, and rarely – when cysts compress the optic nerve – sudden loss of vision. Aneurysmal bone cysts thus carry a high risk of morbidity and should be evaluated urgently by a surgeon [Lee et al 2012, Manjila et al 2013].

Prophylactic optic nerve decompression to reduce the risk of vision loss can in fact increase the risk of vision loss and is thus contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Cutler et al 2006, Amit et al 2011].

Physical therapy to optimize function and attenuate loss of mobility is appropriate. Patients with lower-extremity FD in particular may benefit from therapies to address hip girdle weakness, range of motion, and leg length discrepancies [Paul et al 2014].

Intravenous bisphosphonates such as zoledronic acid and pamidronate are usually effective at relieving bone pain. Dosing should be based on symptoms, not on a fixed interval or bone turnover markers. Note: The oral bisphosphonate alendronate has been shown to be ineffective for treatment of bone pain [Boyce et al 2014].

Malignancy should remain a consideration for individuals with acute or rapidly expanding FD lesions, or with atypical radiographic features such as compromise of the bony cortex with an associated soft tissue mass.

Endocrinopathies 

Precocious puberty. Treatment of precocious puberty is important to prevent bone age advancement and compromise of adult height.

Effective treatment options for girls include the aromatase inhibitor letrozole [Feuillan et al 2007] and/or the estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen [Eugster et al 2003]. See Precocious Puberty Management in Girls (pdf). The primary clinical endpoints are prevention of growth acceleration and bone age advancement. Most girls will also have a decrease in the number of menstrual bleeding episodes while on treatment. Note: Prophylactic surgical intervention for large and persistent ovarian cysts should be undertaken with extreme caution due to the known risks of recurrent cysts and the potential for decreased ovarian reserve in affected women.

Given the rarity of precocious puberty in males, treatment options are less well established. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys (pdf). One strategy includes the combination of an androgen receptor blocker (e.g., spironolactone or flutamide) and an inhibitor of sex steroid synthesis (e.g., letrozole) [Boyce et al 2012].

Children of both sexes frequently enter central precocious puberty due to premature sex steroid exposure (see Clinical Description). This typically presents with reappearance of signs of puberty in a child with previously well-controlled peripheral precocious puberty. Leuprolide therapy in combination with the above medications is an effective therapeutic strategy in most.

Thyroid disease. See Hyperthyroidism Management (pdf). Methimazole is effective for management of hyperthyroidism. However, because FD/MAS-associated hyperthyroidism is persistent, most patients ultimately elect for definitive treatment. Thyroidectomy is the preferred definitive treatment in most affected individuals. Total gland resection is generally recommended due to the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth. Selection of an experienced high-volume endocrine surgeon is critical to minimize complications and optimize outcomes. Patients should be monitored post-surgically with yearly ultrasound examination to evaluate for tissue regrowth.

Note: Radioablation is typically avoided due to potential preferential uptake by areas of mutation-bearing tissue, which may lead to increased risk of malignancy in the remaining unaffected gland. Additionally, GNAS mutations are associated with a slight increased risk of malignant transformation in both thyroid and non-thyroidal tissues; the risk may potentially be enhanced by radiation exposure.

Growth hormone (GH) excess. See GH Excess: Management (pdf). Medical therapy is the preferred first-line treatment. Options include (alone or in combination) octreotide and the growth hormone receptor antagonist pegvisomant [Boyce et al 2013, Salenave et al 2014].

In growing children, the therapeutic goal is to maintain the IGF-1 level in the middle of the normal range with an IGF-1 Z-score of 0.

In skeletally mature individuals, the goal is to decrease the IGF-1 level as low as possible.

Medical therapy is typically continued indefinitely, because options for definitive treatment are associated with significant morbidity.

Surgery may be technically difficult or precluded due to craniofacial FD. Additionally, given the diffuse pituitary infiltration of GH-producing cells, patients treated surgically require total hypophysectomy with resulting total hypopituitarism [Vortmeyer et al 2012].

Radiation treatment may be effective in refractory cases, but has been associated with fatal malignant transformation of craniofacial FD [Hansen & Moffat 2003, Liu et al 2011].

The hyperprolactinemia that frequently accompanies growth hormone excess is generally responsive to treatment with dopamine agonists, including cabergoline and bromocriptine.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Treatment of frank hypophosphatemia is the same as in other disorders of FGF23 excess, and includes oral phosphorus and calcitriol. Important therapeutic endpoints include growth velocity and radiographic evidence of epiphyseal healing. Unlike other disorders of FGF23 excess, bone turnover markers in FD/MAS (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) may be constitutively elevated and are not a useful indicator of skeletal response to treatment.

Hypercortisolism. Treatment guidelines for hypercortisolism are difficult to establish given the rarity of neonatal Cushing syndrome. Additionally patients may be critically ill at presentation, which significantly affects treatment options. See Hypercortisolism Management (pdf).

Definitive treatment includes surgical removal of the diseased adrenal glands.

For medical treatment metyrapone is frequently effective, and is preferred over ketoconazole in children with liver abnormalities.

Spontaneous remission has been clearly documented in some affected individuals [Brown et al 2010]; however, it is not possible to identify prospectively which individuals will undergo remission. The decision to pursue or delay adrenalectomy must be made on an individual basis, taking into account the severity of illness, the ability of medications to control cortisol levels, and the potential effect of continued hypercortisolism on neurodevelopment.

Surveillance

Fibrous Dysplasia

Individuals with craniofacial FD should have yearly vision and hearing evaluations, and periodic computed tomography of the skull.

Individuals with spine FD should be monitored closely for progressive scoliosis.

Radiographs should be performed periodically to evaluate new or worsening symptoms and to provide additional information about FD anatomy and bone quality.

Phosphorus levels should be checked periodically to monitor for the development of FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia.

25-hydroxyvitamin D levels should be checked periodically as part of routine bone health surveillance.

Endocrinopathies

Precocious puberty. All children should be monitored for growth acceleration and other clinical signs of precocious puberty.

Thyroid

Thyroid function tests should be monitored routinely in all children younger than age five years. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Individuals with abnormalities on ultrasound examination but normal thyroid function tests should continue to have laboratory testing periodically throughout childhood, as the development of frank hyperthyroidism may occur later. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Patients who retain abnormal thyroid tissue following thyroid surgery should be monitored with regular physical examination and periodic thyroid ultrasound examination because of the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth.

Testicular lesions likely have low potential for malignant transformation [Boyce et al 2012]; however, it is prudent to monitor all males with regular physical examinations and testicular ultrasound examinations. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys.

Growth hormone excess. See Growth Hormone Excess Evaluation:

All children should be monitored for growth acceleration.

Patients treated medically with octreotide should be monitored for gallbladder disease, and with those treated with pegvisomant should be monitored for hepatotoxicity.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Serum phosphorus levels should be monitored routinely in all patients.

Hypercortisolism

Routine biochemical surveillance is not indicated; however, all infants should be monitored for clinical signs of hypercortisolism.

Patients with a history of Cushing syndrome that has spontaneously resolved should be monitored for late-appearing adrenal insufficiency.

Other

GI. See Gastrointestinal Management (pdf).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contact sports and other high-risk activities should be avoided in patients with significant skeletal involvement.

Prophylactic optic nerve decompression increases vision loss in patients with craniofacial FD and is contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Amit et al 2011].

Surgical removal of ovarian cysts should be performed with caution and only in limited circumstances.

Radiation therapy is not indicated for treatment of FD, and radiation exposure to FD lesions should be limited due to potential risk for malignant transformation [Ruggieri et al 1994].

While a strong association between gsp mutations (i.e., activating GNAS mutations at residues Arg201 and Gln227) and malignancies in FD/MAS is lacking, it is prudent to minimize additional risk factors (e.g., radiation exposure) and encourage vigilance and monitoring.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because FD/MAS is not inherited, relatives are not at increased risk and do not require evaluation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Although the effects of pregnancy on bone and endocrine disease in women with FD/MAS are not well studied, in the authors’ experience most women do not experience a worsening of disease during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-MUC1, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine

Measurement of blood pressure

Referral to a nephrologist for further evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Care by a nephrologist is recommended.

Treatment follows standard guidelines for chronic kidney disease – based on the level of the serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) – and its sequelae, which can include hypertension, anemia, and gout. Affected individuals are encouraged to prepare for kidney transplantation, the definitive treatment of ADTKD-MUC1, by staying in optimal health (e.g., by exercising, avoiding obesity and tobacco usage, and maintaining strict control of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and other cardiovascular risk factors).

Transplantation is curative, and the outcome from kidney transplantation in this group of patients is excellent.

Surveillance

Annually, starting at the time of diagnosis and continuing until chronic kidney disease (CKD) Stage 3:

Hemoglobin concentration

Serum concentrations of uric acid and creatinine

Blood pressure

After CKD Stage 3, follow up as determined by the treating nephrologist is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially when dehydrated, as NSAIDs can further impair kidney function in individuals with CKD. Avoid all nephrotoxic drugs or use with caution depending on the clinical indication.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

For the purpose of early diagnosis and treatment. If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives (parents, sibs, and offspring). Relatives found to have a pathogenic variant can be monitored with serum creatinine measurements to allow early diagnosis and treatment (see Related Genetic Counseling Issues for discussion of testing of children.)

For the purpose of kidney donation. If an MUC1 pathogenic variant is known to be present in an affected family member, any relative who is a potential kidney donor should undergo molecular genetic testing to clarify his/her genetic status so that only those without the pathogenic variant are evaluated further. Several individuals with what appeared to be clinically normal kidney function have donated kidneys and later been found to have ADTKD, MUC1.Thus, it is important to test even those family members with normal kidney function to be certain that they do not have a pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-UMOD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Determination of kidney function (measurement of serum creatinine concentration)

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration

Referral to a nephrologist because of the possibility of progression to chronic kidney disease

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hyperuricemia/gout

Acute gout typically responds well to prednisone, short-term nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or colchicine.

Gout prevention with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered.

With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented.

Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required.

In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in UMOD-associated kidney disease are available at present.

Kidney disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs.

Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Allopurinol may slow the progression of kidney disease, although reliable data are not available [Pirson et al 2000, Fairbanks et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol, probenecid, or febuxostat can prevent development of gout.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Measurement of serum creatinine concentration at least annually in affected individuals, and more frequently in those with severe disease

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration at least annually

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Drugs known to be nephrotoxic should be avoided. NSAIDs are appropriate for short-term administration for treatment of gout or similar painful conditions. However, patients should avoid chronic daily use.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the familial UMOD pathogenic variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Particularly important are:

Adolescents because of their increased risk for gout, which can be prevented with allopurinol treatment;

Relatives interested in donating a kidney to an affected family member.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No pregnancy issues are particular to ADTKD-UMOD. However, in general, chronic kidney disease, depending on the stage, can affect pregnancy through increased hypertension and increased fetal loss.

Women of childbearing age who are taking medications such as allopurinol or an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor should discuss their medication regimen with their physician prior to conception.

A recent study has suggested that allopurinol use during pregnancy may be associated with fetal malformations. While the study included women who were on many other medications when they became pregnant, allopurinol should be discontinued in women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant [Hoeltzenbein et al 2013].

Similarly, the use of ACE inhibitors during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can result in fetal damage and death. Women who are taking ACE inhibitors prior to pregnancy or at the time of conception should be transitioned to another antihypertensive medication.

Ideally, women should not be taking either allopurinol or an ACE inhibitor during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome (MLS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic and neuropsychological examination

Serum CK concentration and liver function tests

Cardiac examination, including ECG, Holter ECG, and echocardiography

Cerebral MRI and electroencephalography

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Dopamine antagonists including tiapride, clozapine, or quetiapine, as well as dopamine depletor tetrabenazine to ameliorate chorea

Treatment of psychiatric problems according to the clinical presentation

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities according to the clinical and/or ECG presentation

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for treatment of seizures

Extended and continuous multidisciplinary psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Transfusion hazards secondary to anti-Kx antibody production resulting from previous exposure to Kx antigens during homologous blood transfusion must be considered in:

All males with the McLeod blood group phenotype [Russo et al 2000b], in particular males with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease resulting from a contiguous gene deletion of CYBB and XK (see Diagnosis, Contiguous Gene Rearrangements) [Holland 2005]; and

Carrier females with the McLeod blood group phenotype.

Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Surveillance

Early recognition and treatment of cardiac problems and seizures is important, as these potential complications may be severe and appear to cause premature death [Danek et al 2001a].

If no pathologic findings are identified at initial evaluation, cardiac examinations (Holter ECG and echocardiography) should be repeated every two to three years.

In the case of suspected epilepsy, EEG should be performed. If AED treatment is indicated, medication-specific laboratory parameters and serum concentrations should be followed.

One individual with MLS developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis; thus, serum CK concentrations should be carefully monitored, in particular if excessive movement disorders are present or if neuroleptic medications are being used [Jung & Brandner 2002].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Blood transfusions with Kx antigens should be avoided in males and females with the McLeod blood group phenotype. Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Treatment with neuroleptics, in particular clozapine, should be carefully monitored.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In female heterozygotes, the probability of manifestations of the McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome in the reproductive period is presumably very low; thus, no particular recommendations can be made. Of note, transfusion reactions have to be considered in female carriers who have the McLeod blood group phenotype (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

No prenatal or perinatal neurologic manifestations of MLS are known; however, severe anemia can be observed in Kell-positive newborns born to sensitized Kell-negative mothers [Lee et al 2000b, Jung et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of a child diagnosed with LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy following the initial diagnosis, the following are recommended:

Assessment of feeding, nutrition, and bone health: measurement of weight and serum concentrations of vitamin D and calcium

Systematic inquiry of parents/caregivers regarding digestive complications, in particular dysphagia, GE-reflux, and constipation. Frequent choking, prolonged feeding, and nocturnal cough may identify swallowing and gastroesophageal disorders. Additional assessment may include endoscopy, manometry, PH-meter studies, and videofluoroscopy.

Lung function tests that ideally include spirometry (forced vital capacity, forced expired volume in the first second [FEV-1]) and assessment of cough effectiveness (cough peak flow and maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures)

Evaluate older children with an FVC lower than 60% of the predicted value with polysomnography or, if polysomnography is not routinely performed, overnight oximetry.

In those using orthopedic trunk braces or orthoses, assess pulmonary function with and without the brace to determine whether thoracic excursion (and thus ventilator function) is impaired.

Evaluation for nocturnal hypoventilation in children with a history of recurrent respiratory infections, failure to thrive, poor cry, and/or feeding fatigue

Physical therapy assessment of muscle strength and joint mobility

Assessment of the spine by an orthopedist regarding the need for early bracing

Evaluation by a child neurologist for seizures or unexplained fainting or loss of consciousness.

Developmental assessment

Neuropsychological testing if learning or behavioral deficiencies are identified

Evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram

Evaluation of respite care services for caregivers

Educational planning to place the child with necessary support in the least restrictive educational environment

Treatment of Manifestations

Early-Onset 

Nutrition/weight. In the absence of evidence-based target BMI or weight charts, the recommendation is to weigh the child serially and assess the frequency of chest infections and hospitalizations. Weight needs to increase annually by small increments. Since these children are usually non-ambulatory and muscular mass is reduced, normalization of weight to standard weights is not the goal. In contrast, excess weight may contribute to reduced motor function, resulting in increased respiratory dysfunction.

If weight plateaus or decreases, assessment of nutrition and diet, speech and swallowing, and respiratory function by a multidisciplinary team of specialists is recommended:

The patient or caregiver may need to be prompted to recall dietary concerns including lengthy meal times, limited food intake, and/or significant constipation [Philpot et al 1999a]. Non-ambulant school-age children (because they require assistance to use the restroom) may consciously restrict liquid intake. Limited hydration, choice of diet, and lack of movement may all contribute to constipation, leading to further restriction of oral intake.

The nutritionist can review dietary fiber, total liquid consumption, and the need for laxatives (e.g., Miralax®, macromolecules FORLAX®) to optimize caloric intake during periods of growth.

If weight continues to decline, respiratory assessment to evaluate for pulmonary infection is indicated.

Adequate weight gain may be achieved by increasing the caloric content of formulas in infants and by supplementary hypercaloric protein drinks in older children.

Infants with persistently poor weight gain and frequent pulmonary infections should be referred to a gastroenterologist:

Gastroesophageal reflux is treated as needed.

A nasogastric tube or percutaneous gastrostomy may help avoid aspiration pneumonia and improve nutritional status.

Failure to thrive may require supplemental feeding and gastrostomy with or without Nissen fundoplication [Philpot et al 1999a].

Children with poor intake or vomiting may require enteral feeding or intravenous fluid therapy to avoid hypoglycemia and metabolic decompensation.

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation is recommended to support bone growth and strength and to prevent future osteopenia.

Respiratory function testing. Training five year olds to perform spirometry during regular clinic visits may allow them to become adept at performing pulmonary function tests by age six years. (Note: A training effect may lead to an initial improvement in spirometric values.) For those who cannot use a standard mouth piece due to facial weakness, a buco-nasal mask adapter or scuba mouth piece can be used.

Pulmonary function tests ideally include spirometry (forced vital capacity [FVC], forced expired volume in the first second [FEV-1]) and measures of cough effectiveness (cough peak flow and maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures). Note: In those using orthopedic trunk braces or orthoses, assess pulmonary function with and without the brace to determine if thoracic excursion is impaired.

An FVC less than 60% of the predicted value has been associated with sleep-disordered breathing; an FVC less than 40% of predicted has been associated with high risk for nocturnal hypoventilation [Mellies et al 2003].

Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted or clinical evidence of disordered sleep (daytime somnolence, morning headaches, hypercarbia) should undergo an overnight sleep study (polysomnogram) to evaluate for night-time hypoventilation, hypercapnia, and obstructive sleep apnea.

Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted and hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and/or significant aspiration of food or refluxed gastric contents should be referred to a pulmonologist.

Assessment of hypoventilation, night-time and daytime hypercapnea is indicated in children with signs of sleep-related difficulties (e.g., morning headaches, attention difficulties, hypersomnolence, increased fatigue), weight loss, recurrent pulmonary infections, a weak cry, and/or FVC less than 60% of predicted.

Because early respiratory insufficiency may not be detected by diurnal tests, polysomnography (including end-tidal CO2 measurements) can be used to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation and other sleep-related breathing difficulties, such as apnea (both obstructive and central) and hypopnea, which are usually more pronounced during REM sleep. (The predominance of findings in REM sleep may be the result of diminished respiratory drive, atonia of the upper airway and intercostal muscles, and weakness of the diaphragm.)

Assistance with coughing. Weak/ineffective cough can lead to progressive atelectasis, infection, and respiratory failure in those with diminished lung capacity.

Daily intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB) may improve diminished compliance, peak cough flow, and ability to clear secretions. It has been shown to promote expansion of the thorax, prevent or treat atelectasis, and decrease the risk of lower-respiratory infections [Mellies et al 2005, Wang et al 2010]. Positive pressure breathing can be administered by IPPB or a mechanical in-exsufflator (Cough Assist), or attained through breath-stacking maneuvers using a bag valve mask. Patients with weak cough (low cough peak flow, maximum and inspiratory pressures <60 cm H2O, and FVCs <60% predicted) can benefit from use of positive pressure breathing once or twice a day and then as needed during respiratory infections. Night-time ventilator support once initiated also helps inflate the lungs, allowing for better tidal volume and ventilation, and thus preventing atelectasis.

Because of abdominal muscle weakness and the need for high positive pressures, an abdominal belt can lead to better results, efficacy, and tolerance [Guérin et al 2010].

Noninvasive ventilation support is indicated in the setting of:

Daytime hypercapnea and/or nocturnal hypoventilation

Evidence on polysomnogram of sleep-disordered breathing (even without hypoventilation)

Recurrent chest infections or atelectasis (in the absence of either daytime hypercapnea or nocturnal hypoventilation) in infants and toddlers [SJ Quijano-Roy, personal communication]

Noninvasive ventilator interfaces include nasal pillows, nasal masks, and full face masks, all of which come with head gear. Of note, it is difficult to fit masks to infants; toddlers often fight the masks.

In children, alternating mask interfaces is recommended to prevent the progressive under-bite and midface hypoplasia that result from the bone remodeling associated with long-term use of nasal masks from an early age. Although the nasal mask causes more bite and mid-face problems than does the full face mask, the full face mask should be used with caution because of the risk of suffocation in a child who vomits into the mask and is unable to remove it.

In patients with severe lordosis/scoliosis and chronic cough or recurrent infections, chest CT may be needed to evaluate for chronic atelectasis and airway compression by the vertebral bodies

During adolescence ventilatory support is often only needed during sleep with noninvasive pressure support. Assessment of daytime hypercapnea is needed beginning in late adolescence or if patient experiences increasing fatigue, chest infections, or failure to thrive. If daytime ventilation is required, ventilation via tracheostomy may be indicated.

Joint contractures. Physical therapy including daily stander placement, stretching activities, and pool (swimming) therapy can assist in maintenance of some range of motion.

Splints, orthoses, and night positioning by casts are used to prevent progression of joint deformities.

Non-ambulant children require standing frames for postural support.

Durable medical equipment support including power wheelchair fitting is essential for non-ambulant toddlers.

Scoliosis may need orthopedic and surgical treatment [Bentley et al 2001]. When needed, specific trunk orthotics or braces that do not restrict the thorax either through compression or limitation of thoracic movements are recommended [Wang et al 2010]. Their use may improve upright posture and delay spinal fusion until early puberty, providing that bracing does not interfere with respiration by causing chest compression [Wang et al 2010].

If cervical lordosis progresses in late adolescence, posterior head support (using trunk braces or wheelchair supports) can prevent neck hyperextension.

Cardiomyopathy. Right heart failure due to respiratory insufficiency requires adequate mechanical ventilation. Primary left heart failure or rhythm disturbances require typical age-appropriate treatment.

Seizures are generally well controlled with routine administration of antiepileptic drugs. Refractory seizures in those with cortical dysplasia may require polytherapy.

Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Early intervention with physical, occupational, and speech therapy along with a multidisciplinary medical team provide the best possible outcome.

Other. Surgery to correct facial function and address cosmetic concerns has been performed [Jones & Waite 2012].

Late-Onset 

These patients need mainly respiratory and orthopedic care due to the risk of progressive respiratory insufficiency and joint and spinal deformities. Regular physical therapy for stretching limbs, shoulder and pelvic girdle, and spine is mandatory.

Antiepileptic drugs should be used to treat seizures.

Surveillance

Standards of care have been reviewed recently [Wang et al 2010] (full text).

Early-onset LAMA2 MD

At least biannual evaluations during the first five years by a nutritionist and gastroenterologist to monitor weight gain and to identify early recurrent aspiration

At least annual follow up with a pulmonologist to assess respiratory function. After age four to six years: annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of forced vital capacity (FVC).

Annual measurement of FVC to allow trending of FVC

Annual evaluation of strength and joint range of motion by a physical therapist

At least annual evaluation of the spine by an orthopedist. Note: (1) More frequent evaluations are warranted during periods of rapid growth, loss of function, and/or progression of deformities. (2) Annual lateral spinal x-rays (in addition to the standard anterior-posterior x-rays) can be used to evaluate the anterior posterior intra-thoracic cavity diameter; however, if respiratory function declines rapidly without known cause or without prior spinal surgery, a CT may be needed.

Cardiac monitoring:

In the absence of symptoms, evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram at age five years, ten years, and then every two years

In patients with severe respiratory insufficiency on mechanical ventilation, annual echocardiography (required)

In patients reporting palpitations, increased fatigue, or loss of consciousness without a clear neurologic origin, cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor and echocardiogram (recommended)

Pre-surgical cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor, echocardiogram, and a dopamine test of cardiac function

Note: The brain MRI findings seen in both complete and partial laminin α2 deficiency do not need to be followed with serial scans over time [Geranmayeh et al 2010].

Late-onset LAMA2 MD

Respiratory. Monitor for respiratory insufficiency with serial pulmonary function tests.

Orthopedic. Monitor with frequent spinal examinations to detect scoliosis and assess bone health.

Neurologic. Monitor to detect and treat seizures.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Succinylcholine in induction of anesthesia because of risk of hyperkalemia and cardiac conduction abnormalities

Statin, cholesterol lowering medication, because of the risk of muscle damage

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy leads to a primary deficiency of the protein laminin α2 in the extracellular matrix of muscle, precipitating several downstream effects including: increased inflammation, increased fibrosis, increased apoptosis, and decreased regeneration.

Several therapies have recently been tested in murine models that replicate disease pathogenesis (including the dyw and dy3k [neo cassettes in LAMA2] and dy2j [a spontaneously occurring pathogenic variant]). Current efforts to define standard operating protocols led by TREAT-NMD, a panel of international scientists and Cure CMD, have been posted at curecmd.org.

Therapies currently under investigation target apoptosis with drugs such as omigapil [Erb et al 2009] and doxycycline [Girgenrath et al 2009], and genetic manipulation of BAX [Girgenrath et al 2004]. Additional approaches include protein replacement therapy using miniagrin constructs and pro-regenerative approaches using IgF [Kumar et al 2011].

Another approach for the treatment of genetic disorders caused by premature termination codons is the use of drugs to force stop codon read-through [Allamand et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended:

General clinical examination

Cognitive assessment including speech assessment

Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation by a clinical psychologist to help determine needs for subsequent treatment

EEG and neurologic examination if epilepsy is suspected

Cardiac ultrasound evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Ideally treatment is tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Because of the high incidence of neurodevelopmental disability, referral to a clinical psychologist for neuropsychological and/or developmental assessment for treatment recommendations is suggested.

Medical treatment for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.

Additional management in healthy adults who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion is not necessary, although their medical care providers may benefit from being alerted to the possible increased risk for late-onset manifestations (e.g., schizophrenia).

Surveillance

Close assessment/monitoring of neurocognitive development and developmental milestones are recommended during childhood for all children who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion, with referral to early intervention programs if required.

Medical surveillance for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

About 10% of the individuals with the 15q13.3 microdeletion develop schizophrenia. The use of cannabis has been reported as a risk factor for development of schizophrenia. Although no studies have been performed on the possible additional risk of the use of cannabis by persons with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, discouraging the use of cannabis may be considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using genomic testing that will detect the 15q13.3 microdeletion found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring of developmental milestones in childhood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 15q24 microdeletion syndrome, the following evaluations should be considered:

Ophthalmologic examination

Formal audiology evaluation to assess for sensorineural hearing loss

Cardiac evaluation

Brain imaging in individuals with microcephaly and/or neurologic findings

Examination for genitourinary abnormalities (e.g., hypospadias or cryptorchidism in males)

Comprehensive developmental assessment

Consideration of neurologic referral for any unusual movements or concern for seizures

Discussion of results with a clinical geneticist or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Routine treatment of ophthalmologic, cardiac, neurologic findings

Speech, occupational, and physical therapies

Specialized learning programs to meet individual needs

No specific antiepileptic or antipsychotic medications are indicated

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental assessments

Monitoring of specific identified medical issues

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a fetus is known to have 15q24 microdeletion syndrome, fetal echocardiogram and ultrasound examination with an attempt to visualize the palate and look for diaphragmatic hernia are recommended. Close monitoring for intrauterine growth retardation is warranted. Counseling with regard to the developmental outcomes and medical complications of the 15q24 microdeletion syndrome is appropriate. Delivery at a center with a good neonatal intensive care team is optimal, as respiratory complications and feeding difficulties may occur after delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 16p12.2 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics consultation

Measurement of height and weight

Broad review of all organ systems

Developmental assessment with cognitive and behavioral testing

To consider:

Consultation with a neurologist and EEG testing if history suggests the possibility of seizures

Evaluation and echocardiogram by a cardiologist

Treatment of Manifestations

Because manifestations of 16p12.2 microdeletion are variable, treatment should be targeted to the specific problems identified. Early diagnosis and treatment facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists is recommended based on specific signs and symptoms. Specialists may include a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist.

Developmental and cognitive delays. Initiate developmental therapies promptly when indicated. Cognitive testing in older children may help identify any specific learning or cognitive disabilities that could be addressed by therapies or specialized education plans.

Cardiac malformations. Individuals with 16p12.2 microdeletion and cardiac malformations should have standard treatment for the malformation, including surgical correction and prophylactic antibiotic treatments as indicated.

Epilepsy. A history suggestive of possible seizure activity should prompt referral to a neurologist for additional testing, including brain imaging and EEG, and consideration of medical intervention.

Psychiatric and/or behavior problems. In individuals of any age, signs of psychiatric or behavioral problems should prompt referral to specialists, including developmental/behavioral pediatricians, psychologists, or psychiatrists, so that formal assessments may be performed and appropriate interventions (medical, social, behavioral, and/or educational) may be made.

Hearing loss. Standard treatment should be provided for hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Other malformations. Standard treatment should be provided for any other malformations, including oro-facial clefting and renal, genitourinary, or dental anomalies.

Surveillance

Periodic:

Developmental evaluations because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and other behavioral features

Monitoring of cardiac, renal, urologic, and/or dental abnormalities, as needed

Reevaluation by a medical geneticist who can apprise the family of new recommendations for monitoring for medical or mental health concerns.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 17q12 recurrent deletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Renal ultrasound examination; serum BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and uric acid; urine magnesium and creatinine; and consultation with a nephrologist

Hemoglobin A1C and consultation with endocrinologist regarding possible evidence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)

Assessment of speech, cognitive development, motor development, and behavior

Pelvic ultrasound examination and gynecologic examination in females to evaluate for possible müllerian abnormalities

Liver function tests (AST, ALT, GGTP)

Ophthalmologic examination

Clinical assessment for congenital heart defects; consultation with a cardiologist and echocardiography if warranted

Neurology consultation if seizure activity is suspected

Audiologic screening

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and depends on an individual’s specific needs.

Renal disease. Treatment should follow standard practice.

Established guidelines for the management of chronic kidney disease, including that related to CAKUT or ADTKD, are available for children and adults [KDIGO CKD Work Group 2013].

Some individuals have normal renal function, while others may progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and require dialysis or kidney transplantation.

For those who have diabetes mellitus, simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation has been successful and should be considered [Faguer et al 2011, Halbritter et al 2011, Poitou et al 2012].

MODY5. Treatment should follow standard practice. The clinical course tends to be progressive in terms of hyperglycemia, requiring treatment with insulin [Fajans & Bell 2011].

Neurodevelopmental/neuropsychiatric disorders. Early identification and intervention for neurodevelopmental or neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., global developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, and bipolar disorder) is important for optimal outcomes.

Specialized instruction and speech / occupational / physical / behavioral therapies should be provided if indicated.

Management of ASD should follow guidelines published by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers & Johnson 2007].

Psychiatric consultation and therapy is recommended for those with mental health concerns, such as mood disorders, anxiety, and/or psychosis.

Other. Cardiac, ophthalmologic, neurologic, gastrointestinal, and other conditions should be treated by the appropriate specialty according to standard guidelines.

Surveillance

Renal structure/function

Renal ultrasound examination to monitor for kidney cysts 12 months after establishing the diagnosis, then every two to three years in childhood/adolescence and every three to five years in adulthood. If an abnormality is detected, more frequent ultrasound examinations may be warranted.

Periodic monitoring of renal function; serum concentration of magnesium, potassium, uric acid; and possibly urine magnesium and creatinine, preferably under the guidance of a nephrologist. Annual or more frequent monitoring may be advised for patients who have laboratory findings suggesting renal impairment, are taking potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), or have structural renal abnormalities [Verbitsky et al 2015]

MODY5

HgbA1C annually

Patients and families should be educated on how to monitor for the clinical signs and symptoms of diabetes mellitus (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss [sometimes with polyphagia], fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and blurred vision) in order to promote early diagnosis and treatment.

Note: Endocrinology consultations as indicated depending on an individual’s clinical manifestations

Psychomotor development. Routine monitoring through early childhood. A full neuropsychological evaluation is indicated for children who experience difficulty with school.

Other. Audiologic and ophthalmological evaluations on a regular basis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with HNF1B-associated renal disease, including the 17q12 recurrent deletion, who develop ESRD and require renal transplantation are at increased risk for developing new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT); therefore, use of an immunosuppressive regimen that avoids tacrolimus and reduces corticosteroid exposure may be beneficial for those who do not have preexisting diabetes [Zuber et al 2009, Faguer et al 2011, Clissold et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If genomic testing detects the 17q12 recurrent deletion in one of the proband’s parents, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of older and younger sibs of the proband and other relatives at risk in order to identify those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring for evidence of renal structural or functional defects, maturity-onset diabetes of the young, and developmental delays/intellectual disability.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the clinical consequences in an individual diagnosed with KANSL1-related intellectual disability syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation, including feeding assessment

Comprehensive speech/language evaluation including audiologic examination

A renal ultrasound examination

Cardiac evaluation for possible heart anomalies including septal defect and aortic dilatation

Brain imaging studies in individuals with microcephaly and/or seizures

If seizures are suspected, EEG and consultation with a neurologist

Consideration of a Chiari malformation type 1 in individuals with the KANSL1-related intellectual disability syndrome presenting suggestive symptoms (headache, neck pain, cerebellar signs or muscle weakness) [Terrone et al 2012]

Investigation of growth hormone deficiency in individuals with KANSL1-related intellectual disability syndrome and short stature, defined by a height below - 2 SD scores for age and sex

Involvement of a clinical geneticist following the initial diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Routine medical care by a pediatrician or other primary physician

Early intervention with physiotherapy for feeding problems and motor delay related to hypotonia. Physical therapy aimed at strengthening the muscles as well as therapy to improve development of the child's fine and gross motor skills may also be beneficial.

Speech therapy directed at improving verbal and nonverbal communication skills. Sign language, pictures, and computer touch screens may augment communication.

Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified

For epilepsy, treatment with routine antiepileptic drugs under the care of a neurologist. The seizures usually are easy to control with medication.

Orthopedic care as required for scoliosis, hip dislocation, and positional deformities of the feet

Standard treatment for cardiac, renal, urologic, and other medical issues

Treatment for cryptorchidism if indicated

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care

Specialized neurologic care for individuals with epilepsy

Ophthalmologic examinations at routine intervals due to increased risk for hypermetropia and strabismus

Monitoring for spine deformities

Monitoring as needed of cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 1q21.1 recurrent microdeletion, the following evaluations should be considered:

Ophthalmologic examination if there are concerns about vision

Cardiac evaluation if there are suggestive features clinically or on physical examination

Brain imaging if microcephaly, macrocephaly, and/or neurologic findings are present

Renal ultrasound examination

Comprehensive developmental assessment for motor and language delays, which may include evaluations for autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disability, ADHD, and hearing loss

Neurology consultation if significant hypotonia, seizures, tics, or tremors are present

Psychiatric evaluation if evidence of mental illness is present

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Routine treatment of ophthalmologic, cardiac, and neurologic findings

Speech, occupational, and physical therapies, as appropriate

Specialized learning programs to meet individual needs

No specific antiepileptic or antipsychotic medications are indicated.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental and learning assessments

Monitoring of any specific medical issues that are identified

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using genomic testing that will detect the 1q21.1 recurrent microdeletion found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring of developmental milestones in childhood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 3q29 recurrent deletion, the following evaluations should be considered:

Comprehensive developmental assessment including evaluation of cognitive, speech and language, motor, and social skills

Psychiatric evaluation in individuals with evidence of neuropsychiatric manifestations including autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

Assessment for feeding problems and nutrition; consultation with pediatric feeding specialists as needed

Early consultation with a pediatric dentist

Evaluation in infancy for evidence of congenital heart disease

Consultation with a pediatric otolaryngologist as needed for recurrent otitis media

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following measures are appropriate:

Early speech and language therapy to address speech delays

Physical therapy as necessary to address fine and gross motor delays

Individualized education program (IEP) for school-age children

Care by a child psychiatrist for anxiety disorder and/or other neuropsychiatric manifestations

Applied behavioral analysis or other treatment for manifestations of ASD

Feeding therapy (including nutrition assessment) with a pediatric feeding specialist or behavioral pediatric psychologist; consideration of gastronomy tube for severe feeding problems and continued failure to thrive

Routine management of dental caries, congenital heart defects, and recurrent ear infections

Surveillance

Continued assessment of:

Feeding and nutrition

Developmental milestones

Cognitive development

Possible psychiatric manifestations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Parents and older and younger at-risk sibs of a proband should be tested for the 3q29 recurrent deletion. Parents or sibs may have the deletion, but with only mild or nonexistent developmental delay or intellectual disability. The average age at onset for schizophrenia is 20-25 years; thus, mildly affected individuals remain at risk for neuropsychiatric manifestations and would benefit from monitoring and clinical evaluation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 9q22.3 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended:

Brain imaging (not using CT) and neurologic evaluation

Complete physical examination, including dermatologic assessment for the manifestations of Gorlin syndrome

Comprehensive developmental assessment

Renal and pelvic ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible renal anomalies and ovarian fibromas

Echocardiogram

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Careful consideration of skeletal and/or dental imaging for associated anomalies

Familial genetic counseling

Routine treatment and management by appropriate specialists for cardiac, neurologic, dermatologic findings

Comprehensive physical, occupational, and speech therapy services as needed

Surgical intervention as needed for excision or treatment of mandibular keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, or other tumors that develop, or for management or correction of physical anomalies

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Routine treatment and management by appropriate specialists for cardiac, neurologic, dermatologic findings

Comprehensive physical, occupational, and speech therapy services as needed

Surgical intervention as needed for excision or treatment of mandibular keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, or other tumors that develop, or for management or correction of physical anomalies

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Avoidance of excessive sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation, and limiting exposure to ionizing radiation (e.g., by computed tomography and x-ray) is recommended because of the increased predisposition for the development of basal cell carcinomas.

Surveillance

The following recommended surveillance is the same as that for Gorlin syndrome (see Gorlin Syndrome).

Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computer tomography (CT) should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.

While there are currently no published guidelines regarding monitoring for intraabdominal embryonal tumors in individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion, 12% of the published cases have been diagnosed with Wilms tumor. Thus regular abdominal ultrasound for Wilms tumor, similar to surveillance for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, is recommended for individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion until disproven otherwise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

As all individuals to date have had involvement of PTCH1 resulting in Gorlin syndrome, affected individuals are at increased risk for malignant tumor formation with ionizing and ultraviolet radiation exposure, and for spontaneous development of basal cell carcinomas both from the numerous existing basal cell nevi and in apparently unaffected skin (see Gorlin Syndrome). Radiographs and computed tomography should be used sparingly, and the benefit versus risk to the individual’s health should be carefully considered.

Liberal use of topical sunblock and avoidance of excessive exposure to sunlight are warranted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Macrosomia and/or macrocephaly of prenatal onset is present in many individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion. This may necessitate delivery by Cesarean section, including emergently, as has been reported for some individuals [Isidor et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) with ataxia, the following evaluations should be performed:

Clinical evaluation

Neurologic examination for evidence of ataxia, including speech, walking, coordination, and handwriting

Evaluation of school performance and emotional status

EEG

Brain MRI

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of epilepsy involves antiepileptic drugs including valproic acid, clonazepam, zonisamide, piracetam, and levetiracetam. Valproate was particularly helpful in one family [El-Shanti et al 2006].

Ataxia may require assistive devices or eventually wheelchair.

Consultation with a speech pathologist may be helpful.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Valproate levels are affected by a number of drugs. Serum valproate concentration should be closely monitored to ensure proper levels. If consistent side effects such as nausea, vomiting, hair loss, or tremor are reported, consider switching to an extended-release formulation which allows for more stable serum levels.

Surveillance

Follow-up evaluations should be performed every three to four months to ensure effective seizure control and monitor for changes in clinical findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Phenytoin [Eldridge et al 1983]

Carbamezapine, oxycarbazepine [National Organization for Rare Disorders 1990]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MECP2 duplication syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of medical history for developmental progress, seizures, and recurrent infections

Complete neurologic evaluation and EEG

Complete neuropsychological evaluation of intellectual level and behavioral problems

Assessment of feeding for swallowing difficulties in infants

Analysis of the family pedigree for other possible affected individuals and carrier females (see Genetic Counseling)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Cognitive impairment. Developmental stimulation including speech therapy is appropriate.

Note: Because developmental outcome is variable, individual counseling is important.

Spastic paraplegia. Treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.

Epilepsy. Seizures usually respond well to standard therapy with antiepileptic drugs; however, in some males seizures are resistant to the usual therapy, necessitating multi-drug therapy.

Predisposition to infections. Infections, especially of the respiratory tract, should be treated immediately with appropriate antibiotics. All vaccines should be given. If aspiration occurs, placement of a permanent gastrostomy should be considered.

Gastrointestinal dysfunction. Feeding problems, gastroesophageal reflux, swallowing dysfunction, and obstipation require referral and treatment in the usual manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical therapy with attention to stretching exercises can help maintain joint range of motion and prevent secondary contractures, thus prolonging the ability to walk.

Respiratory problems require early intervention.

Surveillance

The following should be monitored from early childhood:

Developmental progress

Neurologic features, with special attention to the onset of spasticity

Onset and frequency of seizures and response to antiepileptic medications

Number and type of infections

Autistic-like features

Gastrointestinal symptoms

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MEGDEL syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete audiologic examination including hearing test, brain stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP)

Complete neurologic examination, including brain MRI

Complete orthopedic examination for evidence of contractures and/or scoliosis needing treatment

Developmental assessment, IQ testing

Complete pulmonary examination for evidence of respiratory problems due to excessive drooling and/or scoliosis needing treatment

Complete investigation of liver function including ASAT, ALAT, gamma-GT, serum concentration of bilirubin (total and direct), serum concentration of ammonia, clotting tests

Complete evaluation of feeding and diet to determine if tube feeding is necessary

Evaluation of excessive drooling (if present) for evidence of aspiration and/or dehydration

ECG

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietician, and physical therapist when possible.

Applicable supportive treatment [SB Wortmann, personal communication] includes:

For (progressive) spasticity. Some patients experienced (temporary) improvement of spasticity with treatment with oral or intrathecal baclofen.

For excessive drooling. Patients experienced great improvement (e.g., of respiratory problems) with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of salivary glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts.

For failure to thrive. An age-appropriate diet given via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy can greatly improve overall clinical condition.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes neurologic and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications known to impair mitochondrial function (e.g., valproic acid) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MELAS, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height and weight to assess growth

Audiologic evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Assessment of cognitive abilities

Physical therapy assessment

Neurologic evaluation, MRI, MRS [Kaufmann et al 2004], and, if seizures are suspected, EEG

Cardiac evaluation

Screening for diabetes mellitus by fasting serum glucose concentration and glucose tolerance test

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Sensorineural hearing loss has been successfully treated with cochlear implantation [Sue et al 1998, Scarpelli et al 2012].

Ptosis can benefit from eyelid "crutches," blepharoplasty, or frontalis muscle-eyelid sling placement.

No therapy is available for PEO or retinopathy.

Aerobic exercise is helpful in MELAS and other mitochondrial diseases [Taivassalo & Haller 2004]. Physical therapy should be implemented in individuals after strokes.

Seizures respond to traditional anticonvulsant therapy.

Standard analgesics can be used for migraine headaches.

Cardiac manifestations can benefit from standard pharmacologic therapy.

Diabetes mellitus can be managed by dietary modification only, especially in thin individuals, or with oral hypoglycemic agents, but often requires insulin therapy.

L-arginine showed promise in treating stroke-like episodes in MELAS [Koga et al 2010].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No specific treatment for MELAS exists.

The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].

Idebenone, an analog of CoQ10 that crosses the blood-brain barrier more efficiently, has also been reported as beneficial in anecdotal reports [Napolitano et al 2000]. A clinical trial of idebenone for MELAS is in progress [Author, personal observation].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because febrile illnesses may trigger acute exacerbations, individuals with MELAS should receive standard childhood vaccinations, flu vaccine, and pneumococcal vaccine.

Surveillance

Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Annual ophthalmologic, cardiologic (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with MELAS should avoid mitochondrial toxins such as: aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures [Lin & Thajeb 2007].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Anecdotal reports of effectiveness have not been substantiated by a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, which in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves and concluded that individuals with MELAS (who are already at increased risk for peripheral neuropathies) should avoid DCA [Kaufmann et al 2006a].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk maternal relatives may reveal individuals who have high mutational loads and are thus at risk of developing symptoms. However, no proven disease-modifying intervention exists at present.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Infertility may preclude pregnancy in some affected individuals. Women with MELAS should receive genetic counseling prior to pregnancy. During pregnancy, affected or at-risk women should be monitored for diabetes mellitus and respiratory insufficiency, which may require therapeutic interventions [Díaz-Lobato et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Oral administration of L-arginine seems to attenuate the severity of strokes when administered in the acute phase [Koga et al 2005] and to reduce the frequency of strokes when given interictally [Koga et al 2005, Koga et al 2010]; double-blind studies are needed to confirm these data.

Beneficial effects of oral succinate were reported in one individual [Oguro et al 2004].

The role of heart transplantation for progressive cardiomyopathy has been reviewed [Bhati et al 2005].

The transfer of nuclear DNA from fertilized oocytes or zygotes harboring a mtDNA pathogenic variant to a recipient enucleated recipient cells could theoretically prevent transmission of mtDNA diseases and proof of this concept has been demonstrated in pronuclear transfers from abnormally fertilized zygotes that were allowed to under several replications in vitro [Craven et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1), evaluation for the following most common MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (as described in Clinical Description) is recommended:

Multiglandular parathyroid disease

Prolactinoma

Gastrinoma and other entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice guidelines for MEN type 1 have been developed [Thakker et al 2012] (full text).

PHPT

Parathyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with MEN1, but it is controversial whether to perform subtotal (3.5 glands) or total parathyroidectomy, and whether surgery should be performed at an early or late stage of the disease.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy (i.e. removal of ≤3.5 glands) has resulted in persistent or recurrent hypercalcemia within ten to 12 years after surgery in 40%-60% of patients with MEN1, and in hypocalcemia requiring long-term therapy with vitamin D or its active metabolite calcitriol in 10%-30% [Thakker et al 2012].

Total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation in the forearm may use both fresh and cryopreserved parathyroid tissue. Procedure is dependent on the vitality of cryopreserved cells, which declines with the time interval from cryopreservation to autotransplantation.

Intraoperative monitoring of PTH by rapid assay during surgery to determine successful removal of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue, and to help with the decision to implant parathyroid tissue in the forearm.

Recurrent hypercalcemia is present in more than 50% of patients with autotransplanted parathyroid tissue, and surgical removal of the transplanted grafts is not always successful.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy is suggested as the initial treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN1; total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation may also be reserved for those with extensive disease either at first or at repeat surgery [Thakker et al 2012].

Parathyroidectomy may be reserved for symptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 while asymptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 do not undergo parathyroid surgery but have regular assessment for symptom onset and complications.

Bone anti-resorptive agents administered prior to surgery help to reduce hypercalcemia and limit PTH-dependent bone resorption, thus reducing future risk of osteoporosis.

Some studies have reported that treatment of MEN1-associated hyperparathyroidism by calcimimetics (which act on the calcium-sensing receptor) or octreotide LAR could be also effective, particularly for individuals in whom surgery either has failed or is contraindicated [Faggiano et al 2008, Falchetti et al 2008, Moyes et al 2010].

Pituitary Tumors

PRL-secreting tumors (prolactinomas)

Dopamine agonists such as cabergoline, bromocriptine, pergolide, and quinagolide are the preferred treatment for PRL-secreting tumors.

Cabergoline may be considered the current treatment of choice because of its limited side effects and greater potency [Tichomirowa et al 2009].

Growth hormone-secreting tumors

Transsphenoidal surgery, the first treatment of choice in growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, is effective in 50%-70% of cases.

Somatostatin analogs are the medical therapy of choice for the treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors. Octreotide and lanreotide normalize serum concentration of hGH and IGF1 in more than 50% of treated individuals [Beckers et al 2003].

Dopamine agonists are only rarely effective in treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, although they can be effective in mixed GH-PRL-secreting adenomas and 10%-20% of tumors resistant to somatostatin analogs [Colao et al 1997, Marzullo et al 1999, Freda 2002].

ACTH-secreting tumors

In most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome, the treatment is excision of an adenoma. In the series of Beckers et al [2003], 92% of individuals with an identified microadenoma and 67% with a macro-adenoma were considered to be cured immediately after surgery.

For those ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome that are not cured neurosurgically, radiotherapy may be necessary to reduce the production of ACTH.

Non-secreting pituitary adenomas

In non-secreting pituitary adenomas, surgical treatment using a transsphenoidal approach is the treatment of choice. However, in rare cases of very large adenomas with considerable extracellar extension, the transfrontal approach is the only possibility [Beckers 2002].

In 5%-15% of cases, medical treatment with potent dopaminergic agonists or with somatostatin analogs may shrink the adenoma before surgery [Colao et al 1998].

Published data are not sufficient to compare the treatment of sporadic versus MEN1 syndrome-associated pituitary tumors. Although opinion on this issue differs, Beckers et al [2003] have suggested that aggressive therapy is more frequently needed in MEN1-associated pituitary tumors than in sporadic tumors.

Well-Differentiated Tumors of the Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic (GEP) Tract

Gastrinoma

Medications that can control some of the GEP hormone excess-dependent features of MEN1 syndrome and thus prevent severe and sometimes life-threatening morbidity in MEN1 syndrome include proton pump inhibitors or H2-receptor blockers to reduce gastric acid output [Jensen 1999].

Surgical (versus nonsurgical) management of gastrinoma in MEN1 syndrome is controversial as successful outcome of surgery is rare.

Because MEN1 syndrome gastrinomas occur most commonly in the first and second portions of the duodenum, and less commonly the third and fourth portions of the duodenum and the first jejunal loop, it is important that all these sites be examined during preoperative imaging, intraoperative exploration, and pathologic examination of surgical specimens [Tonelli et al 2005].

A case of a primary lymph node gastrinoma in an individual with MEN1 has been reported and a review of similar cases in the international literature reveals that some gastrinomas in lymph nodes are not the result of metastastic spread. A long-term symptom-free follow up after the excision of a lymph node gastrinoma is the only reliable criterion for the diagnosis of a primary lymph node tumor. Thus, the findings of Zhou et al [2006] supported the possibility that any gastrinoma in persons with MEN1 syndrome should be surgically resected for cure if possible. Anlauf et al [2008] reported the presence of a primary lymph node gastrinoma or occult duodenal microgastrinoma with lymph node metastases in a person with MEN1 syndrome, confirming the need for a systematic search for the primary tumor.

Pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic surgery for asymptomatic individuals with MEN1 syndrome is controversial.

Surgery is usually indicated for insulinoma and most of the other pancreatic tumors observed in MEN1 syndrome. According to Tonelli et al [2005], the best surgical approach for an MEN1 insulinoma is intraoperative localization of nodules greater than approximately 0.5 cm diameter by palpation or intraoperative ultrasound followed either by enucleation (removal) of these nodules or by pancreatic resection if multiple large deep tumors are present.

The optimal therapy of gastrinoma is controversial.

In non-metastasizing gastrinoma within the pancreas, surgery may be curative and should be performed by an experienced endocrine surgeon. MEN1 patients will have multiple small submucosal duodenal gastrinomas and in experienced surgical centers local excision of these tumors with lymph node dissection, duodenectomy, or less commonly duodenopancreatectomy may be also considered together with patient preferences, as such approaches may improve the cure rate.

Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy provides the greatest likelihood of cure for gastrinoma in patients with MEN1, but can be associated with an increased operative mortality and long-term morbidity unless performed by an experienced surgeon.

Non-resectable tumor mass can be treated with somatostatin analogs, biotherapy, targeted radionuclide therapy, locoregional treatments and chemotherapy.

Inoperable or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may be subjected to a chemotherapy. Sunitinib and everolimus may be used for patients with advanced (inoperable or metastatic) progressive well differentiated pancreatic NETs [Thakker et al 2012].

Treatment for non-functioning pancreatic NETs is controversial, some centers considered surgical resection for lesions that are greater than 1 cm in size; other centers recommend surgery only if the tumor is greater than 2 cm.

Occult metastatic disease (i.e. tumors not detected by imaging investigations) may be present in a substantial proportion of these patients at the time of initial presentation.

Carcinoid Tumors

Long-acting somatostatin analogs can control the secretory hyperfunction associated with carcinoid syndrome [Tomassetti et al 2000]; however, the risk for malignant progression of the tumor remains unchanged [Schnirer et al 2003]. Therefore, the treatment of choice for carcinoid is surgical removal, if resectable.

Thymic carcinoid recurred in all individuals with MEN1 syndrome who were followed for more than one year after resection of the tumor [Gibril et al 2003].

For unresectable tumors and those individuals with metastatic disease, treatment with radiotherapy or chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cisplatin, etoposide) may be used [Oberg et al 2008].

Adrenocortical Tumors

Consensus guidelines for the management of MEN1-associated non-functioning tumors do not exist. The risk for malignancy is increased if the tumor has a diameter greater than 4 cm, although adrenocortical carcinomas have been identified in tumors smaller than 4 cm [Thakker et al 2012]. Surgery is suggested for adrenal tumors greater than 4 cm in diameter, for tumors that are 1-4 cm in diameter with atypical or suspicious radiologic features, or for tumors that show significant measurable growth over a six-month interval [Langer et al 2002, Schaefer et al 2008, Gatta-Cherifi et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The organs in MEN1 syndrome at highest risk for malignant tumor development — the duodenum, pancreas, and lungs (bronchial carcinoids) — are not suitable for ablative surgery.

The only prophylactic surgery possible in MEN1 syndrome is thymectomy to prevent thymic carcinoid [Brandi et al 2001]. Prophylactic thymectomy should be considered at the time of neck surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism in males with MEN1 syndrome, particularly those who are smokers or have relatives with thymic carcinoid [Ferolla et al 2005].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Postoperative hypoparathyroidism. Measurement of serum concentration of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on the first day following subtotal or total parathyroidectomy may be a good predictor of residual parathyroid function [Debruyne et al 1999, Mozzon et al 2004]. Repeated measurements of serum calcium concentration are also useful and less expensive than measurement of the serum concentration of PTH [Debruyne et al 1999].

After autotransplantation of the parathyroid glands, the serum concentration of PTH should be assessed no earlier than two months post-operatively and once a year thereafter; serum concentration of PTH should be measured simultaneously in separate blood samples, one from the arm without a parathyroid autotransplant and one from the arm with the parathyroid autotransplant. This procedure allows the physician both to assess the function of the transplanted parathyroid tissue and monitor for possible recurrence of hyperparathyroidism.

Intraoperative hypertensive crisis. Although pheochromocytoma occurs rarely in MEN1 syndrome, it is appropriate to measure urinary catecholamines prior to surgery to diagnose and treat a pheochromocytoma to avoid dangerous and potentially lethal blood pressure peaks during surgery.

Surveillance

Routine surveillance using biochemical testing and imaging is recommended for asymptomatic individuals with an MEN1 pathogenic variant and others at risk for MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (i.e., those known to have MEN1 syndrome and those with an affected parent who have not undergone molecular genetic testing); surveillance should begin in early childhood and continue for life. Early detection and treatment of the potentially malignant neuroendocrine tumors should reduce the morbidity and mortality of MEN1 syndrome. Such screening can detect the onset of the disease about ten years before symptoms develop, thereby providing an opportunity for earlier treatment [Bassett et al 1998].

MEN1 Minimal Surveillance Program 

For individuals known to have MEN1 syndrome or a family-specific pathogenic variant in MEN1 2, 3

Biochemical investigations

Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin, IGF-1, fasting glucose and insulin from age five years 2

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration, chromogranin–A, pancreatic polypeptide, glucagon, vasocative intestinal peptide for other pancreatic NET from age eight years 2

Fasting serum gastrin concentration from age 20 years 2

To be considered: fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH

Imaging

Every three to five years beginning at the specified age; the interval depending on whether there is biochemical evidence of a neoplasia and/or signs and symptoms of an MEN1-related tumor 2:

Head MRI from age five years 2

Abdominal CT or MRI from age 20 years 2

To be considered: yearly chest CT, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) octreotide scan

Notes:

1. Brandi et al [2001], Thakker et al [2012]

2. According to the International Guidelines for Diagnosis and Therapy of MEN Type 1 and Type 2 [Brandi et al 2001], and Clinical Practice Guidelines for MEN Type 1 [Thakker et al 2012]

3. Can be modified according to clinical suspicion and/or findings in an individual

For individuals at 50% risk of having MEN1 syndrome in whom genetic status is unknown

Biochemical investigations. Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin from age five years

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration from age ten years

Fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH from age ten years

Fasting serum gastrin concentration if individual has symptoms of ZES (reflux or diarrhea) from age 20 years

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk members of a family in which a germline MEN1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected relative [Lairmore et al 2004].

When molecular genetic testing for an MEN1 pathogenic variant is not possible or is not informative, individuals at 50% risk (i.e., first-degree relatives of an individual with MEN1 syndrome) should undergo routine evaluation (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). An Italian group described preliminary results of the use of cinacalcet (a calcimimetic drug) over a 12-month period in an individual with local recurrence of MEN1-PHPT. A dose of 30 mg daily was well tolerated. Serum concentration of calcium and PTH rapidly normalized and bone mass increased over pre-treatment with a return to normal bone turnover in the absence of antiresorptive agents [Falchetti et al 2008].

Another group followed eight individuals with MEN1-PHPT for a range of ten to 35 months. All were commenced on cinacalcet at a dose of 30 mg. Significant reductions were observed in serum calcium and PTH measurements; and cinacalcet was well tolerated [Moyes et al 2010].

Another Italian group treated eight individuals with MEN1-PHPT for six months with octreotide-LAR at a dose of 30 mg every four weeks in order to stabilize the duodenum-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor before parathyroidectomy [Faggiano et al 2008]. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria normalized in 75% and 62.5%, respectively. Serum concentrations of PTH decreased significantly in all treated individuals and normalized in 25%. However, larger studies are needed before introducing cinacalcet and/or octreotide-LAR as a cure for MEN1-PHPT.

Ablation using ethanol injection has been suggested as an alternative to reoperation of recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism [Veldman et al 2008].

Pituitary tumors. In a MEN1 animal model with a pituitary PRL-secreting adenoma, monotherapy with the anti-VEGF-A monoclonal antibody (mAb) G6-31 was studied. Tumor growth was evaluated by MRI and vascular density in tissue sections was assessed. Significant inhibition of the growth of the pituitary adenoma leading to an increased mean tumor doubling-free survival and lowering of serum prolactin concentration were observed in treated animals but not controls. Additionally, the vascular density in pancreatic islet tumors was significantly reduced by the treatment. Such findings suggest that VEGF-A blockade may represent a nonsurgical treatment for benign tumors of the endocrine system, including those associated with MEN1 syndrome [Korsisaari et al 2008].

Well-differentiated tumors of the gastro-entero-pancreatic (GEP) tract. Somatostatin analogs may be used to control proliferation of enterochromaffin-like cells. In one study, long-term administration of octreotide resulted in regression of a type II gastric carcinoid tumor [Tomassetti et al 2000]. As for MEN1-primary hyperparathyroidism, more extensive studies are needed to establish the efficacy of such molecules for clinical use in individuals with MEN1-ZES.

Inhibitors of tyrosine kinase receptors (TKRs) and of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway have been reported to be effective in treating pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NET) [Raymond et al 2011, Yao et al 2011] because pancreatic NET may express TKRs. Treatment of individuals who have advanced, well-differentiated pancreatic NET with sunitimib malate, which inhibits TKRs, led to increased overall survival and a doubling in progression-free survival when compared to affected individuals receiving placebo. Treatment of individuals who have advanced, low-grade, or intermediate-grade pancreatic NET with everolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, also led to a doubling of median progression-free survival when compared to affected individuals who received placebo [Yao et al 2011]. These two studies mainly included individuals without MEN1; in fact, in the sunitimib study (comprising 171 individuals), only two individuals had MEN1 and neither was in the treatment arm [Raymond et al 2011]. In the everolimus study (410 individuals), details of MEN1 status were not provided. However, it seems highly plausible that these results can be extrapolated to individuals with MEN1 harboring pancreatic NET [Thakker et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Referral to an endocrinologist

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Biochemical evaluations

Plasma calcitonin

Plasma catecholamines and metanephrines

Serum calcium and parathyroid hormone

Workup to evaluate for metastatic disease in individuals with MTC

CT with contrast for chest and abdomen

MRI of liver with nodal disease or calcitonin >400 pg/mL

Treatment of Manifestations

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Standard treatment for MTC is surgical removal of the thyroid and lymph node dissection [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009, National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Current NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of therapeutic external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for incomplete tumor resection or extrathyroidal extension with positive margins [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Two kinase inhibitors – vandetanib and cabozantinib – have been shown to improve progression-free survival and in some cases cause disease regression in unresectable or advanced metastatic MTC [Elisei et al 2013, Wells et al 2013].

All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy need thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

Autotransplantation of parathyroid tissue is not typically performed at the time of thyroidectomy unless there is evidence of hyperparathyroidism [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Pheochromocytomas detected by biochemical testing and radionuclide imaging are removed by adrenalectomy, which may be performed using video-assisted laparoscopy. Historically, some specialists recommended bilateral adrenalectomy at the time of demonstration of tumor on just a single adrenal gland because of the strong probability that the other adrenal gland would develop a tumor within ten years. However, because of the risk for adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis following bilateral adrenalectomy, most experts now recommend unilateral adrenalectomy in unilateral tumors and cortical-sparing adrenal surgery with close monitoring of the remnant tissue in persons with one remaining adrenal gland or bilateral pheochromocytoma [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Hypertensive treatment prior to adrenalectomy involves the use of α- and β-adrenergic receptor blockade [Pacak et al 2005].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia diagnosed at the time of thyroidectomy is treated either with resection of the visibly enlarged parathyroid gland(s), subtotal parathyroidectomy, or total parathyroidectomy with forearm autograft [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, in most individuals with MEN 2A, hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed many years after thyroidectomy.

Individuals with biochemical evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism who have undergone prior thyroidectomy should have preoperative localization with excision of the localized hypertrophied parathyroid glands and forearm autotransplantation.

Therapy with medications to control primary hyperparathyroidism should be considered in individuals with a high risk for surgical mortality, limited life expectancy, or persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism after one or more surgical attempts [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is the primary preventive measure for individuals with an identified germline RET pathogenic variant [Cohen & Moley 2003, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is safe for all age groups; however, the timing of the surgery is controversial [Moley et al 1998]. According to the consensus statement from the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force, the age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is performed can be guided by the codon position of the RET pathogenic variant (Table 4, Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, these guidelines continue to be modified as more data become available.

Table 4. 

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

ATA 1 Risk Level

Pathogenic Variants 2, 3

Age of Prophylactic Surgery

Age to Begin Screening

For PHEO

For HPT 4

Level D(highest risk)

p.Ala883Phep.Met918Thrp.Val804Met+p.Glu805Lys 5p.Val804Met+p.Tyr806Cys 5p.Val804Met+p.Ser904Cys 5

As soon as possible in 1st year of life

8 yrs

NA

Level C

p.Cys634Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyr

<5 yrs

8 yrs

8 yrs

Level B

p.Cys609Phe/Arg/Gly/Ser/Tyrp.Cys611Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys618Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Cys620Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys630Arg/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Asp631Tyrp.633/9 bp dupp.634/12 bp dupp.Val804Met+p.Val778Ile 5

Consider <5 yrs; may delay if criteria met 5

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Level A

p.Arg321Glyp.531/9 bp dupp.532 dupp.Cys515Serp.Gly533Cysp.Arg600Glnp.Lys603Glup.Tyr606Cysp.635/insert ELCR;p.Thr636Prop.Lys666Glup.Glu768Aspp.Asn777Serp.Leu790Phep.Val804Leu/Metp.Gly819Lysp.Arg833Cysp.Arg844Glnp.Arg866Trpp.Ser891Alap.Arg912Pro

May delay beyond age 5 yrs if criteria met 6

20 yrs

20 yrs

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

1. 

ATA = American Thyroid Association

2. 

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

3. 

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

4. 

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

5. 

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

6. 

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

ATA = American Thyroid Association

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Thyroidectomy for C-cell hyperplasia, before progression to invasive MTC, may allow surgery to be limited to thyroidectomy with sparing of lymph nodes [Brandi et al 2001, Kahraman et al 2003].

For all individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who have not had a thyroidectomy, annual biochemical screening is recommended with immediate thyroidectomy if results are abnormal [Szinnai et al 2003].

Annual serum calcitonin screening [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] should begin at age:

Six months for children with MEN 2B

Three to five years for children with MEN 2A or FMTC

Caution should be used in interpreting calcitonin results for children younger than age three years, especially those younger than age six months [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is not routinely offered to at-risk individuals in whom the disorder has not been confirmed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prior to any surgery, the presence of a functioning pheochromocytoma should be excluded by appropriate biochemical screening in any individual with MEN 2A or MEN 2B. In a prospective study of at-risk family members with the pathogenic variant, 8% had pheochromocytoma detected at the same time as MTC [Nguyen et al 2001].

If pheochromocytoma is detected, adrenalectomy should be performed before thyroidectomy to avoid intraoperative catecholamine crisis [Lee & Norton 2000].

Surveillance

MTC. Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with MTC who have undergone total thyroidectomy and neck nodal dissections have recurrent disease [Cohen & Moley 2003]. Furthermore, thyroid glands removed from individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who had normal plasma calcitonin concentrations have been found to contain MTC [Skinner et al 1996]. Therefore, continued monitoring for residual or recurrent MTC is indicated after thyroidectomy, even if thyroidectomy is performed prior to biochemical evidence of disease.

The screening protocol for MTC after prophylactic thyroidectomy is an annual measurement of serum calcitonin [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. More frequent follow up is recommended for those with residual disease.

Hypoparathyroidism. All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy and autotransplantation of the parathyroids need monitoring for possible hypoparathyroidism.

Pheochromocytoma. For individuals whose initial screening results are negative for pheochromocytoma, annual biochemical screening is recommended, followed by MRI and/or CT if the biochemical results are abnormal [Pacak et al 2005, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Other screening studies, such as scintigraphy or positron emission tomography, may be warranted in some individuals.

MEN 2A. Annual biochemical screening beginning at age eight years has been recommended for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634 and at age 20 years for a pathogenic variant in all other codons [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Screening as for MEN 2A is indicated, as not all families classified as FMTC are MTC-only [Moers et al 1996].

MEN 2B. Annual screening should begin at age eight years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia. Annual biochemical screening is recommended for affected individuals who have not had parathyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation.

MEN 2A. Screening should start at age eight years for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634, and by age 20 years for individuals with other RET pathogenic variants [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Periodic screening should begin at age 20 years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

MEN 2B. Screening is unnecessary as individuals with MEN 2B do not have an increased risk of hyperparathyroidism.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide and veralipride) and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers) have a high potential to cause an adverse reaction in individuals with pheochromocytoma.

Other medications including monoamine oxidase inhibitors, sympathomimetics (e.g., ephedrine), and certain peptide and corticosteroid hormones may also cause complications; tricyclic antidepressants are inconsistent in causing adverse reactions [Eisenhofer et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. The American Society of Clinical Oncologists (ASCO) identifies MEN 2 as a Group 1 disorder, i.e., a well-defined hereditary cancer syndrome for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [American Society of Clinical Oncology 2003]. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known:

MEN 2A.

RET molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk children by age five years. The finding of MTC in the thyroid of a 12-month-old with a RET pathogenic variant suggests that molecular genetic testing should be performed even earlier when possible [Machens et al 2004].

FMTC. Recommendations for families with known FMTC are the same as for MEN 2A.

MEN 2B.

RET molecular genetic testing should be performed as soon as possible after birth in all children known to be at risk [Brandi et al 2001].

The following screening of at-risk family members if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known:

Neck ultrasound examination and basal and/or stimulated calcitonin measurements for MTC

Albumin-corrected calcium or ionized calcium for hyperparathyroidism

Measurement of plasma or 24-hour urine metanephrines and normetanephrines as appropriate [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] for pheochromocytoma

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Clinical trials of multikinase inhibitors such as sorafenib, sunitinib, and ponatinib are currently underway. NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of clinical trial participation for individuals who fail standard treatment with vandetanib and cabozantinib [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015].

Sorafenib is FDA approved for use in renal cell and hepatocellular carcinoma. In a Phase II clinical trial of sorafenib, 16 individuals with sporadic MTC had a partial response (1/16) or stable disease (15/16) [Lam et al 2010]. A small Phase II trial of treatment with sunitinib demonstrated objective response in three (50%) of six individuals with metastatic MTC and stable disease in two individuals [Carr et al 2010]. Ponatinib has been shown to inhibit RET kinase activity and diminish medullary thyroid cancer in mice [De Falco et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with Menkes disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Evaluation of feeding and nutrition

Assessment of bladder function

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with occipital horn syndrome (OHS), evaluations for the following are recommended:

Bladder diverticula

Inguinal hernias

Vascular tortuosity

Dysautonomia (chronic diarrhea, orthostatic hypotension). Note: Some medical centers have clinical autonomic testing laboratories.

Mild cognitive deficits

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with ATP7A-related distal motor neuropathy (DMN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

EMG with nerve conduction studies

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Menkes disease

Gastrostomy tube placement to manage caloric intake and general nutrition in some males with classic Menkes disease

Surgery for bladder diverticula that occur in classic Menkes disease

Developmental intervention

ATP7A-related DMN

Physical therapy (strength and stretching exercises)

Occupational therapy

Ankle foot orthotics

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Menkes disease. In classic Menkes disease, treatment with subcutaneous injections of copper histidine or copper chloride before age ten days normalizes developmental outcome in some individuals and improves the neurologic outcome in others [Kaler et al 2008, Kaler et al 2010].

Note: Despite very early copper histidine treatment, some infants show no significant improvement relative to the natural history of untreated Menkes disease [Kaler et al 1995, Kaler et al 2008]. The type and severity of the ATP7A pathogenic variant determine the response to early copper treatment.

To maintain serum copper concentration in the normal range (70-150 µg/dL), the suggested dose of copper chloride is:

For children age <1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 2x/day

For children age >1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 1x/day

Occipital horn syndrome. Although there is no evidence that copper replacement therapy for OHS is clinically beneficial, it would be reasonable to expect even better overall neurodevelopmental and neurocognitive outcomes if individuals with OHS were identified early and treated with copper during their first three years.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be necessary to prevent bladder infection.

Surveillance

For infants being treated with copper histidine or copper chloride, monitor serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels to avoid supranormal levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to test male relatives at risk for Menkes disease for the ATP7A pathogenic variant identified in the family before age ten days in order to promptly begin copper replacement treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Adeno-associated viral gene therapy in a mouse model is under active investigation with promising early results [Donsante et al 2011].

Newborn screening is not currently available for Menkes disease because biochemical strategies are not practical with current newborn screening platforms. A pilot study to evaluate the potential of sequence analysis of ATP7A from dried blood spots is currently in progress. If successful, such testing would allow early diagnosis and treatment.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Therapies proven to be ineffective include vitamin C.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged red fibers), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height and weight to assess growth

Audiologic evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Assessment of cognitive abilities

Physical therapy assessment

Neurologic evaluation, including MRI, MRS, and EEG if seizures are suspected

Cardiac evaluation

Medical genetics consultation including genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

The seizure disorder can be treated with conventional anticonvulsant therapy. No controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different anticonvulsants. Levetiracetam, clonazepam, zonisamide, and valproic acid (VPA) have been used to treat myoclonic epilepsy; however, VPA may cause secondary carnitine deficiency and should be avoided or used with L-carnitine supplementation.

The myoclonus improved substantially in three of four individuals treated with levetiracetam [Crest et al 2004, Mancuso et al 2007]. Clonazepam can also reduce myoclonus.

Physical therapy is helpful for any impaired motor abilities.

Aerobic exercise is helpful in MERRF and other mitochondrial diseases [Taivassalo & Haller 2004].

Standard pharmacologic therapy is used to treat cardiac symptoms.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of affected individuals with heterogeneous mitochondrial diseases, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].

Surveillance

Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals (e.g. every 6-12 months initially) to monitor progression of disease and the appearance of new symptoms.

Annual neurologic, ophthalmologic, cardiology (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.

If normal for three years, less frequent evaluations can be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with MERRF should avoid mitochondrial toxins including aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

During pregnancy, affected or at-risk women should be monitored for diabetes mellitus and respiratory insufficiency, which may require therapeutic interventions.

Therapies Under Investigation

The transfer of nuclear DNA from fertilized oocytes or zygotes harboring a mtDNA pathogenic variant to a recipient enucleated recipient cell could theoretically prevent transmission of mtDNA diseases and proof of this concept has been demonstrated in pronuclear transfers from abnormally fertilized zygotes that were allowed to undergo several replications in vitro [Craven et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish medical needs and extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM), the following evaluations are recommended:

In newborns: airway assessment for evidence of upper-airway obstruction with or without choanal atresia and urgent evaluation for possible esophageal atresia

Audiology assessment (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview)

Examination for midline cleft palate, and referral to multidisciplinary cleft palate team as required

Cardiology and/or echocardiographic assessment for structural heart defects

Renal ultrasound examination

Developmental assessment

Other evaluations as dictated by the specific clinical situation (e.g., skeletal x-ray for scoliosis)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Mandibulofacial dysostosis

Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation and/or tracheostomy for initial stabilization.

Treatment of craniofacial manifestations is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, occupational and speech/language therapy.

Intellectual disability. Occupational, physical, and/or speech/language therapies are involved as needed to optimize developmental outcome.

Hearing loss. Treatment is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aid(s), bone-anchored hearing aid(s), and/or cochlear implant(s). See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview.

Esophageal atresia is managed as for nonsyndromic forms of EA, the definitive management being surgical. See Esophageal Atresia/Tracheoesophageal fistula Overview.

Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner.

Thumb anomalies. Preaxial polydactyly, if present, may be treated surgically; other thumb anomalies are not generally functionally significant.

Short stature is managed expectantly. Of note, the response to human growth hormone has not been specifically reported.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in the disorder (typically a pediatrician). Clinical follow up should include measurement of growth parameters as well as specific enquiry into symptoms of seizures and obstructive sleep apnea.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Manifestations of MFDM in an affected fetus may include intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), polyhydramnios, increased nuchal translucency, and/or fetal structural anomalies (e.g., cardiac and renal defects). Management of an affected fetus should include a detailed (‘level II’) fetal ultrasound assessment, and consultation(s) with high-risk obstetrics and/or neonatology, as appropriate for the clinical situation.

The delivery room team should be aware of the possible need for intubation in the event of airway compromise.

Polyhydramnios, if present, should prompt urgent postnatal evaluation for esophageal atresia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Studies of the Treacher-Collins syndrome (TCS) mouse show the craniofacial anomalies in that model to be p53-dependent [Jones et al 2008]. Although the role of p53 as a tumor suppressor protein makes it an unlikely therapeutic target, blockade of other proapoptotic genes downstream of p53 has been suggested as an alternative approach [Trainor et al 2009].

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with myofibrillar myopathy (MFM), the following evaluations are recommended:

EMG

Routine ECG to identify arrhythmias and cardiac conduction defects; Holter monitoring if symptoms suggest an intermittent arrhythmia; echocardiogram if cardiac symptoms are present

Respiratory function tests if respiratory symptoms are present

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) should be considered in individuals with arrhythmia and/or cardiac conduction defects. Individuals with progressive or life-threatening cardiomyopathy are candidates for cardiac transplantation.

Respiratory support, consisting of continuous or bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP or BIPAP), initially at night and later in the daytime, is indicated in individuals with hypercapnea and other signs of incipient ventilatory failure.

Range of motion physical therapy and assistive devices are appropriate for those with advanced muscle weakness. Treatment of scoliosis by spinal fusion is appropriate. Orthoses are indicated for treatment of foot drop.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator placement for individuals with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Physical examination to monitor disease progression yearly or less often depending on rate of progression

Electrocardiogram and/or echocardiogram yearly for early detection of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function tests for individuals with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Affected pregnant women may need assistance during delivery if they have significant weakness of their abdominal muscles.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

The role of strengthening exercises has not been defined.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with OPA3-related methylglutaconic aciduria (Costeff syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete ophthalmologic examination

Visual evoked potentials

Complete neurologic examination

Developmental/educational assessment

Echocardiogram

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive.

A multidisciplinary team including a neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, ophthalmologist, biochemical geneticist, and physical therapist is required for the care of affected individuals.

Visual impairment, spasticity, and movement disorder should be treated as in the general population.

Surveillance

Ophthalmologic, neurologic, and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings are appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Tobacco and alcohol use

Medications known to impair mitochondrial function

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

A possible role for coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) has been hypothesized in the treatment of OPA3-related methylglutaconic aciduria because both 3-methylglutaconate (3-MGC) and CoQ10 can be produced from DMAPP, an intermediate metabolite in the synthesis of cholesterol [Costeff et al 1998]. Therefore, if CoQ10 production is impaired, more DMAPP would possibly be directed through the mevalonate shunt to 3-methyglutaconyl-CoA production. The findings of significantly lower-than-normal plasma concentrations of CoQ10 in six individuals with OPA3-related 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, in two individuals with Barth syndrome, and in four individuals with unclassified type 3-MGA-uria support this hypothesis.

However, administration of CoQ10 to six individuals with OPA3-related 3-methylglutaconic aciduria showed no clinical benefit or change in the excretion of 3-MGC [Costeff et al 1998]. The question of whether initiation of CoQ10 supplements early in the course of disease would prevent some neurologic damage remains to be answered.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Arterial blood gas analysis; serum concentration of electrolytes, lactate, and CK; coagulation studies; presence of myoglobin in the urine and elevated myoglobin levels in serum.

Continuous core temperature monitoring until the syndrome has resolved

Measurement of serum CK concentrations until normalized

Family history of anesthetic complications

Once the syndrome has resolved, neurologic assessment for evidence of muscle damage

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

For management guidelines, see Guidelines/Consensus Statements and Figure 2.

Early diagnosis of MH, together with the administration of dantrolene sodium, is essential in the successful treatment of an acute episode of MH:

Discontinue use of potent inhalation agents and succinylcholine.

Increase minute ventilation to lower end-tidal CO2.

Get help. One resource is the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) hotline for acute cases: 800-MH-HYPER (800-644-9737). Similar hotlines exist in other countries, specifically the UK, Germany, and Brazil.

Prepare and administer dantrolene: 2.5 mg/kg initial dose. Tachycardia, hypercarbia, and muscle rigidity respond rapidly; multiple doses of dantrolene may be needed. The suggested upper limit is 10 mg/kg; however, more may be given as needed. Continue dantrolene at 1.0 mg/kg every four to eight hours for 24-48 hours, titrating to the desired effect (resolution of hyperthermia, acidosis, and myoglobinemia). Dantrolene sodium is a hydantoin molecule that binds to a specific region of the RYR-1 channel. It decreases the uncontrolled release of intracellular calcium [Paul-Pletzer et al 2002]. The toxicity profile of dantrolene, when administered acutely, is extremely benign. Calcium channel blocking agents should not be administered with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Dantrolene may aggravate previously existing muscle weakness.

Begin cooling measures. If patient is hyperthermic, administer iced solutions, ice packs to groin, axilla, and neck, nasogastric lavage with iced solution, or more aggressive measures as needed. Stop cooling measures at core body temperature of 38.5° C.

Treat cardiac arrhythmias as needed. Do not use calcium channel blockers.

Obtain blood gases, serum concentration of electrolytes and CK, blood and urine for myoglobin, and coagulation profile. Check values every six to 12 hours. The earliest sign of rhabdomyolysis is myoglobinuria/myoglobinemia. Serum CK levels may not rise for several hours. Serum CK concentration may remain elevated for days and should be monitored until it returns to normal.

Treat hyperkalemia with hyperventilation, glucose and insulin, and calcium as dictated by laboratory and cardiovascular changes.

Ensure urine output of 2.0 mL/kg/hr with mannitol, furosemide, and fluids as needed.

Evaluate need for invasive monitoring and continued mechanical ventilation.

Observe the individual in an ICU for at least 36 hours because of the 25% chance of recrudescence following initial treatment. Dantrolene should be continued for at least 36 hours following successful treatment in a dose of about 1.0 mg/kg every six hours or more depending on whether signs of MH are present.

Affected individuals who display extreme hyperthermia are at risk for disseminated intravascular coagulation. A coagulation profile should be obtained on all individuals experiencing fulminant MH.

Refer the affected individual to the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) for information and counseling. Complete the Adverse Metabolic Reaction to Anesthesia (AMRA) form for enrollment in the North American MH Registry.

Refer the individual to a MH diagnostic center for muscle biopsy and contracture testing after discussion with MH consultants associated with MHAUS.

Myoglobinuria. The presence of myoglobinuria mandates referral to a neurologist for further investigation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive measures for individuals known to be susceptible to MH or for any individual with an equivocal contracture test response (MHE) (treated clinically as MHS):

For any individual undergoing anesthesia, obtain a thorough anesthetic history to determine the possibility of the individual or a family member having experienced an MH episode. When suspicion of MHS exists, family members should not be given trigger anesthetic agents, i.e., potent volatile anesthetic agents such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane, and isoflurane or the depolarizing agent succinylcholine.

In general, individuals undergoing general anesthetics that exceed 30 minutes in duration should have their temperature monitored using an electronic temperature probe. Skin liquid crystal temperature sensors are not recommended as they have been found to be unreliable indicators of changing temperature during human malignant hyperthermia (MH) events.

Individuals with any form of myotonia (see Differential Diagnosis) should not receive succinylcholine.

Individuals with central core disease, multiminicore disease, nemaline myopathy, congenital fiber-type disproportion, or Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy should not receive trigger anesthetics.

Individuals with MHS should carry proper identification as to their susceptibility; identification bracelets are available through the Medic Alert Foundation, Turlock, California (www.medicalert.org).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals who are MH susceptible should avoid potent inhalation anesthetics and succinylcholine.

Calcium channel blockers should not be given together with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result.

Serotonin antagonist (5HT3-anatagonist) antiemetics should be used cautiously, as sudden death has been reported in a child with multiminicore disease caused by a pathogenic variant in RYR1 (p.Arg3983His) after receiving a therapeutic dose of ondansetron [Gener et al 2010].

Individuals with MH are generally advised to avoid extremes of heat but not to restrict athletic activity or lifestyle unless they have experienced overt rhabdomyolysis or heat stroke.

In individuals with MH undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, aggressive rewarming should be avoided, as it may be associated with development of clinical signs of MH [Metterlein et al 2011b].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If a pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives is warranted to identify those who also have the pathogenic variant and thus will benefit from avoiding anesthetic agents that increase the risk for a malignant hyperthermia episode.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a pregnant woman with MHS requires non-emergent surgery during the pregnancy, a non-triggering anesthetic (local, nerve block, epidural, spinal anesthesia, or a total intravenous general anesthetic) should be administered. Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists mandated monitoring should be used, along with core temperature monitoring. Fetal monitoring should follow standard guidelines. Dantrolene should not be administered in preparation for surgery or labor and delivery.

Continuous epidural analgesia is highly recommended for labor and delivery. If a Cesarean delivery is indicated in a woman who does not have an epidural catheter in place, neuraxial (spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural) anesthesia is recommended, if not otherwise contraindicated. If a general anesthetic is indicated, a total intravenous anesthetic technique should be administered, with an anesthesia machine that has been prepared for an MH-susceptible individual.

In the case of a fetus whose father is known to be MH susceptible but whose mother is not known to be MH susceptible, regional anesthesia or general anesthesia without trigger agents is recommended.

For further information regarding the management of pregnant women with MHS, see 2009 guidelines developed by the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States.

Therapies Under Investigations

Preliminary investigation by Lanner et al [2012] has shown that 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) prevents heat-induced sudden death in a knock-out mouse model of MH. This finding is suggestive of possible effectiveness of AICAR in the prophylactic treatment of humans with enhanced susceptibility to exercise/ heat-induced sudden death associated with mutation of RYR1.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with microcephaly-capillary malformation (MIC-CAP) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment to determine the types of services and therapies needed (e.g., physiotherapy, occupational therapy, communication assistance)

Pediatric neurology evaluation

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess for functional vision, strabismus, refractive errors, and optic atrophy

Swallowing/feeding evaluation to assess for dysphagia and aspiration and determine need for enteral feeding

Baseline audiology evaluation

Baseline echocardiogram and abdominal ultrasound examination

Pediatric palliative care consultation and psychosocial support for family

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Development. As for all children with profound developmental disability, infants and children with MIC-CAP syndrome require stimulation and recreation. Given that most have poor vision, regular tactile and auditory stimulation are recommended.

Physical habilitation. Central hypotonia and peripheral hypertonia require care by physicians and therapists specializing in physical habilitation. If the child is non-ambulatory, proper seating and bracing is required to maintain posture and prevent contractures.

Neurologic. Seizure management during infancy requires an experienced pediatric neurology team to manage medically refractory epilepsy. Multiple anticonvulsant medications are frequently required for adequate seizure control. A few individuals have responded favorably to ketogenic diet or corticosteroids.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues (e.g., enteral feeding team to optimize nutrition and weight gain)

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular follow up with a child neurologist for seizure management

Regular follow up with a complex care/palliative care team or experienced pediatrician to monitor for complications associated with severe neurologic impairment (e.g., aspiration, constipation, contractures, pressure sores)

Periodic reevaluation with a clinical geneticist to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproic acid. One individual with MIC-CAP syndrome died from complications of pancreatitis after starting valproic acid for seizures [Carter et al 2011]. However, several other individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome have been treated with valproic acid without adverse effects. Therefore, it is unclear whether or not an association exists between MIC-CAP syndrome and adverse outcomes with valproic acid therapy. The benefits of use of valproic acid for seizure management in some patients may outweigh the potential risk for serious complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with the primary autosomal recessive microcephalies (MCPH) and Seckel syndrome (SCKS) spectrum disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurology consultation

Age-adapted psychomotor or neuropsychological evaluation

Electroencephalogram if seizures are suspected

Review of brain MRI performed at the time of diagnosis to evaluate for malformations which can have a prognostic value in young children

If short stature is present, skeletal survey (if not performed at the time of diagnosis)

Treatment of Manifestations

Therapy is supportive and involves the following:

Special education programs tailored to the needs of the individual

Speech and language therapy

Behavioral therapy as needed

Occupational therapy as needed

Community services that provide support for families

Ritalin® may be helpful to treat marked hyperkinesia.

Seizures are usually responsive to monotherapy with standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Growth hormone may be considered in individuals with mild growth retardation; objective efficiency of GH therapy has not been evaluated.

Intubation may be difficult in affected individuals with small chin [Gürkan et al 2006].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of head circumference and stature using standard growth charts

Neurologic follow-up from birth to adulthood to detect behavioral difficulties, hyperactivity, attention disorder, and motor problems (spasticity), and to monitor for evidence of seizures which can be late onset

Periodic neuropsychologic evaluation in order to adapt interventions and schooling to the level of the individual's cognitive abilities

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with microphthalmia with linear skin lesions (MLS) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic examination

Dermatologic evaluation to look for skin lesions

Brain MRI with and without contrast to evaluate for corpus callosum dysgenesis and other neurologic abnormalities

Developmental assessment, with further evaluation if significant delays are identified

Hearing evaluation

Cardiac examination

Consideration of abdominal MRI and standard protocols for management of diaphragmatic hernia

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Use of a prosthesis in severe microphthalmia and anophthalmia. In some cases ophthalmologic surgery can be considered to expand the palpebral fissures and orbit by fitting the infant with prostheses of progressively increasing size.

Considerations for surgical intervention in severe microphthalmia and anophthalmia are best made after age six months, when postnatal growth of the orbit can be assessed.

Regular care of a dermatologist for individuals with significant skin lesions

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for evaluation and treatment if microcephaly, seizures, and/or other neurologic abnormalities are present

Appropriate developmental stimulation and special education as indicated for developmental delay

Routine care for diaphragmatic hernia, cardiomyopathy, congenital heart defects, and other malformations, when present

Surveillance

Monitoring and follow up with ophthalmologist, dermatologist, pediatric neurologist, or other professionals as needed is appropriate.

For those with cardiomyopathy, complete and periodic cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of heart failure is needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Milroy disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical genetics consultation

Referral to a lymphedema therapist

Lymphoscintigraphy

Treatment of Manifestations

Guidance by a lymphedema therapist regarding management of edema (e.g., fitting stockings, massage) is important. Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement is usually possible with the use of properly fitted compression hosiery and/or bandaging and well fitting, supportive shoes. Toe gloves may be of benefit and good skin care is essential. Such treatment measures may improve the cosmetic appearance of the limb, decrease the size of the limb, and reduce the risk of complications.

Prevention of Secondary Complications 

Secondary cellulitis is prevented through the following measures:

Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema

Prompt treatment for early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics. It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously.

Prophylactic antibiotics in recurrent cases (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily)

Surveillance 

Routine follow up in a clinic specializing in the care of lymphedema is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Wounds to the swollen limbs, because of their reduced resistance to infection

Long periods of immobility with the legs in a dependent position (e.g., on a long airplane flight)

Medications, particularly calcium channel-blocking drugs, that can cause increased leg swelling in some individuals

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the FLT4 pathogenic variant in a family is known, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives ensures identification of those who will benefit from treatment early in the disease course.

If the pathogenic variant in a family is not known, evaluation of relatives at risk by physical examination is appropriate in order to identify those who will benefit from treatment early in the course of the disease. The use of properly fitted compression hosiery and advice to reduce the risk of cellulitis of the legs and feet can be beneficial.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Ultrasound scanning during pregnancy may indicate if a fetus is affected if swelling of the dorsum of the feet is noted in the second or third trimester. The fetus may have mild pleural effusions which frequently resolve before birth [S Mansour, personal communication]. Very rarely, the fetus may present with hydrops fetalis. If the mother is affected by Milroy disease there may be an increase in swelling during the pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Attempts at over-expressing VEGF-C, the ligand for FLT4, have been successful in producing functional lymphatics in mice [Karkkainen et al 2000b]. This is now in clinical trial in Finland for human breast cancer-related lymphedema.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Treatment with diuretics is of no proven benefit.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital mirror movements (CMM), evaluations to document difficulties with activities of daily living are recommended.

A clinical genetics consultation may also be proposed.

Treatment of Manifestations

It is important to avoid stigmatizing children and adolescents with CMM and to assure that educational opportunities including university are not lost as a result of the mirror movements.

Physicians should explain the disorder to parents and teachers, making it clear that intellectual disability is not associated.

Adaptation of the school environment (e.g., allocation of extra time during examinations and limitation of the amount of handwriting) is recommended.

Adolescents and young adults should be encouraged to consider a profession that does not require complex bimanual movements, repetitive or sustained hand movements, or extensive handwriting.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Complex bimanual movements or sustained/repetitive hand activity should be limited in order to reduce the occurrence of pain or discomfort in the upper limbs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Noninvasive modulation of brain interhemispheric communication may be a possibility in the future [Galléa et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dysferlinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of strength and function in the arms, hands, legs, and feet; especially calf muscle

If needed, measurement of serum CK concentration

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No definitive treatments exist for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies.

Management should be tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility

Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Use of respiratory aids when indicated

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders

Prevention of Secondary Complications 

Stretching exercises to prevent contractures are indicated.

Surveillance

The following surveillance is appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function

Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those subtypes with known occurrence of cardiac involvement

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Control weight to avoid obesity; avoid use of steroids [Walter et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial of deflazacort in individuals with genetically confirmed dysferlinopathy has been completed [Walter et al 2013]. After six months of treatment, muscle strength did not improve; rather, there was a trend towards worsening muscle strength for affected individuals on deflazacort treatment. Muscle strength improved after the study drug was discontinued. Side effects included a broad spectrum typically seen in those taking steroids. Therefore, deflazacort treatment is not effective as a therapy for individuals with dysferlinopathies; additionally, the authors concluded that steroid treatment in general should be avoided in this condition [Walter et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with McKusick-Kaufman Syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Pelvic ultrasound examination to detect genitourinary malformations (Table 3)

Skeletal radiographs to detect osseous polydactyly and syndactyly

ECG and echocardiogram, to detect congenital heart defects

Renal ultrasound examination and a renal imaging study to detect pelvicalyceal abnormalities, renal hypoplasia, or cystic dysplasia of the kidneys

Assessment of height, weight, and head circumference and initiation of a carefully maintained growth chart to document obesity that may indicate Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS).

Determination of developmental status by standard screening tools to detect developmental delay that may indicate BBS. If delays are identified, a more detailed assessment of developmental and cognitive abilities is indicated.

Ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram to evaluate for manifestations of BBS in children with weight greater than the 90th centile and/or short stature and/or developmental delay or intellectual disability.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Prompt surgical repair of the obstruction causing hydrometrocolpos and drainage of the accumulated fluid is important.

Standard treatment is indicated for the following:

Polydactyly and syndactyly

Congenital heart defects

Anal anomalies and Hirschsprung disease (surgical treatment)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis of the vaginal orifice are the most common complications in individuals with MKS following surgical drainage of the HMC [Slavotinek & Biesecker 2000].

Care should be taken with anesthesia in the neonatal period if severe hydrometrocolpos causing diaphragmatic compression is present. Gastric decompression and preoxygenation prior to tracheal intubation were used in the anesthetic management of one neonate with severe hydrometrocolpos compressing the diaphragm [Tekin et al 2003].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

In individuals with renal abnormalities, monitoring of blood pressure and renal function.

In individuals with interim history of severe constipation, rectal biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung disease

Continuing surveillance for manifestations that would establish the diagnosis of BBS including the following:

Serial growth measurements to track height and weight until at least age five years to document obesity that can occur with BBS

Developmental assessments until at least age five years to detect developmental disabilities that can occur with BBS

Regular ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram (ERG) (if appropriate) after age five years to evaluate for visual signs and symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa [A Verloes, personal communication]

As diabetes mellitus is a rare complication of BBS, measurement of fasting blood glucose as appropriate

Investigations for rarer complications of BBS, including hearing assessment, dental assessment, electroencephalogram, and thyroid function tests as appropriate

Consideration of later complications of surgery for HMC, including recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis and infection of the vaginal tract [Lueth & Wood 2014]. Surveillance as appropriate for each individual is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In the newborn with severe HMC, care with anesthesia in the neonatal period is appropriate, as HMC can cause diaphragmatic compression.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known:

Sisters of females with MKS should have examination of the external genitalia for vaginal membranes or an imperforate vagina and of the hands and feet for polydactyly, and an echocardiogram for the congenital heart defects associated with MKS.

Brothers of affected females should have an examination of the external genitalia for hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and chordee and of the hands and feet for polydactyly, and an echocardiogram for cardiac manifestations of MKS.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.In order to establish the extent of disease in a child diagnosed with mucolipidosis II (ML II), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographic skeletal survey, if not performed or incomplete in the diagnostic evaluation. Such survey in early infancy is important for comparison with similar radiographs in the third year of life.

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess valve thickening and ventricular size and function

Pulmonary radiographs; an important means of monitoring interstitial lung disease in any serious intrathoracic airway infection. Chest CT may better show fibrotic changes in the lungs. It is doubtful that the child with ML II can cooperate sufficiently to achieve reliable pulmonary function tests, by which the restrictive respiratory deficiency could be documented more objectively.

Baseline ophthalmologic examination

Hearing screen

Developmental assessment to help establish appropriate expectations for the child’s developmental progress

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated.

Joint. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML II because of the following:

Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful.

The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification.

Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated.

Cognitive. Intellectual impairment in ML II is rarely severe. It is often milder than the adverse impression created by the significantly impaired development of speech: any well-adapted program of cognitive stimulation such as interactive play is recommended, such as a stimulation program that favors alertness, imitative skills, ambition, and even some active motion. Occupational and speech therapy are important, the former being the more effective of the two.

Dental. Severe gingival thickening can compromise routine dental cleaning. Mouth pain, infections, and even abscesses have been successfully treated with gingivectomy in some patients (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Otic. Myringotomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections is common but should not be considered a routine procedure because of the unique airway issues and hence risk associated with anesthesia (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care. Children with ML II are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched children is necessary. Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management. Extubation may also be challenging in ML II.

Surveillance

Infants and toddlers with ML II and their families benefit from outpatient follow-up visits approximately every three months. Subsequently throughout early childhood, two outpatient visits per year may be adequate until cardiac and respiratory monitoring need to be more frequent.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Since individuals with ML II do not survive into adulthood, there have not been any reports of affected individuals who have become pregnant.

In women who have a fetus diagnosed prenatally with ML II, the fetus should be carefully monitored for intrauterine growth retardation and skeletal changes such as extraosseous calcifications and/or osteolytic lesions. Ultrasound abnormalities are not present in all affected pregnancies.

Therapies Under Investigation

Treatment of ML II by bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been attempted in a few affected toddler-age children without any significant therapeutic result. Information on the outcome of recent transplantations in a few young children is not yet available.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with mucolipidosis III alpha/beta (ML III alpha/beta), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographic skeletal survey if either not performed or incomplete in the diagnostic evaluation

Baseline evaluations with an orthopedic surgeon and a metabolic bone specialist to better determine if/when surgical interventions or bisphosphonate therapy may be initiated (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess valve thickening and ventricular size and function

Baseline ophthalmologic examination

Hearing screen

Developmental assessment to help establish appropriate expectations for the child’s developmental progress

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated.

Skeletal. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML III alpha/beta for the following reasons:

Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful.

The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification.

Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated.

Management of pain in the hips during and following walking requires attention from late childhood or early adolescence.

Carpal tunnel signs may require tendon release procedures for temporary relief.

Later in the disease course more general bone pain of variable intensity is present.

Encouraging results have been obtained in several individuals with ML III alpha/beta with monthly IV administration of pamidronate, a biphosphonate. The recommended dose is 1 mg/kg monthly. The protocol under development is different from that applied to individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. Bone density needs to be monitored closely. At present, information as to when in the disease course or at what age to initiate such treatment is insufficient. Bone pain in the two individuals about whom information has been published was reduced within a few months of initiating therapy. In some wheelchair-bound individuals ambulation has been transiently restored for more than one year. Bone densitometry is improved [Robinson et al 2002].

Several remarks need to be made regarding this symptomatic treatment:

Parents and affected individuals must keep in mind that this treatment does not cure the disorder. It neither represses the slow process of bone resorption nor alters its course.

The long-term effect(s) are unknown.

The end point to the treatment regimen remains incompletely defined [Robinson et al 2002; Sillence, personal communication].

Not all affected individuals benefit from bisphosphonate treatment. The use of bisphosphonates in ML III alpha/beta and other bone diseases is an area of active clinical research worldwide.

In older adolescents and adults with milder phenotypic variants of ML III alpha/beta, bilateral hip replacement has been successful.

Audiologic. Recurrent otitis media occurs more often in ML III alpha/beta than in a control population. The prevalence decreases with age. Myringotomy tube placement may be considered necessary as a preventive measure of conductive hearing deficiency but should not be considered a “routine” procedure in this condition because of the unique airway issues and hence the anesthesia risks involved (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensivists. Individuals with ML III alpha/beta are small and have a narrow airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary. Fiberoptic intubation must be available.

Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management, especially in older individuals. Functional decline of lung parenchyma is likely due at least in part to slowly progressive degeneration of soft connective tissue in the extracellular matrix, a phenomenon insufficiently studied but concomitant to the osteopenia in bone. As subclinical cardiac failure may become overt during anesthesia, any surgical intervention should be preceded by a thorough cardiologic evaluation Extubation may also be a challenge.

Surveillance

Young children with ML III alpha/beta and their families benefit from outpatient clinic visits about twice a year.

From age six years similar follow-up visits are recommended on a yearly basis unless bone pain and deteriorating ambulation become major handicaps and/or cardiac and respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Preliminary results suggest that IV bisphosphonate may alleviate bone pain in some affected individuals; however, such treatment is still considered investigational.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ML III gamma, the following evaluations are recommended:

Basic assessment

Growth parameters

Pain assessment

Orthopedic and functional assessments

Psycho-developmental evaluation to follow the individual’s developmental progress and program appropriate management

Skeletal survey

Metabolic bone disease assessment including evaluation of bone densitometry by DEXA studies and evaluation of biomarkers reflecting bone metabolism [Robinson et al 2002]

Cardiac

Clinical examination

ECG

Echocardiography

Ophthalmologic evaluation including slit lamp examination, fundoscopy, and visual acuity

Medical genetics consultation for genetic counseling and reproductive decision making

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated. Psychosocial support of patients and families is recommended.

No known measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. Physiotherapy intervention programs need to be adapted to the affected individual’s needs.

Short sessions of aqua therapy that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain are usually well tolerated.

Later in the disease course bone pain of variable intensity may become a frequent complaint. Management of pain in the hips is required. In older adolescents and adults with milder ML III gamma, bilateral hip replacement has been successful.

Casts (especially of the hands) during the night hours are usually well tolerated and seem to improve daily functions.

Carpal tunnel signs and rarely tarsal tunnel symptoms may require surgical tendon release procedures for temporary relief [Smuts et al 2009].

In severe cases, when significant valvular dysfunction disrupts ventricular function, valve replacement should be seriously considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesia. As with all storage diseases, anesthesia in ML III gamma must be well planned. Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care physicians.

The anesthetic team should be aware of the following issues:

Persons with ML III gamma are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary.

Fiberoptic intubation must be available.

Persons with ML III gamma have short necks and atlanto-axial instability has been reported [Umehara et al 1997].

Jaw and neck movement can be limited

Abnormalities of the spine and ribs can limit the individual’s capacity to breathe and fully expand the lungs.

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Persons with valvular involvement should be given antibiotic prophylaxis before minor and major surgical procedures (including dental procedures) to prevent bacterial endocarditis.

Surveillance

Young children with ML III gamma and their families usually benefit from out-patient clinic visits once a year, unless cardiac and/or respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention. Orthopedic assessment should be done at least once a year, with more frequent follow-up visits if any deterioration is observed. Annual ophthalmologic assessment should address possible ophthalmologic changes. If necessary, an ERG should be considered to better evaluate for retinal impairment.

During yearly visits, attention should be paid to pain relief, daily functional abilities, and psychological interventions.

Although cardiac manifestations are usually asymptomatic, monitoring for progressive valvular insufficiency using echocardiography should occur at least once a year.

Surveillance for metabolic bone disease includes DEXA scan in five-year intervals.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Vigorous stretching exercises are not recommended because they are ineffective, painful, and may damage the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If both pathogenic alleles have been identified in the family, testing of at-risk sibs can be pursued. Note, however, that early diagnosis of affected individuals does not delay or halt disease progression [Author, personal observation].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several individuals with ML III alpha/beta have been treated with monthly intra-venous administration of pamidronate, a bisphosphonate. At present information is insufficient about when in the ML III alpha/beta disease course or at what age such treatment should be initiated [Robinson et al 2002; Sillence, personal communication]. In a consensus meeting on the use of bisphosphonate therapy in oligosaccharidoses doubts were raised regarding its usefulness in ML III gamma [MPS Society 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucolipidosis IV, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmic examination

Brain MRI

Iron studies

Neurologic evaluation, including EEG

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment is appropriate:

Speech therapy

Physical therapy and rehabilitation for motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia)

Ankle-foot orthotics in individuals with hypotonia and weakness of ankle dorsiflexion

Antiepileptic drugs

Topical lubricating eye drops, artificial tears, gels, or ointments for management of the intermittent ocular irritation seen frequently in younger children

Surgical correction of strabismus

High-contrast black and white materials for those with visual impairment

Note: Corneal transplantation has not been successful because the donor corneal epithelium is eventually replaced by the abnormal host epithelium.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical therapy and rehabilitation can help prevent permanent joint contractures.

An iron preparation such as oral ferrous sulfate is indicated for treatment of iron deficiency anemia resulting from poor absorption of dietary iron.

Surveillance

Annual follow up with a generalist is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Chloroquine may be contraindicated, based on published research in patient cultured skin fibroblasts [Goldin et al 1999].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI

Physical therapy/occupational therapy assessment

Assessment of cognitive dysfunction (neuropsychological testing)

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive therapy includes the following:

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) if epileptic seizures are present

Physical therapy to improve motor function

Special education

Speech therapy as needed

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Minor head trauma may lead to temporary motor deterioration or (rarely) to coma. Wearing a helmet should be considered for situations involving increased risk of head trauma.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Minor head trauma may lead to temporary motor deterioration or (rarely) to coma. For this reason contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Unsuccessful therapies have included diuretics, acetazolamide, and creatine monohydrate.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arylsulfatase A deficiency (MLD), the following evaluations are recommended:

If the diagnosis is made presymptomatically, baseline measures of ARSA enzyme activity, urinary sulfatide excretion, and myelin integrity by MRI to monitor disease progression and evaluate the need for possible intervention

Baseline assessment of development/cognitive abilities and behavior to monitor disease progression or changes with attempted therapy

Examination of the peripheral nervous system

Clinical genetics consultation

Guidelines. See Wang et al [2011] for clinical follow up recommendations. Click here for full text.

Treatment of Manifestations

Whether the intent is to prolong life or to let the disease run it natural course, an extended period of nursing care with changing needs can be anticipated. Supportive therapies to maximize the retention of physical and neuromuscular functions help avoid many end-stage care problems.

Every effort should be made to maintain intellectual abilities, neuromuscular function, and mobility as long as possible. Provision of an enriched environment and an aggressive physical therapy program provides an optimized quality of life at all stages of the disease. The parents and/or caregivers should be aware of the likely progression of the disorder in order to anticipate decisions concerning walking aids, car seats, wheelchairs, suction equipment, swallowing aids, feeding tubes, and other supportive measures.

Specific findings such as seizures and contractures should be treated with antiepileptic drugs and muscle relaxants, respectively. Gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and drooling are common problems which may be helped by specific medications.

The Evanosky Foundation has a very helpful document, Suggestions for Caring for a Child with MLD (pdf), based on their family’s experience.

Because MLD affects the whole family, management should include a team of professionals to provide genetic counseling and family support through what is often a long disease process. Even children with late-infantile MLD may survive for five to ten years with progressive loss of function and continually changing care needs.

Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. A pediatrician or family physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans. The usual regime of age-appropriate vaccinations, flu shots, nutritional support, and other typical medical care need be provided. Dental care is important and is often difficult to obtain. Pulmonary function and vision may also need attention.

It is important for most families to develop a network of support services and establish contact with other families who have faced similar situations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only presently available therapy that attempts to treat the primary central nervous system manifestations of MLD [Krivit et al 1999, Peters & Steward 2003, Krivit 2004]. Not all individuals with MLD are suitable candidates for these procedures and not all families are willing to undertake the risks involved. Although identification of adequately matched donors and treatments for complications of HSCT are constantly improving, it remains controversial. Substantial risk is involved and long-term effects are unclear.

However, in the absence of alternative approaches, HSCT needs to be discussed with families. This is particularly important for families with more slowly progressing late-onset forms of MLD because family members may be diagnosed with MLD by biochemical or molecular genetic testing before symptoms occur.

A number of reports on the experience of individual centers using HSCT have appeared over the past ten years: each involves a limited number of patients and few with MLD. They reflect evolving pretreatment conditioning and improved donor matching. HSCT failures continue; nevertheless, some improvement has been seen. Even when HSCT is successful, however, MLD progresses for a substantial period before implanted cells populate the central nervous system. The best clinical outcomes are obtained when transplantation occurs before clinical symptoms have appeared.

Meuleman et al [2008] reported minimal complications in an adult who underwent reduced intensity conditioning accompanied by mesenchymal stromal cell infusion.

Although the availability of hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood enhances the chances of obtaining a suitable source of donor cells, the results reported to date indicate that considerable problems remain [Martin et al 2006].

Cartier & Aubourg [2008] concluded that “…banked umbilical cord blood is still associated with significant risks of graft failure or GVHD.”

In earlier studies, HSCT for MLD appeared to slow disease progression, but not alleviate peripheral nervous system manifestations [Koç et al 2002]. More recently, however, a 13-year follow up of an individual with juvenile MLD treated with HSCT reported slow disease progression in the two years following transplantation, but subsequent stabilization [Görg et al 2007].

Pierson et al [2008] reported three sibs with MLD who were transplanted with umbilical cord blood at different stages of disease: the oldest experienced disease progression; the two younger children had stable or improved neuropsychologic, neuroimaging, and nerve conduction evaluations over a two-year period of follow up.

Tokimasa et al [2008] evaluated the feasibility of transplants from unrelated donors using a modified preparative procedure. Two persons with MLD showed complete donor chimerism and survived more than a year after transplantation.

Smith et al [2010] followed an adult with psycho-cognitive MLD for 11 years after HSCT. “Cognitive decline, indistinguishable from the natural course of the disease…” was observed.

de Hosson et al [2011] reported treatment of five patients and reviewed the literature. They conclude that in most published cases, HSCT has not been effective for MLD.

Cable et al [2011] report five-year follow up of three sibs with juvenile MLD who were transplanted with unrelated umbilical cord blood. The disease progressed over the first two years post-transplant followed by stabilization of symptoms. The overall outcome depended on the disease status at the age of transplantation with the oldest showing typical disease progression.

In a review of outcomes of persons with MLD undergoing HCST, Orchard & Tolar [2010] concluded that persons with later-onset disease may benefit and presymptomatic children with pathogenic variants typical for late-infantile onset (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) appear to have significant cognitive benefits; however, it is unclear if progressive motor problems will improve.

Lanfranchi et al [2009] reviewed the therapeutic use of stem cells of various origins in a variety of conditions including MLD.

HSCT in a presymptomatic neonate has been reported, but complications were encountered and disease progression was not halted [Bredius et al 2007].

For further information on the specific nursing care requirements for those with MLD who undergo HCST, see Barrell [2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of joint contractures by maintaining joint mobility facilitates nursing care in the later stages of the disorder.

Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. The pediatrician or general care physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

A program of periodic MRI monitoring developed by the neurologist and primary care physician:

Wang et al [2011] propose guidelines for confirmatory testing and subsequent clinical management of presymptomatic individuals suspected to have MLD and other lysosomal storage diseases (click here for full text).

Eichler et al [2009] propose a scoring system for brain MR images in individuals with MLD.

Dali et al [2010] report that N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brains of patients with MLD as assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) correlate with motor and cognitive function. This finding could be used to monitor disease progression and the effects of treatments.

Not all persons with MLD show white matter lesions as the initial MRI finding. Cranial nerve enhancement by MRI in a child age 25 months with apparent MLD and without intraparenchymal white matter involvement was seen by Singh et al [2009]. Likewise, Morana et al [2009] report that cranial nerve and cauda equina nerve root enhancement by MRI may precede typical white matter abnormalities and could facilitate earlier diagnosis. Haberlandt et al [2009] present three individuals with peripheral neuropathy in whom initial MRI showed no white matter changes, but who later developed MLD.

Monitoring of changes in locomotion, communication, and behavior which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (e.g., introduction of walking aids and/or a wheelchair). A classification system for gross motor function for children with MLD has been developed and tested by Kehrer et al [2011b]; it can be used to monitor the course of the disease and should prove extremely useful in evaluating therapeutic trials.

Monitoring for onset of seizures and/or contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Monitoring for behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions or actions, problems in following directions, memory loss, and/or incontinence, which indicate a need for increasing physical restriction and curtailing of independence

Monitoring for difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration of gastrostomy

Special attention following general anesthesia or an infection with a high fever as these may trigger exacerbation of disease progression

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

While environmental factors are thought to influence the onset and severity of MLD symptoms, no specific exacerbating agents are known. Initial symptoms are often noted following a febrile illness or other stress, but it is unclear if a high fever actually accelerates progression.

Excessive alcohol and drug use are often associated with later-onset MLD, but it is unclear if this is caused by the disease or is simply an attempt at self-medication in the face of increasing cognitive difficulties [Alvarez-Leal et al 2001].

Exacerbation of symptoms has been noted following anesthesia because affected individuals may have altered responses to sedatives and anesthetics [Mattioli et al 2007, Birkholz et al 2009, Cappuccio et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Attempts at improving the effectiveness of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) include combined therapy with either genetically engineered ARSA enzyme [Martino et al 2005] or mesenchymal stem cells [Koç et al 2002, Meuleman et al 2008].

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is presently considered impractical because of the difficulty of bypassing the blood-brain barrier. Clinical testing of intravenous recombinant human enzyme was discontinued in 2010 after a Phase I/II study failed to show substantial improvement [Shire 2010]. However, different forms of human ARSA enzyme are now available, and animal studies suggest that it may be a useful supplement in other therapies [Martino et al 2005, Matzner et al 2005]. Schröder et al [2010] examined N-linked glycans on recombinant ASAs produced under differing culture conditions and concluded that the enzymes used in various clinical trials may have had different uptake properties.

Gene therapy. A large number of papers have been published over the past ten years on experimental gene therapies for arylsulfatase A. These are reviewed by Biffi & Naldini [2007], Sevin et al [2007], Biffi et al [2008b], Gieselmann [2008]. Sevin et al [2009], Faust et al [2010], Gieselmann & Krägeloh-Mann [2010], Sevin et al [2010], and Biffi et al [2011].

Piguet et al [2009] investigate intracerebral AAVrh.10 as a possible gene therapy vector for MLD.

Piguet et al [2010] considered brain-directed gene therapies for MLD.

Colle et al [2010] injected an adeno-associated virus vector containing human ARSA into the brains of non-human primates and found that the enzyme was expressed without adverse effects, suggesting that a similar approach could be possible in persons with MLD.

Preliminary results of a human gene replacement trial have recently been reported. The treatment appeared to be effective over an 18-24 month follow up period in the three presymptomatic affected individuals. Some concerns have been raised about the long-term safety of this approach, but the results are encouraging [Biffi et al 2013, Flight 2013, Rothe et al 2013, Verma 2013].

Mouse model of MLD

Viral vectors for introducing ARSA into the enzyme-deficient mouse model have been investigated [Matzner & Gieselmann 2005].

Miyake et al [2010] examined the effectiveness of bone marrow cells expressing the homeobox B4 gene (HoxB4) in curing mice with MLD. These findings support the idea that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) transduced with a HoxB4 expression vector could be used to transport therapeutic proteins into the brain.

Iwamoto et al [2009] examined the feasibility of intrathecal (IT) injection of an adeno-associated viral vector expressing arylsulfatase A in MLD mice. They achieved widespread distribution of the enzyme in the brain and the reduction of sulfatides.

Kurai et al [2007] observed that coexpression of the gene encoding the formylglycine-generating enzyme (deficient in multiple sulfatase deficiency) is necessary for efficient gene replacement and correction in the mouse model.

Other studies

Matzner et al [2008] evaluated parameters affecting enzyme replacement that could be an adjunct to therapy.

Capotondo et al [2007] evaluated overexpression of ARSA.

Hou & Potter [2009] discuss microencapsulated brain-targeted therapy for MLD.

Lagranha et al [2008] demonstrated the ability of encapsulated BHK cells overexpressing ARSA to correct the enzyme defect in fibroblasts from persons with MLD.

Biffi et al [2008b] indicated that autologous hematopoietic stem cells can be genetically modified to constitutively express supra-physiologic levels of arylsulfatase A. Similarly modified stem cells obtained from an individual with MLD could become an effective source of enzyme when transplanted back into the individual. Moreover, transformed autologous cells should result in reduced transplant-related problems.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Lead has been reported to enhance secretion of ARSA enzyme by cells in culture and to lower cellular enzyme levels [Poretz et al 2000]. Minimizing lead exposure is already an important public health goal, and it is uncertain if additional steps would be useful in individuals with MLD.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, the following evaluations are recommended:

A serum chemistry panel (Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin [T/U], triglycerides, and cholesterol); complete blood count with differential; arterial or venous blood gas; plasma ammonium and lactic acid concentration; formal urinalysis and ketone measurement; quantitative plasma amino acids; and urine organic acid analysis by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC-MS)

If possible, measurement of plasma concentrations of methylmalonic acid, methylcitrate, free and total carnitine, and an acylcarnitine profile to document propionylcarnitine (C3 species) concentration

Measurement of serum vitamin B12 concentration to determine if a nutritional deficiency is present in the patient and possibly the mother (in newborns)

Biochemical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No consensus exists among various metabolic centers regarding treatment of acute and chronic complications of methylmalonic acidemia. Recent guidelines developed by professionals across 12 European countries and the US based on rigorous literature evaluation and expert group meetings outline the current management recommendations and areas for further research [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Stabilization of critically ill individuals

Volume replacement with isotonic solutions

All IV solutions should contain glucose, preferably D10 or D12.5. If hyperglycemia develops, an insulin infusion may be needed.

The total base deficit should be followed serially with repeat electrolyte and venous or arterial blood gas measurements and corrected by hydration and bicarbonate replacement, as needed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Adequate kcals must be delivered. Central or peripheral total parenteral nutrition (TPN), which typically contains glucose and amino acids, and in some instances, lipids, may be required. Total protein administration is usually completely withdrawn for no more than 24-48 hours and reinstated gradually depending on the patient's acid-base balance and remaining test values, including ammonia, lactic acid, and plasma amino acids among others.

Lipid infusions must be used with caution for the risk of pancreatitis.

Carnitine may be administered intravenously at 50-100 mg/kg/d bid-qid.

Urine output and serum sodium and potassium concentration need to be monitored.

Dietary protein should be reintroduced enterally as soon as is feasible given the clinical scenario and may need to be further augmented with TPN. Nasograstric or orogastric feeding should be strongly considered so that enteral feedings can be reintroduced without delay.

N-carbamylglutamate (NCG, Carbaglu®) may be considered in the event of hyperammonemia. NCG allosterically activates CPS1 (carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1), the first step of the urea cycle. It has been effective in normalizing the blood ammonia concentration in patients with a deficiency of NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthase) and can also benefit some patients with propionic and possibly methylmalonic acidemia [Tuchman et al 2008, Ah Mew et al 2010].

Hemodialysis or hemofiltration may be required in the event of treatment failure (uncontrollable acidosis and/or hyperammonemia).

A letter given to the family to present to emergency department physicians that specifies the recommended acute management protocol should be standard of care.

Medic Alert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Other

Aside from episodes of critical illness, patients with intercurrent illness such as viral infection or those undergoing surgery for various reasons should have aggressive fluid, metabolic, and nutritional management.

Specialists in physiatry, physical therapy, and occupational therapy can help address the complex challenges faced by patients and families, maximize functionality, and improve quality of life [Ktena et al 2015b].

Special considerations regarding choices of anesthetic agents in this patient population may apply [Ktena et al 2015a, Ruzkova et al 2015].

Most individuals require "sick day" management regimens, which typically consist of reducing or eliminating protein intake and increasing fluids and glucose to ensure delivery of adequate calories and to arrest lipolysis. Immediate hospitalization is usually required if signs suggest intercurrent infection.

Although all of the treatments discussed above may be needed in fragile individuals, they still may not prevent death, the severe sequelae of metabolic decompensation (e.g., metabolic stroke of the basal ganglia), or renal disease. The correlation and identification of treatment patterns and outcomes is needed to develop more effective management protocols for individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia.

Many affected individuals require gastrostomy/gastrojejunostomy tube feeding because of anorexia and vomiting to ensure caloric and fluid intake and improve growth.

Bone marrow failure during episodes of metabolic decompensation on rare occasion requires granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF).

Anemia is an expected complication of chronic renal failure and is treated with erythropoietin and eventually renal transplantation [Inoue et al 1981, Guerra-Moreno et al 2003, MacFarland & Hartung 2015].

Some children have had documented growth hormone (GH) deficiency; however, because response to GH therapy may vary, diet and GH replacement dose need to be carefully adjusted [Bain et al 1995, Al-Owain et al 2004]. The indications for GH replacement therapy and the response to GH replacement in treated individuals require further investigation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary Management

Nutrition. After stabilization, nutritional management is critical. This typically includes instituting a low-protein, high-calorie diet. When available, accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure can guide dietary and caloric prescriptions and eliminate overfeeding [Hauser et al 2011].

Natural protein needs to be carefully titrated to allow for normal growth, while avoiding an excessive propiogenic amino acid load (isoleucine, valine, methionine and threonine) into the pathway. Adjustment of dietary whole (complete)-protein intake, based on clinical and laboratory findings, is needed throughout life for these patients.

The FAO/WHO/UNU report [2007] recommended that safe levels per age group should be the aim for natural protein intake [Baumgartner et al 2014]; however, the individual protein amount prescribed will depend on growth parameters, metabolic stability, stage of renal failure, and other factors. A propiogenic amino acid-deficient formula (e.g., Propimex®-1/2,, XMTVI-1/2, OA-1/2) and protein-free formula (e.g., Pro-Phree®, Duocal®) are given to some individuals to provide extra fluid and calories. As the infant grows, the total protein load is slowly reduced, based on growth, plasma amino acid concentrations, and plasma and urine methylmalonic acid concentrations.

Of note, in patients with low protein tolerance, severe restriction of propiogenic amino acid precursors (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine) can produce a nutritional deficiency state. Furthermore, an iatrogenic essential amino acid deficiency can be induced by the relatively high leucine intake through the MMA formulas that can negatively affect long-term growth and possibly other outcomes [Manoli et al 2016b]. Medical foods should be used in moderation with the relative intake of natural protein to propiogenic amino-acid deficient formula not exceeding a ratio of 1:1. Isolated valine or isoleucine supplementation should be avoided.

These dietary guidelines do not apply for patients with CblC deficiency, a separate disorder in the pathway [Manoli et al 2016a].

Hydroxocobalamin injections. 1.0-mg injections every day to every other day are usually required in individuals who are vitamin B12 responsive. The regimen of B12 injections needs to be individually adjusted according to the patient's age and, possibly, weight.

Carnitine can be given at a dose of 50-100 mg/kg/day, up to approximately 300 mg/kg/day. As a dietary supplement, carnitine may replace the free carnitine pool and enhance the conjugation and excretion of propionylcarnitine. The contribution of propionylcarnitine excretion to the total propionate load is, however, small. The relief of intracellular CoA accretion may be the mechanism by which carnitine supplementation benefits some individuals.

Antibiotics. A variety of antibiotic regimens to reduce the production of propionate from gut flora can be used:

Oral neomycin, 250 mg by mouth 4x/day, was the original regimen reported by Snyderman et al [1972].

Metronidazole at 10-15 mg/kg/day has also been reported.

The intervals at which affected individuals are treated may vary, but a typical course is one week to ten days of treatment per one to three months.

Although oral antibiotics reduce the propionate load that derives from gut flora in affected individuals, chronic antibiotic therapy is not innocuous; it introduces the risk of repopulation of the individual with resistant flora. This could pose a serious infectious threat and could be especially dangerous to individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, since most deaths are related to metabolic decompensation, often precipitated by infection.

Response to antibiotic administration should be determined in treated persons by demonstrating either a decrease in whole body output of methylmalonic acid on antibiotic therapy by a timed urine collection or a decrease in the plasma methylmalonic acid concentration compared to the baseline value for that individual.

Rotating antibiotic regimens may be considered in some persons.

Antioxidants. One individual with isolated methylmalonic acidemia who was documented to be glutathione deficient after a severe metabolic crisis responded to ascorbate therapy [Treacy et al 1996]. Several recent studies document increased oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and specific respiratory chain complex deficiencies in persons with the mut0 enzymatic subtype with methylmalonic acidemia [Schwab et al 2006, Atkuri et al 2009, Chandler et al 2009, de Keyzer et al 2009, Manoli et al 2013], suggesting a potential benefit of treatment with antioxidants or other mitochondria-targeted therapies in these patients.

A regimen of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E has been shown to prevent progression of acute optic nerve involvement in a patient with MMA [Pinar-Sueiro et al 2010] and was shown to attenuate the progression of kidney disease in a mouse model of MMA [Manoli et al 2013].

Organ Transplantation

The number of individuals who have undergone liver and/or kidney transplantation, the detailed effects on the underlying metabolic disorder, and the overall outcome in those undergoing this procedure have yet to be determined [Sloan et al 2015]. Inclusion of enzymatic and genotype information in case series of transplanted patients will allow better comparisons of the outcomes and genotype-phenotype associations that could inform decisions about the indication and timing of transplantation in individual cases.

Liver transplantation. Because most of the metabolic conversion of propionate occurs in the liver, replacing the liver could contribute enough enzyme activity to avert metabolic decompensation. Liver transplantation has been shown to largely protect against metabolic instability but is not curative, and individuals with isolated MMA remain at risk for long-term complications of MMA including renal disease, basal ganglia injury, and neurologic complications [Chakrapani et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Vernon et al 2014]. To date, more than 35 individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia have undergone living donor or cadaveric, orthotopic, or partial liver transplantation or combined liver-kidney transplantation (>20 patients) [van't Hoff et al 1998, van't Hoff, McKiernan et al 1999, Kayler et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Hsui et al 2003, Kasahara et al 2006, Morioka et al 2007, McGuire et al 2011, Niemi et al 2015].

The underlying biochemical parameters and the frequency of metabolic decompensation improved significantly in individuals undergoing liver transplantation despite persistent metabolic abnormalities [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Niemi et al 2015], probably as a result of increased extrahepatorenal methylmalonic acid production primarily from the skeletal muscle [Chandler et al 2007].

Following liver transplantation, some individuals continued to have progressive renal failure as well as high CSF concentrations of methylmalonic acid [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006].

Neurologic complications post-transplant, including globus pallidus injuries [Chakrapani et al 2002, Cosson et al 2008, McGuire et al 2011] suggest that adequate protein restriction and supportive care should be continued after the transplantation.

Earlier transplantation particularly for individuals with mut0 (who are very fragile) is gaining support as surgery techniques and outcomes improve [Niemi et al 2015, Spada et al 2015]. The choice of the kind and timing of the indicated transplant procedure remains challenging for families and treating physicians [Sloan et al 2015]. In the long term, the details regarding development of renal disease, optic nerve atrophy, and neurologic complications will be most important.

Kidney transplantation. Some individuals have received only renal allografts [Van Calcar et al 1998, Lubrano et al 2001, Coman et al 2006, Cosson et al 2008, Clothier et al 2011].

One of the first reports on isolated renal transplantation in mut0 methylmalonic acidemia was claimed to provide enough enzyme activity to normalize methylmalonic acid excretion and allow for increased dietary protein tolerance; however, it was later determined that that patient had cblA deficiency and responded to vitamin B12. Thus, this individual, who has a much milder case, is not representative of the outcomes of isolated renal transplantation in individuals with severe MMA subtypes (mut0 or cblB) [Lubrano et al 2001, Lubrano et al 2007, Lubrano et al 2013].

Elective kidney transplantation, even before the onset of renal disease, has been advocated as a form of “cell therapy” to help stabilize individuals with mut0 MMA [Brassier et al 2013]. However, one patient died after developing hepatoblastoma, neurologic deterioration accompanied by CSF lactic acidosis, and multiorgan failure; a second patient developed progressive neurologic symptoms; and two others developed metabolic decompensations post transplant. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if this is a safe alternative to liver transplantation or liver-kidney transplantation, especially in persons with severe mut0 MMA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Frequent monitoring of plasma amino acids is necessary to avoid deficiencies of essential amino acids (particularly isoleucine, valine, and methionine) as a result of excessive protein restriction and the development of acrodermatitis-enteropathica-like cutaneous lesions in methylmalonic aciduria, as in other organic acidurias (glutaric aciduria-I) and amino acid disorders (maple syrup urine disease) [De Raeve et al 1994].

Low plasma amino acids can reflect low natural protein intake, imbalanced intake of branched chain amino acid from use of metabolic formulas, or effects of chronic acidosis on branched chain amino acid metabolism [Manoli et al 2016b].

Surveillance

During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated as frequently as every week. No guidelines regarding the recommended type or frequency of laboratory testing have been published.

The following should be monitored on a regular six-month to one-year basis or more frequently if the patient is unstable and requires frequent changes in management:

Plasma amino acids

Plasma and urine MMA levels

Serum acylcarnitines and free and total carnitine levels

Chemistry: Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin (T/U), triglycerides, and cholesterol

Liver, kidney, and bone health

Bone marrow indices

Monitoring of kidney function periodically with creatinine, cystatin-C, and, if available, studies of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (e.g., iohexol plasma decay), in addition to imaging of the kidneys, will allow for early referral to nephrology and appropriate timing of renal transplantation when needed [van't Hoff et al 1999, Kruszka et al 2013]. Combined equations based on creatinine and cystatin-C are expected to reflect more accurately the kidney function in this patient population [Schwartz et al 2009].

Regular ophthalmology and audiology evaluations to screen for optic nerve thinning/pallor and hearing loss [Authors, unpublished observations] are recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Fasting. During acute illness, intake of adequate calories is necessary to arrest/prevent decompensation.

Stress

Increased dietary protein

Supplementation with the individual propiogenic amino acids valine and isoleucine, as they directly increase the toxic metabolite load in patients with disordered propionate oxidation [Nyhan et al 1973, Hauser et al 2011, Manoli et al 2016b]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Depending on the genotype and phenotype of the proband, evaluation of sibs at risk should be performed using biochemical testing with treatment instituted as soon as possible if a sib is affected. Molecular genetic testing (if the pathogenic variants in the family are known) or cellular enzymology typically can further confirm the results of biochemical studies. Prenatal diagnosis of at-risk sibs may allow for prompt treatment of affected newborns at the time of delivery.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Oral and intramuscular vitamin B12 has been administered to women pregnant with a fetus with vitamin B12-responsive MMA, resulting in decreased maternal MMA urine output [Ampola et al 1975, van der Meer et al 1990]. Despite these observations, maternal vitamin B12 supplementation for isolated MMA needs further study.

Despite high maternal MMA levels, fetal growth and development were normal for all reported pregnancies of women with MMA [Wasserstein et al 1999, Deodato et al 2002].

Complications observed in pregnancies of women with MMA can include acute decompensation or hyperammonemia, deterioration of renal function, and obstetric complications including preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and cæsarean section [Raval et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Carefully designed clinical studies are required to evaluate the efficacy of antioxidant regimens in patients with MMA.

Gene therapy. Preliminary studies in human-derived hepatocytes and animal models of methylmalonic acidemia suggest a potential benefit of gene therapy [Chandler & Venditti 2008, Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2010, Chandler & Venditti 2010, Chandler & Venditti 2012, Sénac et al 2012]. The effect of that therapeutic approach in patients and especially on the long term complications of methylmalonic acidemia remains to be elucidated in appropriate clinical studies.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiminicore disease (MmD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Comprehensive respiratory evaluation including assessment of breathing rate, signs of respiratory distress, ability to maintain oxygen saturations, pulmonary function studies, and sleep studies to rule out nocturnal hypoxia

Assessment of feeding abilities including suck, swallow, gastroesophageal reflux, and maintenance of airway while feeding; evaluation of growth parameters to identify failure to thrive and determine need for interventions including gavage feeds and gastrostomy tube insertion

Spinal x-rays to evaluate for presence of scoliosis; physical examination for joint contractures

Cardiac evaluation for cardiomyopathy/cardiac involvement secondary to respiratory complications

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to develop interventions based on the distribution and extent of weakness

Speech evaluation, especially if dysarthria or hypernasal speech is present

Orthodontic evaluation for palatal anomalies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is aimed at prevention of disease manifestations, early diagnosis by regular screening, and aggressive management of complications that may develop. Effective treatment requires a multidisciplinary approach that can improve both quality of life and survival for the affected individual.

Ongoing careful assessment of the potential need for part-time or permanent respiratory support is absolutely critical, as affected individuals may rapidly enter respiratory crisis or may unknowingly suffer from potentially fatal nocturnal hypoventilation.

Feeding support with tube/gavage feeds is needed if oral intake is poor. Failure to thrive may need to be overcome with high-caloric density formulas/feeds. Gastroesophageal reflux (if present) is treated in the usual manner.

Physical and occupational therapy may help to improve/maintain gross motor and fine motor functions.

Speech therapy should be provided for individuals with dysarthria/hypernasal speech.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Annual influenza and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory infections is critical.

Surveillance

Monitoring for potential complications that can influence the prognosis of MmD includes the following:

Frequent and regular monitoring of the spine particularly during childhood and adolescence when scoliosis can rapidly progress during the adolescent growth spurt

Careful monitoring of respiratory function from an early stage because of the risk for insidious nocturnal hypoxia and sudden respiratory failure. Monitoring of respiratory function should include the following:

Close attention to nocturnal hypoventilation symptoms including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance

Lung function tests (FEV1 and FVC)

Sleep studies

Assessment of the need for intermittent or permanent ventilation. Nocturnal ventilation, when indicated, may significantly improve the prognosis.

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk of cardiac impairment secondary to respiratory involvement

Growth should be assessed regularly.

Regular neuromuscular evaluation to assess disease progress is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Risk for malignant hyperthermia. Depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine) and inhalational agents (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, desflurane) can cause malignant hyperthermia and therefore need to be avoided during surgical procedures/childbirth, as RYR1 pathogenic variants are associated with both malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and MmD.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In women with MmD, there is risk for malignant hyperthermia during delivery if inhalational anesthetic agents are used. A woman who has a fetus affected by MmD may develop polyhydramnios during pregnancy and may report a history of poor fetal movements. Abnormal presentation of an affected fetus may complicate delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multicentric osteolysis nodulosis and arthropathy (MONA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete skeletal survey

Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon, rheumatologist, and physical therapist to assess joint range of motion

Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiogram

Eye examination

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive.

Osteopenia and osteolysis

At present no specific therapy can alleviate the progressive osteopenia.

Assure that daily requirements of vitamin D and calcium are met.

Pamidronate is probably not effective [Phadke et al 2007].

Steroids and immunosuppressants have been used without much benefit and are best avoided given their side effects [Al-Mayouf et al 2000, Zankl et al 2007, Tuysuz et al 2009, Castberg et al 2013, Ekbote et al 2014].

Joints

Physical therapy may slow the rate of development of contractures and prolong mobility.

Surgical release of contractures may not help [Author, personal observation].

Aids to ensure mobility (wheelchair and walking aids) may be needed as the disease progresses.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may not provide sufficient relief. Referral to a rheumatologist or pain clinic may be beneficial to develop an individual pain management plan.

Cardiac manifestations. Provide medical or surgical interventions as appropriate.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual assessment of joints by a rheumatologist or orthopedic surgeon

Follow up of congenital heart defects as per the treating cardiologist

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid physical trauma to reduce the risk of fractures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No information on pregnancy management and outcomes is available.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Urgent referral to an oncologist for evaluation of cytopenias and bone marrow abnormalities that appear prior to the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is indicated. Laboratory studies for hematologic status and hemoglobin F levels, as well as cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood are recommended.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

The goal of management in familial monosomy 7 is early diagnosis so that definitive therapy with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) can be initiated prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone. Once transformation into AML occurs, the probability that BMT will fail to cure the disease increases significantly.

Any child or young adult with detectable monosomy 7 in combination with cytopenias and marrow dysplasia should, therefore, proceed to BMT as soon as possible, unless rising blast count warrants cytoreductive chemotherapy prior to transplant. Since BMT is the only effective treatment for the management of hematologic disease and the familial status of the disorder may not be known, rigorous evaluation of related donors is strongly suggested.

The suitability of sibs who are potential bone marrow donors may be evaluated with appropriate hematologic and cytogenetic studies to rule out bone marrow disease associated with familial monosomy 7. However, given that the underlying germline pathogenic variant may not be known, a matched sib donor may not be an ideal candidate (unless much older than the affected individual and with no evidence of hematologic disorders) and an unrelated donor may be more suitable.

Monosomy 7 in children with de

novo AML (i.e., with no clinical history of MDS, myeloproliferative disorder, or exposure to potentially leukemogenic therapies or agents) has an adverse prognosis, and thus children with monosomy 7 AML are treated on high-risk AML protocols and offered bone marrow transplantation in first remission [Hasle et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with monosomy 7 and certain underlying bone marrow failure syndromes including Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita, and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome have increased sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiation doses used in conventional ablative BMT approaches, and therefore require reduction in conditioning intensity. For individuals with monosomy 7 but without these above conditions, data remain too limited to determine whether standard protocols for ablative therapy prior to BMT should be modified.

Surveillance

If transplant therapy is not pursued due to lack of donor availability or family preference, annual monitoring of bone marrow karyotype and FISH for chromosome 7, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels should be coordinated by specialists in oncology and bone marrow transplantation. The goal is to identify bone marrow abnormalities (cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia) prior to the development of AML or MDS by annual monitoring of cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the goal of management in familial monosomy 7 is early diagnosis for initiation of BMT prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone, it is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk including sibs and potentially maternal first cousins, based on kindreds described in Mode of Inheritance.

In sibs and cousins of individuals with a history of familial monosomy 7, signs and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated by their physicians as potential early indications of the cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia which appear prior to the development of AML or MDS.

To evaluate sibs at risk, perform cytogenetic studies/chromosomal microarray (CMA) on bone marrow or unstimulated peripheral blood (FISH and/or conventional cytogenetics), hematologic studies, and hemoglobin F assessment. If these are normal, repeat of hematologic studies on a yearly basis is reasonable, followed by chromosomal studies if abnormalities are detected.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Manitoba oculotrichoanal (MOTA) syndrome, the following are recommended:

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Surgical evaluation of omphalocele and umbilical hernia, if present, and of anal abnormalities

ENT (ear-nose-throat) evaluation for bifid nose/notched nares

Plastic surgery evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary team comprising a clinical geneticist, general surgeon, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, plastic surgeon, and social worker is preferred for optimal management of individuals with MOTA syndrome.

Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention with procedures tailored to the specific needs of the individual.

Eye anomalies

Colobomas of the upper eyelids and synechiae are managed conservatively with intensive ocular lubrication to avoid exposure keratopathy before surgery is performed.

Anophthalmia/microphthalmia and cryptophthalmos may warrant surgical intervention and insertion of prostheses to facilitate the development of the ocular region [Seah et al 2002].

Visual impairment, such as refractive errors, may be associated with colobomas and corneopalpebral synechiae.

Notched or bifid nose. Rhinoplasty may be performed for cosmetic purposes.

Omphalocele and umbilical hernia may be managed conservatively or by surgery. To date, all individuals with MOTA syndrome who have been managed surgically have tolerated the procedure well without procedure-related complications.

Anal stenosis is generally managed by serial dilatations.

Anteriorly placed anus is managed conservatively or with surgical intervention, as determined on a case-by-case basis.

Psychosocial support may be indicated for the parents and the affected child.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Laing distal myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

A full neurologic history and examination at presentation, with particular reference to early gross motor milestones. The examination should particularly note tightening of the tendo Achilles (Figure 1) and the pattern of muscle weakness.

As severe cardiac manifestations are a feature in one third of individuals with Laing distal myopathy, an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram should be performed as a baseline.

Electromyography/nerve conduction studies

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Physiotherapy assessment with particular reference to preventing or treating tightening of the tendo Achilles is very useful. In persons with more advanced disease, lightweight splinting of the ankle (e.g., with an ankle-foot orthosis) may be recommended.

The cardiomyopathy may respond to ACE inhibitors or other medication. Cardiac consultation is recommended.

Kyphoscoliosis may be treated with surgical stabilization of the spine. There is no treatment for spinal rigidity.

Surveillance

After establishing the diagnosis (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) and instituting the indicated therapies (see Treatment of Manifestations), annual review is recommended.

Additional recommendations include:

Spinal review for evidence of scoliosis and/or kyphoscoliosis, especially during the years of rapid growth in adolescence;

Repeat electrocardiogram and echocardiogram if symptoms of cardiac insufficiency occur;

Respiratory function and assessment if symptoms suggest either sleep apnea or sleep-related respiratory insufficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.After the diagnosis of dense deposit disease/membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II (DDD/MPGNII) has been made, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluate the complement system by measuring serum concentration of CH50, APH50, C3, C3d, C4, factor H and sMAC. (For a list of laboratories providing these tests, contact Richard Smith. See Author Notes.)

Complement protein measures in DDD/MPGNII are distinctive, with most patients having only low serum concentrations of C3, while serum concentrations of properdin, C5, and other terminal proteins are within the normal range.

Factor H serum concentrations can be low, as has been reported with pathogenic missense variants in the CFH coding sequence that block protein secretion from the endoplasmic reticulum [Ault et al 1997, Dragon-Durey et al 2004].

Measure autoantibodies including C3NeF, factor H autoantibodies (FHAA) and factor B autoantibodies (FBAA).

Screen CFH for pathogenic variants using bidirectional sequencing.

Establish the extent of renal disease by measuring serum creatinine concentration, and monitor creatinine clearance, proteinuria and hematuria.

Obtain a baseline ophthalmologic examination [McAvoy et al 2004].

Treatment of Manifestations

Nonspecific therapies have been shown to be effective in numerous chronic glomerular diseases and should be initiated. The judicious use of these agents, along with optimal blood pressure control, may be of benefit in individuals with DDD/MPGNII.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II type-1 receptor blockers decrease proteinuria in many glomerular diseases and slow the progression to renal failure [Ruggenenti et al 1999, Brenner et al 2001]. A retrospective study found that the combination of angiotensin blockers and immunosuppressants (steroids) is more effective than each therapy alone in preventing the development of renal failure [Nasr et al 2009].

Lipid-lowering agents, and in particular hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors, may delay progression of renal disease as well as correct endothelial cell dysfunction and alter long-term atherosclerotic risks in the presence of hyperlipidemia [Nickolas et al 2003, Maisch & Pezzillo 2004]. These agents are not widely used in children.

Renal allografts. Fewer than 200 individuals with DDD/MPGNII have undergone transplantation [Braun et al 2005]. Five-year allograft survival approximates 50%, which is significantly worse than for the NAPRTCS database as a whole (p=0.001). Living-related donor grafts fare better than deceased donor grafts (p<0.005). Allograft survival appears to be age-dependent in DDD; the survival of pediatric DDD transplant recipients is significantly worse than the rest of the pediatric transplant population [Angelo et al 2011].

DDD/MPGNII recurs in nearly all grafts and is the predominant cause of graft failure in 15%-50% of transplant recipients [Appel et al 2005, Angelo et al 2011]. There are little data to suggest that any therapeutic interventions have an effect on reversing this course, although isolated reports have described the use of plasmapheresis, which appears to be of equivocal benefit [Frémeaux-Bacchi et al 1994, Kurtz & Schlueter 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Although most treatment for DDD/MPGNII is ineffective, plasma replacement therapy in patients with pathogenic variants in CFH can control complement activation and prevent ESRD [Licht et al 2006].

Surveillance

Periodic funduscopic assessment is appropriate [McAvoy et al 2004].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If pathogenic variants in CFH have been identified in an affected individual, sibs can be offered molecular genetic testing to identify those who have the same variant(s) in order to facilitate early diagnosis and management of renal disease. Penetrance rates, however, are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical study using eculizumab in persons with DDD/MPGN2 or C3 glomerulonephritis who are age 18 years and older is ongoing but is not recruiting new patients (ClinicalTrials.gov).

A clinical study using sulodexide in persons with DDD/MPGNII who are under age 21 years was put on inactive status as no beneficial effect was noted in patients with diabetic nephropathy (ClinicalTrials.gov).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The impact of genotype on graft survival has not yet been explored.

Experience with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and B cell suppression is limited.

The following treatment modalities are of unproven value:

Plasmapheresis to remove or suppress serum C3NeF activity:

In one study, one of three adults with DDD/MPGNII experienced improvement in serum creatinine during plasmapheresis [McGinley et al 1985].

Another study reported success using plasmapheresis to treat a five-year-old boy with recurrent DDD/MPGNII after transplantation. Twelve phereses were performed over 24 days, and the child continued to have improved renal function one year later [Oberkircher et al 1988].

In another report, a 15-year-old girl with rapidly progressive recurrent DDD/MPGNII in her allograft underwent 73 phereses over 63 weeks, stabilizing her creatinine and improving her creatinine clearance. Serial biopsies during this time demonstrated persistent DDD/MPGNII without development of tubular atrophy. During the course of therapy, serum C3NeF activity decreased and C3NeF activity was detected in the removed plasma. Because of the morbidity associated with repeated phereses, treatment was discontinued and graft failure ensued [Kurtz & Schlueter 2002].

In another report, two patients with a pathogenic variant in CFH were successfully treated with fresh frozen plasma [Licht et al 2006].

Prednisone. Although long-term controlled studies of prednisone therapy have suggested a possible benefit as measured by a decrease in proteinuria and prolonged renal survival in children with MPGN type I-III [West 1986, McEnery 1990], a randomized placebo-controlled study found that while evidence showed an overall benefit in individuals with MPGNI, II, and III combined, children with DDD/MPGNII had no better response to prednisone than to lactose, with treatment failure defined as a creatinine greater than 350 mmol/L (4 mg/dL) in 55.6% (5/9) and 60% (3/5) of individuals, respectively [Tarshish et al 1992].

Available data on steroid therapy in adults with DDD/MPGNII suggest a similar lack of efficacy [Donadio & Offord 1989].

Note: The use of steroid therapy is extremely effective in JANG, which can be confused with DDD/MPGNII. The two diseases can be distinguished clinically, as DDD/MPGNII is typically associated with C3NeF-induced hypocomplementemia, often with nephrotic syndrome and hypertension, while in JANG, C3 levels remain at the lower limit of normal [West et al 2000].

Calcineurin inhibitors. When evaluated in small numbers of individuals, the calcineurin inhibitors do not improve renal survival in DDD/MPGNII. Furthermore, in vitro studies with two calcineurin inhibitors, cyclosporin and tacrolimus, have shown that at therapeutic concentrations neither drug suppresses C3 transcription [Sacks & Zhou 2003]. Given the evidence that uncontrolled activation of the AP of the complement cascade is the basis of MPGNII/DDD, it is not surprising that these drugs are clinically ineffective immunomodulatory treatment modalities.

Combined therapy with immunosuppression (IS) and renin aingotensin system (RAS) blockade. In a retrospective study, the combined use of IS (steroids) and RAS blockade (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and/or angiotensin II receptor blocker) was protective against developing end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The IS/RAS blockade therapy was superior to the use of either agent alone. These findings need to be confirmed by a prospective control study [Nasr et al 2009].

Bevacizumab. In one study, a 29-year-old woman with DDD/MPGNII and subretinal neovascular membranes was treated with monthly intravitreal injections of bevacizumab. An improvement in vision was noted; renal function remained unaltered [Farah et al 2009].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with megalencephaly-postaxial polydactyly-polymicrogyria-hydrocephalus (MPPH) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with particular attention to head size (OFC)

In the presence of hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, full spinal MRI to evaluate for syringomyelia or syrinx formation

Assessment by a pediatric neurologist with evaluation of suspected seizures as indicated

Assessment of feeding by a feeding specialist, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist for evidence of chewing and swallowing difficulties and dysphagia

Developmental assessment

Echocardiogram (to evaluate for structural cardiac defects)

Renal ultrasound examination (to evaluate for structural renal defects)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Neurosurgical complications (hydrocephalus and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia). Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management are lacking.

Feeding difficulties such as chewing and swallowing difficulties and dysphagia require evaluation by a feeding specialist and/or gastroenterologist to promote early identification and prompt intervention which may include dietary modification and/or placement of a gastrostomy (G) tube.

Speech therapy is indicated for difficulties with speech, swallowing, and feeding.

Epilepsy may require long-term antiepileptic treatment.

Developmental delays. Initiation of physical, occupational, and speech therapy is recommended within the first year of life.

Surveillance

Given the limited number of individuals reported with MPPH syndrome, no formal surveillance guidelines exist; however, recommended surveillance includes the following:

Follow-up with a pediatric neurologist, at least every six months until age six years, and annually thereafter.

Brain MRI to detect hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia; provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Long-term neurologic follow up is recommended for management of epilepsy.

Routine follow up with a developmental pediatrician is appropriate, given the high risk for developmental delays and/or intellectual disability.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I), the following evaluations are recommended:

Skeletal survey to determine the involvement of the spine and degree and extent of joint involvement

Ophthalmologic examination with measurement of visual acuity and intraocular pressure, slit lamp examination of the cornea, and assessment of retinal function by electroretinography and visual field testing

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess ventricular size and function

Hearing assessment

ENT assessment and consideration of ventilating tubes for recurrent otitis media

Consideration of sleep study

Cranial imaging, preferentially MRI, including assessment of possible hydrocephalus

Assessment of spinal cord and peripheral nerve involvement

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Guidelines for the management of MPS I have been developed [Muenzer et al 2009].

Supportive or symptomatic management can improve the quality of life for affected individuals and their families.

Infants with severe MPS I require a stimulating environment to promote early learning, as some skills may be retained during the period of general deterioration.

Skeletal. Physical therapy is a critical aspect of MPS I therapy [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010a]. Range of motion exercises appear to offer some benefits in preserving joint function, and should be started early. Once significant joint limitation has occurred, increased range of motion may not be achieved without hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).

Various orthopedic approaches can be undertaken, particularly in individuals with attenuated disease. Joint replacement and atlanto-occipital stabilization may be necessary. These procedures must be performed at appropriate times in the individual's clinical course and must take into account the presence of other disease complications.

Carpal tunnel syndrome should be treated especially in individuals with attenuated MPS I and individuals with severe MPS I who have had HSCT. Most individuals lack typical symptoms (pain, tingling, or numbness) until severe compression occurs [Haddad et al 1997, Van Heest et al 1998, Bahadir et al 2009]; thus, nerve conduction studies should be used early in the course of disease to identify persons with carpal tunnel syndrome at a time when surgical release may be most beneficial. Surgical decompression of the median nerve results in variable restoration of motor hand activity [Van Heest et al 1998]. Intervention at an early stage, prior to severe nerve damage, optimizes outcome; repeated surgery may be required.

Ophthalmologic. Wearing peaked caps or eye shades can help reduce glare resulting from corneal clouding. Corneal transplantation is successful for individuals with attenuated disease, although donor grafts eventually become cloudy. Individuals with clear grafts may still experience poor vision because of involvement of the retina and/or optic nerve [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Cardiovascular. Cardiac valve replacement should be considered early.

Hearing loss. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy correct eustachian tube dysfunction and decrease upper airway obstruction. Early placement of ventilating tubes is recommended in severely affected individuals. Hearing aids should also be considered.

ENT (otolaryngologic). Sleep apnea may require tracheotomy or high-pressure continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) with supplemented oxygen. Tracheostomy is often required to maintain the airway and control pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

Gastrointestinal system. Some gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea and constipation) can be controlled by diet, including control of the amount of roughage. Increased roughage and the conservative use of laxatives may ease constipation.

Hydrocephaly. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure and progressive ventricular enlargement indicate a shunting procedure. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting in individuals with MPS I who have moderate to severe hydrocephalus is generally palliative and improves quality of life.

Other. Progressive compression of the spinal cord with resulting cervical myelopathy should be aggressively and quickly evaluated in individuals with attenuated disease or those who have had HSCT. Early surgical intervention may prevent severe complications.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)

HSCT is considered standard of care for children with severe MPS I. Outcome from HSCT is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time of diagnosis (and thus, with the age of the patient). Due to the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with severe MPS I.

HSCT should be used only in carefully selected children with extensive pretransplantation clinical assessment and counseling in whom systematic long-term monitoring will be possible [Aldenhoven et al 2015a, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Adults have not undergone HSCT.

Pulmonary and cardiac complications in the peri-transplant period appear to be significant predictors of transplant complications [Orchard et al 2010].

In general, the outcome of children undergoing HSCT is varied and depends on the degree of clinical involvement and the child's age at the time of transplantation. It is generally recommended that HSCT be performed before age two years to maximize benefit.

HSCT has been successful in reducing the progression of some findings in children with severe MPS I [Vellodi et al 1997, Guffon et al 1998, Neufeld & Muenzer 2001, Souillet et al 2003, Staba et al 2004, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Although the heterogeneity of the disease makes the outcomes of HSCT somewhat difficult to interpret, available data show that:

Successful HSCT reduces facial coarseness, and hepatosplenomegaly, improves hearing, and maintains normal heart function;

The skeletal manifestations and corneal clouding continue to progress at the same rate in children treated with HSCT and in untreated children [Weisstein et al 2004, Taylor et al 2008];

The degree to which HSCT relieves neurologic complications other than progressive intellectual decline is not clear: a few reports suggest improvement [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Valayannopoulos et al 2010] whereas others do not [Eisengart et al 2013, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. In children undergoing HSCT before evidence of significant developmental delay (i.e., usually between ages 12 and 18 months), HSCT appears to slow the course of cognitive decline. Children showing significant cognitive impairment prior to undergoing HSCT do not show correction of existing impairment.

HSCT is not curative and does not ameliorate cardiac valvular or skeletal manifestations.

In individuals predicted to have severe MPS I based on the presence of known severe pathogenic variants, use of HSCT resulted in stabilization and improvement of myocardial function with regression of hypertrophy and normalization of chamber dimensions [Braunlin et al 2003]. In that cohort, HSCT did not appear to show significant effects on the presence and progression of valvular involvement.

In part because of increased longevity after HSCT, treated individuals develop increasing pain and stiffness of the hips and knees, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord compression, and progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis [reviewed in Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. As a result, various orthopedic procedures intended to maintain function and gait have been performed post-HSCT [Masterson et al 1996, Tandon et al 1996].

Pathophysiology. The beneficial effect of HSCT is thought to result from the replacement of deficient macrophages by marrow-derived donor macrophages (Kupffer cells; pulmonary, splenic, nodal, tonsilar, and peritoneal macrophages; and microglial cells) that constitute an ongoing source of normal enzyme capable of gaining access to the various sites of storage [Guffon et al 1998, Prasad & Kurtzberg 2010]. As existing damage is not reversed, early HSCT is critical for optimal effect.

One hypothesis regarding the failure of HSCT in treating skeletal manifestations is the relatively poor vascularity of bone tissues [Taylor et al 2008].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Laronidase (Aldurazyme®) is currently licensed in the US, Europe, and Canada for use in treating non-CNS manifestations of MPS I. The current dose regime involves premedication with an anti-inflammatory and antihistamine drugs and intravenous weekly infusion of 100 U/kg of Aldurazyme® over four hours. Note that the package insert provides details that may differ by country.

The potential effect of Aldurazyme® on the progression of somatic findings and (more importantly) the effect that Aldurazyme® may have when started very early in the treatment of an individual with attenuated disease remain to be answered. The latter is particularly important as early diagnosis is critical. Aldurazyme® does not cross the blood-brain barrier and thus is not expected to influence the CNS disease in severely affected individuals.

A Phase I open label study included ten individuals with attenuated MPS I treated with human α-L-iduronidase and studied over one year. This study showed improvement in liver size, growth, joint mobility, breathing, and sleep apnea. Increased ability to perform daily functions was reported [Kakkis et al 2001]. A six-year follow up of five of the treated individuals showed sustained improvements in joint range of motion and sleep apnea and no progression of heart disease, but evidence of progression of valvular involvement [Sifuentes et al 2007].

A Phase III double-blind placebo-controlled study included 45 individuals with attenuated MPS I treated for 52 weeks with a 26-week placebo phase [Wraith et al 2005]. This study showed statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function and a six-minute walk test and clear biologic effect with reduction in urinary GAG excretion and liver volume. Patients who had significant sleep apnea at the start of the study improved significantly.

Other case reports representing smaller numbers of treated patients show variable responsiveness to treatment. The heterogeneity of treated patients published to date complicates any conclusions that can be drawn. It appears that the ability of ERT to reverse disease symptoms in individuals with attenuated disease relates closely to the burden of disease prior to commencement of treatment.

All published reports indicate that ERT is well tolerated. Although most individuals treated in either clinical trial developed IgG antibodies, no apparent clinical effects have been reported. These antibodies may, however, hinder therapeutic benefit by promoting more rapid clearance of the enzyme. Follow up of individuals who were part of the Phase I and Phase III studies indicates that immune tolerance is eventually reached [Kakavanos et al 2003, Wraith et al 2005].

A Phase III extension trial included 40 of the individuals from the Phase III trial for an additional four years of treatment [Clarke et al 2009].

Urinary GAG levels decreased 60%-70% before the reduction rate plateaued after 12 weeks (with 15% of patients achieving normal values).

Hepatic volume normalized in 92%.

Respiratory function either improved slightly or remained constant.

Shoulder joint mobility increased gradually, with larger increases being seen in persons with more severe disease.

Timed walk measurements remained largely constant.

Quality of life index improved in most (especially with respect to pain).

Visual acuity improved in 24% although corneal clouding was unchanged.

Growth resumed in approximately 70%; although the growth rate increased with treatment, the final height was still reduced.

The most common reactions were of an immune nature; most were not serious, indicating that Aldurazyme® is generally well tolerated. IgG antibodies to Aldurazyme® were produced in 93% of patients, in inverse correlation to urinary GAG excretion levels; they were not, however, directly related to adverse immune reactions.

Other studies have shown:

Improvement in height and cranial diameter with earlier administration of Aldurazyme® (age <1 year) as compared to later administration (age ≥3 years), despite no measurable improvement in growth rate when treatment was started at age one year [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010b];

Improvement of learning performance in one of three patients and noticeable alteration of MRI profile after 3.5-4.5 years of ERT in 3/3 persons with attenuated disease [Valayannopoulos et al 2010]; however, many more individuals would need to be treated to confirm this finding.

Clear differences between early initiation (age 5 months) and late initiation (age 5 years) of ERT in sibs with attenuated MPS I [Coppa et al 2010].

Pathophysiology. The effectiveness of ERT depends on the ability of recombinant enzymes (supplied intravenously) to enter cells and to localize to the lysosome, the appropriate intracellular site [Russell & Clarke 1999].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is advised for individuals with cardiac abnormalities [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Individuals with MPS I present major anesthetic risks, including death [Moores et al 1996]. It is appropriate for affected individuals to undergo general anesthesia in centers staffed by anesthesiologists experienced in managing individuals with a mucopolysaccharidosis [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. The following are important considerations:

Dysostosis multiplex can lead to instability of the spine, including the atlanto-axial joint. Careful positioning and avoidance of hyperextension of the neck are necessary.

Induction of anesthesia for any purpose can be difficult because of the difficulty of maintaining an adequate airway. Smaller than anticipated endotracheal tubes may be required for endotracheal intubation because the trachea may be narrowed and the vocal cords thickened.

Intubation may require fiber-optic laryngoscopy.

Recovery from anesthesia may be slow and postoperative airway obstruction is a common problem.

Surveillance

The recommended minimal schedule of assessments is highlighted in Muenzer et al 2009].

Persons with MPS I, regardless of disease severity and mode of treatment, should be actively followed at a center that is experienced with the care of individuals with MPS disease.

Aggressive orthopedic management for all patients regardless of treatment choices and disease severity; yearly or more frequent assessment by an experienced orthopedic surgeon is recommended.

Routine median nerve conduction velocity testing because of the high incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome [Van Heest et al 1998]

Annual ophthalmologic assessment with assessment of corneal status and retinal function

Cardiac assessment including annual echocardiogram

Annual assessment by an audiologist as well as by an otolaryngologist to determine the degree and cause of hearing impairment

Early and continuous monitoring of head growth by measuring occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) in infants and children

Cranial ultrasound examination and other brain imaging studies are recommended if a rapid increase in OFC occurs.

MRI can show ventriculomegaly, but imaging studies often cannot reliably distinguish between brain atrophy and brain compression.

Lumbar puncture with measurement of opening pressure of CSF is a preferred method for assessing the degree of pressure elevation [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Annual assessment for evidence of spinal cord compression by neurologic examination with consideration of spinal MRI studies when indicated

Developmental assessment in all patients; consideration of psycho-educational assessment of children with attenuated disease prior to primary school entry

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs of affected individuals should be identified either through molecular genetic testing of IDUA, if both pathogenic variants in the family are known, or assay of IDUA enzyme activity in order to initiate therapy as early in the course of disease as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Key elements of the management of women with MPS I who become pregnant involve assessment and frequent monitoring of cardiorespiratory as well as spinal cord involvement.

Therapies Under Investigation

With the success of ERT for MPS I demonstrated by clinical trials, an increased effort is underway to improve responsiveness to ERT and to develop other forms of therapy directed at areas/organs that may not be responsive to ERT, such as skeletal and neurologic involvement.

Combined ERT and HSCT. Whether long-term combined ERT and HSCT may improve the outcome of a severely affected individual is of interest.

Delivery of enzyme to the CNS. Intravenous infusion of recombinant proteins does not lead to transfer of proteins across the blood-brain barrier. Various means to provide enzyme to the CNS are currently being researched. These approaches include CSF instillation of enzyme via direct injection, continuous pumps, microcapsule implants, and production of chimeric recombinant proteins, enabling passage across the blood-brain barrier.

A clinical trial of intrathecal ERT is currently underway in patients who have evidence of spinal cord involvement. To date, this method has reduced CSF GAG levels and CSF pressure and has been found to be safe. The efficacy of intrathecal ERT is unclear [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Dickson et al 2015a, Dickson et al 2015b].

Stabilization of mutated enzyme with substrate analogs. It is now generally accepted that lysosomal enzymes must be processed through a complex intracellular sorting mechanism prior to transport to the lysosome. Many single-nucleotide variants underlying lysosome enzyme deficiencies lead to disease by altering the folding of the protein after translation, such that the misfolded protein cannot be transported to the lysosome. Small molecule substrate analogs have been shown to stabilize mutated lysosomal proteins in tissue culture and thus enable transport of these enzymes to the lysosome. Once in the lysosome, these mutated enzymes are likely able to metabolize enough substrate to alter the disease course. As most individuals with attenuated MPS I have at least one IDUA pathogenic missense variant, the development of substrate analogs for alpha-L-iduronidase may lead to new forms of therapy for this disorder.

Substrate deprivation. Decreasing the quantity of stored substrate in lysosomal disorders is currently being investigated for the treatment of Gaucher disease [Cox et al 2003]. Potential use of similar molecules that may decrease the production of GAGs or other substances that are stored in MPS disease may have a future role in treatment [Piotrowska et al 2006]. These approaches are still in the animal model phase, with attempts such as silencing of key GAG synthetic enzymes [Kaidonis et al 2010] to certain GAGs.

Gene- and cell-based therapy. Advances in both gene- and stem cell-based therapies for genetic diseases could potentially influence treatment of MPS I [Punnett et al 2004, Di Domenico et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA), the following evaluations are recommended [Hendriksz et al 2013, Solanki et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015]:

Baseline neurologic examination to assess for signs of spinal cord compression

Plain radiographs

Baseline radiographs of the cervical spine, including anterior-posterior (AP), neutral lateral, and flexion-extension views

Baseline AP and lateral radiographs of the entire spine

Baseline AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis

Baseline AP standing radiographs of the lower extremities; in individuals who are able to stand independently and have signs of lower extremity misalignment, baseline standing lower extremity alignment radiograph from hip to ankle

MRI

Baseline MRI of the entire spine (neutral position) focusing on potential sites of cord compression (occipitocervical, cervicothoracic, and thoracolumbar)

Flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine when clinically indicated – for example, if cervical spine instability is suspected on plain radiographs:

Because MRI is usually performed under sedation or anesthesia, cervical spine radiographs should be obtained prior to anesthesia to evaluate for upper cervical spine instability.

In individuals with cervical spine instability suspected on plain film or those with inconclusive radiographic findings, flexion-extension cervical spine MRI can be used to evaluate for cord compression.

Flexion-extension MRI can identify dynamic changes in canal diameter leading to cord compression.

Mackenzie et al [2013] demonstrated that cervical spine flexion-extension MRI under sedation/anesthesia in children with skeletal dysplasia was safe under adequate supervision and the result was useful for surgical decision making.

Evaluation by:

A physiatrist (i.e., specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to assess mobility and autonomy. Endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk test (T25FW) in patients with limited ambulation have been used to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. 6MWT and T25FW should be performed at the time of diagnosis.

A physical therapist to assess joint range of motion and mobility

An occupational therapist to assess activities of daily living such as the functional dexterity test (FDT). Baseline upper extremity strength assessments should be performed, including grip strength assessed by dynamometer and pinch strength assessed by a pinch meter [White et al 2014].

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. If coronary artery involvement is suspected, noninvasive stress imaging should be performed [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013].

Baseline pulmonary function and polysomnography, with evaluation by a pulmonologist

Audiology evaluation

Dental evaluation

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess visual acuity and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination and posterior segment examination for retinopathy

Plotting of height and weight on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Pain assessment and quality of life questionnaires

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with MPS IVA is best undertaken by the following multiple specialists, coordinated by a physician specializing in the care of individuals with complex medical problems:

Physiatrist (specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to optimize mobility and autonomy

Physical therapist to optimize mobility

Occupational therapist to optimize autonomy

Psychological support to optimize coping skills and quality of life

Educational professions to optimize learning in a medically fragile individual

Consideration of referral to family therapy to help normalize the experience for the affected individual, parents, sibs, and extended family members

Home care for affected individuals with multiple medical equipment needs

Hospice for end-of-life care

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Recombinant human GALNS ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) was approved by the FDA in February 2014.

The recommendation dose is 2 mg/kg/week intravenous. Although the treatment with ERT is not curative, ERT could improve endurance and overall quality of life.

Premedication (30-60 minutes prior to each enzyme infusion) with a non-sedating antihistamine (if possible) with or without antipyretics is recommended to prevent infusion-associated reactions.

A Phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in the 6MWT distance in the 2 mg/kg weekly dose group compared to the placebo group. The 3-minute stair climb test (3MSCT) and respiratory function were improved with the treatment but the differences were not statistically significant.

The long-term effects of this treatment on the skeletal features of MPSIVA are not yet known (see Therapies Under Investigation). The efficacy of ERT in improving pathology in the musculoskeletal system may be limited because of poor biodistribution of the enzyme in avascular tissue.

Musculoskeletal

For published orthopedic management guidelines, see White et al [2014]. The level of physical activity should be monitored by specialists in orthopedic surgery, neurology, physiatry, and physical therapy to optimize mobility while preventing joint injury, joint misalignments, and cervical cord damage.

Upper extremities. Non-operative interventions, such as external wrist splints, may be considered. Surgical intervention, including partial or complete wrist fusion, may be necessary to stabilize wrist range of motion.

Knee and ankle valgus. Lower extremity malalignment associated with progressively poor mechanical alignment and decreasing endurance requires intervention; however, no absolute indications for intervention exist.

Growth modulation, also called guided growth (temporary surgical tethering of the growth plate to allow gradual correction of the deformity) or realignment osteotomies have been successful [Dhawale et al 2012, White et al 2014].

Early detection and evaluation may allow surgical tethering of the growth plate to treat mild-to-moderate lower extremity angular deformities in children with open physes (growth plates). Typically this procedure is less invasive and allows for easier recovery than realignment osteotomies.

Once the growth plates close, distal femoral and proximal tibial osteotomies are needed to acutely or gradually (with the use of external fixators) correct lower extremity malalignment.

Ankle malalignment is often corrected by a distal tibial osteotomy with distal tibial screw hemiepiphyseodesis [reviewed in Tomatsu et al 2011].

Hip dysplasia. Surgery can manage pain and alignment and permit optimal mobility.

Hip reconstruction includes either femoral or acetabular osteotomy for mild cases or combined acetabular and femoral osteotomy for severe cases. Augmentation of acetabular bone stock and customized implants by using cortical grafts from the inner table of the ilium are usually required due to a shallow acetabulum [White et al 2014].

Total hip arthroplasty may be required in young adults experiencing significant hip pain which cannot be corrected by reconstructive techniques.

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression.

To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, intervention in children is recommended when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms.

Affected individuals undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation.

Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI (see Surveillance). The affected individual should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Lumbar spine malalignment. Thoracolumbar kyphosis (resulting from vertebral hypoplasia) may be progressive and symptomatic.

When kyphosis is less than 45 degrees, the risk of progressive deformity is less than with a greater curve, but warrants clinical and radiographic monitoring.

When kyphosis exceeds 45 degrees, progression is likely. Although extensive bracing with an orthosis or a cast does not prevent progression of the thoracolumbar kyphosis, it may delay the need for surgical intervention during a period of growth and development.

Anterior and posterior circumferential spinal fusion are indicated if one or more of the following are present:

Progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis greater than 70 degrees

Uncontrolled back pain

Neurologic changes related to spinal stenosis

Cardiac

Elevated heart rates could indicate a compensation mechanism, secondary to small left ventricular diameter and small stroke volume; thus tachycardia treatment with beta blockers should be avoided. Valve replacement may be considered for progressive valvular problems [Hendriksz et al 2015]. Risks need to be carefully weighed for valve replacement, either mechanical (life-long use of anticoagulants) or bioprosthesis (increased risk of valve dysplasia, degradation, and calcification).

Respiratory

Upper-airway obstruction and obstructive sleep apnea are managed by removal of enlarged tonsils and adenoids (average age 7 years [Montaño et al 2007]). Note: Even with this intervention, the rate of obstructive sleep apnea in children with a mucopolysaccharidosis is much higher than the general population; therefore, prompt clinical evaluation and referral for polysomnography are appropriate [Nashed et al 2009].

In persons with diffuse narrowing of the airway in whom adenotonsillectomy only temporally relieves upper-airway obstruction, other interventions to consider are: CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure), BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure), and tracheostomy.

Lower-airway obstruction manifest as wheezing and recurrent infection is managed by inhaled and/or oral bronchodilators and, in some instances, corticosteroids.

Restrictive lung disease is managed by supportive treatment.

Growth

Height of children with MPS IVA is best plotted on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008].

Nutrition should be optimized with a balanced diet and adequate vitamin D and calcium to assure bone health.

Learning Environment

Despite some physical limitation, individuals with MPS IVA have normal intellect and can thrive in an environment with academic and social stimulation. Children routinely attend regular class/school with assistance to prevent physical injury.

Eye

Corneal opacification often causes reduced vision in early childhood, necessitating penetrating keratoplasty, for which the outcome can vary. Recurrence of opacities within the first year post keratoplasty has been reported, making this a temporary measure for improving quality of life [reviewed by Bothun et al 2011]. In addition, other ophthalmologic problems including glaucoma and retinopathy may limit the success of corneal transplantation. Cataract surgery may benefit those with cataracts.

Dental

Daily oral hygiene care, fissure sealing, and adequate fluoride supplementation help prevent cavities. Orthodontic management to correct malocclusion may be necessary.

Hearing

Because ventilation tube placement can minimize the long-term scarring associated with chronic middle-ear effusions and recurrent acute otitis media, and improve hearing in the long term, most children have ventilation tubes placed during the preschool years. At the first occasion, a long-lasting tympanostomy tube is recommended due to high risk of recurrent middle-ear effusion and the risk associated with sedation in individuals with MPS IVA [Hendriksz et al 2015].

The progressive hearing impairment observed in most individuals with MPS IVA benefits from hearing aids.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations for information regarding ERT.

The experience of hematopoietic stem cell therapy is very limited and has not been well studied.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesia. Procedures requiring anesthesia require considerable planning and are best performed in a facility in which anesthesiologists are experienced with the airway issues of MPS IVA, such as abnormal anatomy and GAG accumulation, unstable cervical spine, and progressive pulmonary disease (both restrictive and obstructive). Theroux et al [2012], who published the largest cohort of children with Morquio syndrome undergoing anesthesia, made specific recommendations for care during anesthesia.

Preoperative assessment should include history of response to anesthesia and any evidence of airway obstruction; cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and echocardiography; evaluation of respiratory function (spirometry and polysomnography); and airway fluoroscopy [Muhlebach et al 2011, Tomatsu et al 2011].

Endotracheal intubation likely includes use of a video laryngoscope, fiberoptic bronchoscope with or without a laryngeal mask airway, and a smaller endotracheal tube than expected for age or size. Although nasal intubation is an option, GAG deposits can lead to narrowing of the nasal passages and increased propensity to bleeding [Aziz et al 2011, Muhlebach et al 2011, Walker et al 2013].

Postoperative narcotic management should be judicious; multimodal analgesics and non-narcotic medications are preferable to avoid exacerbating preexisting respiratory issues, such as sleep apnea.

Postoperative complications including pulmonary edema have been described [Morgan et al 2002].

Surgery. Because subacute spinal stenosis and/or dynamic spinal stenosis could lead to spinal cord injury, procedures involving cervical spine manipulation, prone positioning (including spinal surgery), and/or prolonged time under anesthesia (e.g., exceeding 45 minutes), should be considered for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM). IONM uses somatosensory and motor evoked potentials (SSEPs or MEPs) to monitor spinal cord function [Solanki et al 2013, Walker et al 2013]. Note: While spinal infarct during surgery was reported in a few individuals with skeletal dysplasia [Tong et al 2012, Pruszczynski et al 2015], data demonstrating consistent improvement of outcome with this monitoring technology are limited [Solanki et al 2013].

Immunizations. Due to increased risk for pulmonary infection, all affected individuals should receive influenza and pneumococcal immunizations as well as routine immunizations.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for those at high risk, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].

Surveillance

Individuals on ERT

The following should be assessed before and after initiation of ERT to determine treatment efficacy:

Physical and neurologic evaluation at least every six months

Annual assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance (see All Individuals)

Annual pulmonary function tests, including maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) and forced vital capacity (FVC)

Note: (1) Changes in urine keratan sulfate (KS) levels do not correlate with efficacy of treatment; therefore, the benefit of following urine KS (or urine GAG) levels during elosulfase alfa treatment is limited. (2) The benefit of monitoring anti-elosulfase alfa antibodies is unknown.

All Individuals

Assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance

Every 6-12 months: track growth, pubertal stage, and progress; optimize ambulation

Pain severity assessment every six months; age-appropriate quality of life questionnaires every year

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, or as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk (T25FW) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Respiratory rate, pulse oximeter, and heart rate should be measured before and after the annual testing.

Musculoskeletal.

White et al [2014] recommended the following guidelines for monitoring musculoskeletal involvement in those with MPS IVA (full text):

Upper and lower extremities. Evaluate severity and progression of upper and lower extremity involvement at least annually.

Evaluation of range of motion, grip and pinch strength, and functional assessments (e.g., functional dexterity test) of the upper extremities

Assessment of lower extremity alignment, including standing AP radiographs (as clinically indicated) and AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis to assess hip dysplasia/subluxation until skeletal maturity or when clinically indicated

Spine. Neurologic examination every six months to assess for spinal cord compression [Solanki et al 2013]:

For children who are reliable historians, at each clinic visit obtain a history of exercise tolerance and symptoms of myelopathy (e.g., extremity weakness; clumsiness; unsteady, changing gait; bowel or bladder dysfunction or lower back/leg pain).

In those with multisegmental myelopathy, SSEPs and MEPs (if available) may provide detailed information.

Perform plain radiography of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion-extension) every six months.

Perform plain radiography of the spine (AP and lateral views for the thoracolumbar spine) every one to three years.

Perform MRI whole spine (neutral position)* annually and flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine every one to three years.* Neutral, flexion, and extension lateral radiographs of the cervical spine should be obtained prior to cervical MRI to assess for atlanto-occipital instability.

Cardiac. Evaluate heart rate annually; perform electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015].

Respiratory

For obstructive sleep apnea, yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Annual in home screening sleep studies (which monitor oxygen saturation). Polysomnography every three years.

To assess pulmonary function, annual MVV and FVC until children stop growing, then every two to three years. The benefit of noninvasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Length/height and weight should be measured at every visit.

Eye

Monitor for vision and ocular abnormalities at every visit; refer to an ophthalmologist as needed.

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy, perform retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013].

Dental. Evaluate every six to 12 months.

Hearing. Perform yearly audiogram.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the duration of independent ambulation, it is important to optimize nutrition for growth while maintaining a lean habitus.

Due to small ventricular diameter and stroke volume, beta blockers should be avoided in the treatment of tachycardia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of ERT (see Treatment of Manifestations). Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Analysis of N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfatase (GALNS) enzyme activity if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) use in mildly affected individuals is still being investigated. As reported in the MOR-008 Phase 2 clinical trial in which all participants were high functioning (defined as a mean baseline walking distance of 70%-80% of the unaffected population), ERT made little change in endurance and respiratory function tests but some positive change in exercise capacity, muscle strength, and pain. Hypersensitivity reactions occurred in 18.7% of participants. Over all, the safety profile of elosulfase alfa appears manageable and serious adverse reactions are uncommon, but further long-term safety data are being collected [Tanpaiboon 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with MPV17-related hepatocerebral mtDNA depletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended.

Hepatic

Liver function including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Ultrasound examination to assess liver size and texture, and for the presence of masses

Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma

Hepatology/liver transplantation consultation

Neurologic

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic consultation and comprehensive neurologic examination

Brain MRI to assess white matter and other abnormalities. The brain MRI findings can establish the degree of central nervous system involvement and serve as a baseline for monitoring the progression of the neurologic disease.

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) to assess peripheral neuropathy. NCV can establish the degree of the peripheral nervous system involvement and serve as a baseline for monitoring the progression of the neurologic disease.

EEG if seizures are suspected

Nutritional evaluation

Plasma lactate and glucose concentration

Urinalysis and amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Gastrointestinal consultation if gastrointestinal dysmotility is present

Ophthalmologic examination to assess corneal sensation and possible corneal ulcers/scaring

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, clinical genetics, and child development. Treatment of MPV17-related hepatocerebral mtDNA depletion syndrome remains unsatisfactory with a mortality rate higher than 50% (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Nutritional support should be provided by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.

Prevention of hypoglycemia requires frequent feeds and avoidance of fasting. Uncooked cornstarch (1-2 grams/kg/dose) can be used to manage hypoglycemia, and it may slow but not stop the progression of the liver disease [Spinazzola et al 2008, Parini et al 2009].

Liver transplantation. Although liver transplantation remains the only treatment option for liver failure, liver transplantation in mitochondrial hepatopathy is controversial, largely because of the multisystemic involvement. Liver transplantation has been performed in about one third of affected children; the outcome has not been satisfactory, with half of the transplanted children dying in the post-transplantation period because of multi-organ failure and/or sepsis (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Hepatocellular carcinoma. The two children reported with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were treated by liver transplantation. Screening for HCC using periodic hepatic ultrasound examination and serum alpha fetoprotein concentration potentially could result in earlier diagnosis, enabling liver transplantation before metastasis or local invasion occurs.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Nutritional deficiencies, for example of fat-soluble vitamins, can be prevented by ensuring adequate intake and frequent assessment by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Hepatic ultrasound examination to screen for liver masses that might suggest HCC

Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) concentration

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Urinalysis and urine amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Ophthalmologic examination

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged fasting can lead to hypoglycemia and should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome (MSS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination including measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

Evaluation of motor skills with special attention to muscle strength and cerebellar function

Assessment of developmental milestones in infants and intellectual abilities in older children, particularly before school age, to plan appropriate education and rehabilitation

Assessment of speech and feeding

Ophthalmologic examination

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of muscular manifestations is symptomatic. Affected individuals are usually managed by pediatric or adult neurologists and physiatrists and/or physical therapists.

Developmental delay and intellectual disability are managed with education programs tailored to the individual's needs.

Cataracts are removed surgically during the first decade of life.

Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (i.e., primary gonadal failure) is treated with hormone replacement therapy at the expected time of puberty.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Hormone replacement therapy in individuals with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and reduced physical activity can prevent osteoporosis.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular follow-up with a child or adult neurologist and physiatrist and/or physical therapist

If the diagnosis is made prior to the development of cataracts, ophthalmologic examination beginning in infancy and at regular intervals

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Establishing the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). To determine whether an individual has either classic or intermediate MSUD, it is useful to focus on concentration ratios among the BCAAs and between leucine and other essential and non-essential amino acids. Regulated concentration ratios among the full complement of circulating amino acids are one indication of in vivo residual BCKAD enzyme activity. These ratios are normally maintained within a narrow range by balanced transport of branched-chain and other essential amino acids across common carriers (LAT1/2), intracellular transamination equilibria, and coordinated activity of multiple catabolic pathways [Boado et al 1999, Matsuo et al 2000, Killian & Chikhale 2001, Umeki et al 2002, Brosnan 2003].

The following plasma concentration ratios are the most representative of amino acid regulation: leucine:isoleucine, leucine:valine, leucine:tyrosine, leucine:phenylalanine, leucine:glutamate, and leucine:alanine (mol:mol) [Strauss et al 2006, Strauss et al 2010, Mazariegos et al 2012]. In MSUD, plasma leucine concentration has the strongest reciprocal relationship to plasma alanine and glutamine concentrations (Spearman correlation coefficient -0.86 and -0.62, respectively; p<0.0001; see Figure 1) [Strauss et al 2010].

Severe BCKAD deficiency (classic MSUD) affects amino acid homeostasis at multiple levels and causes frequent and variable disturbances of plasma amino acid concentration ratios.

In milder intermediate forms of MSUD, plasma BCAAs may be chronically elevated but plasma amino acid concentration ratios tend to be preserved.

Note: (1) The majority of individuals with MSUD cared for by the authors are known to harbor a classic "Mennonite" variant in BCKDHA (c.1312T>A) and, thus, newly diagnosed children are not routinely tested for residual BCKAD enzyme activity [Strauss et al 2010]. (2) It is often difficult or impossible to establish whether or not an individual has clinically important residual BCKAD enzyme activity in vivo, even when the precise pathogenic variants are known.

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment considerations apply to individuals with MSUD who have pathogenic variants in the E1a, E1b, or E2 subunits of BCKAD complex. Note: Treatment recommendations do not apply to those with disease caused by pathogenic variants in the common E3 subunit.

Home therapy. Dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) reagent allows home detection of high urine BCKAs during metabolic decompensation. With timely detection of mild or moderate illness, many individuals can be managed safely at home by experienced providers using dietary leucine restriction, high-calorie BCAA-free "sick-day" formulas, and frequent outpatient monitoring. Vomiting is the major reason that the sick neonate or child fails home therapy.

Acute decompensation. Dietary indiscretion causes plasma BCAAs to increase but only rarely results in acute decompensation and encephalopathy. In contrast, infections and injuries trigger a large endogenous mobilization of muscle protein and can precipitate metabolic crisis and hospitalization. Leading causes of hospitalization among one cohort of children with MSUD (N=15) are summarized in Table 4 [Strauss et al 2010].

Table 4. 

Reasons for 28 Hospitalizations in 15 Infants with MSUD

Indication for Hospitalization

Number

Vomiting and viral gastroenteritis

11

Viral bronchiolitis

3

Sinusitis

3

Neonatal encephalopathy

3

Urinary tract infection

2

Cellulitis

1

Influenza

1

Viral meningitis

1

Bacterial pharyngitis

1

Esophageal candidiasis

1

Appendicitis

1

Strauss et al [2010]

Reasons for 28 Hospitalizations in 15 Infants with MSUD

Strauss et al [2010]

Correction of metabolic decompensation is predicated on establishing net protein accretion. This is achieved by treating the precipitating stress (e.g., infection, dehydration, pain, fever) while simultaneously delivering sufficient calories, insulin, free amino acids, isoleucine, and valine to stimulate net protein synthesis in muscle and liver. Rapid nutritional correction of leucine intoxication in older children and adults is more challenging than in young rapidly growing infants (see, e.g., Figure 2 and Figure 9) but is, nonetheless, possible with higher weight-adjusted calorie intake (see Methods of achieving these goals) [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Simultaneous in-hospital management of metabolic intoxication and brain edema is complex and should be guided by an experienced metabolic specialist. Metabolic physicians may benefit from the expertise of an intensivist when administering medications such as insulin, hypertonic saline, and mannitol. Referral centers that admit individuals with MSUD who are in crisis should be able to provide parenteral BCAA-free amino acid and 1% isoleucine and valine solutions in the hospital pharmacy, as well as 24-hour monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations.

The primary goals of in-hospital therapy

Decrease plasma leucine concentration at greater than 750 µmol/L per 24 hrs.

Provide isoleucine and valine supplementation sufficient to maintain plasma concentrations of 400-600 µmol/L during the acute phase of illness.

Maintain serum sodium concentration of 138-145 mEq/L with minimal fluctuation.

Avoid osmolarity changes of greater than 5 mosm/L per day or 0.25 mosm/L per hour.

Maintain urine output of 2-4 mL/kg/hr and urine osmolarity of 300-400 mosm/L.

Minimize exposure to hypotonic fluid sources.

Anticipate and prevent iatrogenic electrolyte abnormalities associated with intravenous glucose and insulin therapy; the most commonly encountered are hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia.

Methods of achieving these goals

Identify and treat precipitating conditions (e.g., infection, inflammation, and fever).

Administer antiemetics (e.g., odansetron 0.15 mg/kg/dose) to control nausea and vomiting.

Provide at least 1.25 times the weight or body surface area-adjusted estimated energy requirement (EER), with 40%-50% of calories as lipid. EER, in kcal/m2/day, is approximately 1700 for neonates, 1500 for young children, and 1200 for adults. In older children and adults with catabolic illness, calorie intakes as high as three times the EER (i.e., 6000 calories per day) are often necessary to establish net protein anabolism.Note: Hypercaloric feeding typically requires a total (enteral + parenteral) glucose delivery rate of ≥10 mg/kg/min and can result in hyperglycemia. Regular insulin is typically infused at a continuous rate of 0.05-0.10 units/kg/hour and titrated to maintain euglycemia. Patients with severe illness may require higher rates of insulin infusion to counteract the glycemic effects of circulating glucagon, cortisol, and epinephrine [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Provide BCAA-free essential and non-essential amino acids: 2.0-3.5 g/kg/day.

Provide specific amino acid supplements during metabolic crisis:

Isoleucine and valine. 20-120 mg/kg/day each; intake is adjusted as necessary at 12- to 24-hour intervals to achieve the goals for isoleucine and valine plasma concentrations (400-600 µmol/L) and to optimize the rate of plasma leucine correction.

Glutamine and alanine. Total intake: 150-400 mg/kg/day each, depending on age and clinical circumstances (Table 5). Newer MSUD medical foods are fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010]; use of such products precludes the need to supply glutamine and alanine separately.

Tyrosine. During acute metabolic crisis, newborns, infants, and children with MSUD can develop acute focal or generalized dystonic posturing attributed to an increased plasma leucine:tyrosine concentration ratio, restricted brain tyrosine uptake, and reduced cerebral dopamine synthesis [Morton et al 2002, Zinnanti et al 2009]. Tyrosine dissolves poorly in aqueous solution, but when supplied enterally (100-400 mg/kg/day) can rapidly reverse dystonia associated with metabolic crisis [Strauss et al 2010; Strauss & Morton, unpublished observation].

Table 5. 

Mean and 25th to 75th Percentile Range Nutrient Intakes (per kg-day) by Age Group

Nutrient

Age in Months (# of Persons)

0-2 (31)

3-5 (18)

6-8 (21)

9-12 (18)

13-18 (21)

19-24 (18)

25-36 (32)

Nutrient Intake per kg-day: Mean (25th to 75th Percentile Range)

Leucine (mg)

72(64-84)

58(47-68)

44(37-51)

35(30-41)

33(26-39)

27(22-28)

21(20-25)

Energy (kcal)

111(103-119)

99(94-107)

89(82-99)

78(71-87)

67(55-77)

57(49-71)

38(39-51)

Total protein (g)

2.4(2.1-2.6)

2.3(1.9-2.6)

2.2(1.8-2.5)

2.0(1.5-2.5)

2.1(1.8-2.4)

2(1.7-2.3)

1.5(1.5-2.9)

Isoleucine supplement (mg)

4.4(0-7)

2.3(0-3.6)

2.7(0-3.9)

2.6(0-3.6)

3.8(2.1-5.1)

3.7(1.0-3.6)

5.5(3.5-6.2)

Valine supplement (mg)

11.5(9.8-14.8)

11.4(9.0-13.0)

11.0(9.5-12.1)

8.1(6.3-9.4)

7.8(5.4-10.0)

6.2(2.3-9.3)

5.8(4.9-8.7)

Alanine intake (mg)

233(200-262)

209(197-234)

206(193-225)

189(168-218)

178(159-199)

159(140-192)

117(114-149)

Glutamine intake (mg)

416(361-471)

363(337-405)

358(332-400)

320(288-371)

294(252-337)

256(221-318)

184(181-235)

Iron (mg)

2.2(1.9-2.5)

2.1(1.9-2.2)

2.1(2.0-2.2)

2.0(1.6-2.2)

2.0(1.8-2.1)

1.8(1.5-2.1)

1.3(1.3-1.6)

Zinc (mg)

4.6(3.7-4.9)

4.0(3.7-4.0)

4.0(3.7-4.3)

3.7(3.1-4.3)

3.7(3.4-4.0)

3.4(2.9-4.0)

2.6(2.6-3.1)

Selenium (µg)

7.0(5.7-7.5)

6.2(5.7-7.0)

6.2(5.7-6.6)

5.7(4.8-6.6)

5.7(5.3-6.2)

5.3(4.4-6.2)

4.0(4.0-4.8)

Omega-3 fattyacids, as 18:3n-3 (mg)

378(307-401)

330(307-378)

330(307-354)

307(260-354)

307(283-330)

283(236-330)

212(212-260)

Leucine / energy ratio (mg/kcal)

0.65(0.57-0.72)

0.58(0.48-0.66)

0.50(0.43-0.56)

0.46(0.37-0.53)

0.50(0.43-0.58)

0.48(0.38-0.58)

0.54(0.44-0.55)

From Strauss et al [2010]; with permission from Elsevier

Mean and 25th to 75th Percentile Range Nutrient Intakes (per kg-day) by Age Group

From Strauss et al [2010]; with permission from Elsevier

Total nutritional goals can be met by combined enteral and parenteral administration. In ill neonates or children otherwise able to tolerate enteral formula, regular feeding (30-60 mL each hour) or continuous nasogastric delivery of a one kcal/mL BCAA-free MSUD formula supplemented with isoleucine and valine is an effective way to manage metabolic crises [Nyhan et al 1998, Morton et al 2002].

Control of brain edema. A decrease in blood osmolarity of more than 8 mosm/L per day can precipitate fatal brain herniation in an ill infant or child with MSUD (Figure 4). Close monitoring (preferably in an intensive care unit) is warranted.

Neurologic assessments to be performed on a frequent basis to monitor for brain swelling include the following:

Measure head circumference and fontanel size in neonates.

Watch for signs of increased intracranial pressure including the following:

Papilledema

Disorientation, combativeness

Depressed level of consciousness

Refractory vomiting

Extremity hyperreflexia

Bradycardic hypertension

Watch for signs of impending brain herniation including the following:

Hyperactive gag

Pupillary asymmetry

Ophthalmoplegia

Decorticate posturing

Methods to minimize the possibility of brain swelling:

In appropriate clinical settings, the authors recommend use of a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line in encephalopathic patients with MSUD. This allows sufficient nutritional support to be delivered without an excessive fluid volume and reduces the risk for cerebral edema.

Elevate the individual's head.

Assess total body sodium, potassium, and water balance at 12-hour intervals. The following clinical formula is useful for managing the serum sodium concentration [Rose & Post 1994]:

Serum Na concentration equals ~([total body Na + total body K]/ total body water).

Assume total body water equals ~70% body weight, 2/3 of which is intracellular and has sodium and potassium concentrations of 14 mEq/L and 140 mEq/L, respectively [Guyton & Hall 1996].

Minimize osmotic variation of the extracellular fluid in hospitalized patients by assessing weight trend, urine output, and serum and urine electrolytes every 12 hours and adjusting electrolyte and water intake accordingly [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Note: Give furosemide (0.5-1.0 mg/kg/dose) as needed every six to 12 hours to oppose the urinary concentrating action of vasopressin and maintain urine osmolarity at a ceiling value of 300-400 mosm/L. This allows for brisk output of isotonic urine to compensate for the large infused volume associated with hypercaloric feeding.

Methods to manage brain swelling:

For weight gain, hyponatremia, or deepening encephalopathy, the authors administer [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]:

Furosemide: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, followed by

Mannitol: 0.5-1.0 g/kg over 60 minutes, followed by

Hypertonic (3%-5%) saline: 2.5 mEq/kg over 60 minutes

Neuroimaging. During episodes of acute encephalopathy, individuals with MSUD are typically too unstable for magnetic resonance imaging. Cranial CT scan is used to look for major indices of cerebral edema, such as decreased volume of cerebral ventricles and basal fluid spaces, or reduced gray-white discrimination (Figure 4).

If there is clinical evidence of evolving brain herniation, elevate the individual's head, hyperventilate by face mask or endotracheal tube, give mannitol 1-2 g/kg and hypertonic saline 3 mEq/kg, and transfer the individual emergently to a pediatric or neurologic intensive care unit.

Hemodialysis/hemofiltration. Nutritional therapy alone can effectively reduce even extremely elevated plasma concentrations of leucine in persons with MSUD of any age and under a wide variety of clinical circumstances [Morton et al 2002, Strauss & Morton 2003]. However, numerous publications have shown that renal replacement methods can achieve rapid corrections of BCAAs and BCKAs during the acute phase of MSUD crisis [Jouvet et al 1997, Schaefer et al 1999, Yoshino et al 1999, Jouvet et al 2001, Puliyanda et al 2002].

As methods of invasive leucine removal, peritoneal dialysis and venovenous hemofiltration are less effective and more dangerous than short courses of continuous hemodialysis [Schaefer et al 1999]. When hemodialysis is used to treat MSUD it must be coupled with effective nutritional management to constrain the catabolic response and prevent recurrent clinical intoxication. A combined approach to therapy, using hemodialysis with simultaneous anabolic nutritional therapy, was shown to be highly effective in one neonate with classic MSUD [Puliyanda et al 2002]. Dialysis without simultaneous management of the underlying disturbance of protein turnover is analogous to treating diabetic ketoacidosis with invasive removal of glucose and ketones rather than insulin infusion. In both conditions, effective treatment depends not only on lowering concentrations of pathologic metabolites, but also on controlling the underlying metabolic derangement.

Other potential complications in hospitalized persons with MSUD:

Acute pancreatitis. If clinical signs of pancreatitis (epigastric or mid-back pain, anorexia, vomiting) develop two to three days into the treatment of a metabolic decompensation, stop all enteral feeding and measure serum concentrations of lipase and amylase [Kahler et al 1994]. Treatment is supportive; persons with MSUD with pancreatitis need to be managed with special parenteral nutrition solutions until the condition abates.

Infection. Monitor for and promptly treat hospital-acquired infections. Superficial and invasive Candida infections are common. Persons with MSUD are vulnerable to bacterial or fungal infection from central venous catheters.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary management. The goals of dietary management for newly diagnosed infants:

Normal weight gain, linear growth, and head growth

Normal psychomotor development, as assessed by serial examinations and valid developmental screening tools (e.g., Denver Developmental Screening Test II, standardized intelligence testing, validated behavioral inventories) [Muelly et al 2013]

Age-appropriate tolerance of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, with stable plasma BCAA concentrations and BCAA concentration ratios

Avoidance of essential amino acid, fatty acid, and micronutrient deficiencies

Home formula supplies include BCAA-free powder; breast milk or regular infant formula as a natural protein source; and 10-mg/mL solutions of isoleucine, valine, and leucine in distilled water. If the BCAA-free powder is not already fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010], these can be given separately as a combined powder (weight ratio 3:2). Parents maintain a record of intake of calories, leucine, isoleucine, and valine and send dried blood spots by overnight mail for monitoring of amino acid concentrations. The frequency of amino acid monitoring varies by age, metabolic stability, compliance, and regional clinical practice. For rapidly growing infants, monitoring weekly or twice weekly is recommended. Of note, the frequency of amino acid monitoring correlates directly with long-term measures of intelligence [Muelly et al 2013].

Suggested clinical parameters for the asymptomatic infant or young child include the following:

Normal age- and weight-adjusted energy intake

Protein as essential and non-essential amino acids: 2-3 g/kg/day

Appropriate leucine tolerance. The dietary requirement for BCAAs varies as a function of age, growth rate, calorie intake, illness, and residual in vivo BCKAD enzyme activity. In persons with classic MSUD (0%-2% enzyme activity), leucine tolerance in mg/kg/day is 65-85 for neonates, 20-40 for children, and 10-15 for adults (Figure 9) [Strauss et al 2010].

Isoleucine and valine supplements as needed to maintain a plasma leucine-to-valine concentration ratio (mol:mol) of 0.5 or less and a leucine-to-isoleucine ratio of approximately 2.0. Isoleucine supplements can periodically be suspended based on plasma amino acid monitoring, but continuous valine supplementation is prudent because its low affinity for the blood-brain barrier LAT1 transporter makes it especially vulnerable to competitive inhibition by leucine [Smith & Takasato 1986] and its appropriate fortification is directly related to long-term intellectual outcome [Strauss et al 2010, Muelly et al 2013].

The authors recently compiled age-specific (birth to age 4 years) nutrient intakes for Mennonite children with classic MSUD under their care. These data are presented in Table 5, which shows mean (and 25th to 75th percentile range) intakes for energy, total protein, supplemental amino acids, omega-3 fatty acids, and select minerals at different age intervals.

Goals of laboratory monitoring:

Plasma leucine concentration: 150-300 µmol/L with an age-appropriate intake

Plasma isoleucine concentration approximately equal to plasma leucine concentration

Plasma valine concentration at least twofold plasma leucine concentration

Indices of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3 essential fatty acid sufficiency

Neuropsychiatric morbidity is most effectively addressed by presymptomatic diagnosis followed by strict and consistent metabolic control [Muelly et al 2013]. Adolescents and adults with MSUD and ADHD, depression, or anxiety respond favorably to standard psychostimulant and antidepressant medications.

Thiamine treatment. The existence of "thiamine-responsive" BCKAD mutants is controversial. Nevertheless, for any person with MSUD in whom the functional consequences of the pathogenic variant(s) are unknown, a four-week trial of enteral thiamine (50-100 mg/day, divided 2x a day) is reasonable. However, it should be noted that significant changes in dietary therapy (e.g., BCAA or calorie intake) during the treatment period confounds interpretation of a specific thiamine effect.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is an effective therapy for classic MSUD, with removal of dietary restrictions and complete protection from decompensations during illness [Wendel et al 1999, Bodner-Leidecker et al 2000]. Through a collaboration between University of Pittsburgh Children's Hospital and Clinic for Special Children [Strauss et al 2006], 52 individuals with classic MSUD (age 1.9-20.5 years) underwent elective orthotopic liver transplantation between 2004 and 2013. Plasma leucine, isoleucine, and valine concentrations were normal within six hours after transplantation in all individuals and remained so on an unrestricted diet. Metabolic cure was reflected by a sustained increase in weight-adjusted leucine tolerance from 10-40 mg/kg/day to more than 140 mg/kg/day, normalization of plasma concentration relationships among branched-chain and other essential and non-essential amino acids, and metabolic and clinical stability during protein loading and intercurrent illnesses [Strauss et al 2006, Mazariegos et al 2012].

Risks associated with surgery and immune suppression were similar to those in other pediatric liver transplant populations and one person developed EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Currently, disease-free survival and graft survival are 100% in this cohort of 52 patients [Mazariegos et al 2012]; however, deaths and graft failures have been reported among individuals with MSUD transplanted elsewhere during the same time period [Mazariegos, unpublished observations].

Although liver transplantation does not reverse cognitive disability or psychiatric illness in individuals with MSUD [Muelly et al 2013], it does appear to arrest progression of neurocognitive impairment [Shellmer et al 2011] and prevent life-threatening cerebral edema associated with metabolic crisis [Mazariegos et al 2012].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Any trauma care or surgical procedures should be approached in consultation with a metabolic specialist.

Surveillance

The authors recommend that infants with MSUD be evaluated by a pediatrician and metabolic specialist once monthly and have a full amino acid profile measured (either from plasma or filter paper) at least once a week. At the authors’ center, strict adherence to these guidelines by 15 Mennonite infants managed between 2005 and 2008 was associated with a 64% reduction in the overall hospitalization rate to 0.14 admissions per patient per year [Strauss et al 2010].

Children, adolescents, and adults also need to be followed closely and should ideally have amino levels monitored once per week. This is usually not practical without a “send-in” filter paper method.

The Denver Developmental Screening Test II or a comparable tool is useful for monitoring development of infants and young children with MSUD.

School-age children, adolescents, and adults should have neurocognitive testing if indicated by school performance or behavioral problems [Shellmer et al 2011, Muelly et al 2013]. Referral to a psychiatrist is appropriate for individuals who show signs of ADHD, anxiety, or depression.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs of an affected individual may allow asymptomatic infants to be managed out of hospital by experienced providers.

Newborn at-risk sibs who have not undergone prenatal testing can be tested in one of two ways:

Plasma amino acid analysis of a sample obtained at approximately 24 hours of life. In some laboratories, samples obtained earlier can yield false negative results.

If the pathogenic variants have been identified in the family, a cord blood sample can be used for molecular genetic testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

With the advent of newborn screening and preventive care, more women with MSUD are surviving to child-bearing age. Successful delivery of a healthy baby is possible for women with classic MSUD. Reports include Van Calcar et al [1992] and Grünewald et al [1998].

Elevated maternal leucine plasma concentration, like elevated maternal phenylalanine plasma concentration, is likely teratogenic. If a woman with MSUD is planning a pregnancy, metabolic control should be maintained in a rigorous fashion preceding and throughout the gestation. Keeping the maternal plasma levels of the branched-chain amino acids between 100 and 300 μmol/L is compatible with delivery of a normal infant [Grünewald et al 1998].

During the development of the placenta and fetus, maternal BCAA and protein requirements increase, and frequent monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations and fetal growth may be necessary to avoid essential amino acid deficiencies [Grünewald et al 1998].

The post-partum period is dangerous for the mother. Catabolic stress of labor, involutional changes of the uterus, and internal sequestration of blood are potential sources of metabolic decompensation [Chuang & Shih 2001]. Appropriate monitoring at a metabolic referral center is advised at the time of delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with enlarged parietal foramina/cranium bifidum, the following evaluations are recommended:

Plain skull radiography

3D CT scan of the head with bone windows

Brain imaging using CT or MRI scanning, if appropriate

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of enlarged parietal foramina is generally conservative. Although surgical closure of parietal bone defects has been advocated and performed [Kortesis et al 2003], its role is controversial. The procedure is not likely to be routinely clinically indicated, given the benign natural history of the skull defects, their tendency to reduce in size with age, and uncertainty as to whether symptoms such as headaches are improved. However, persistent cranium bifidum may warrant operative closure [Perlyn et al 2005].

Associated headaches or seizures should be treated symptomatically.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The risk of penetrating injury to the brain is small but may cause anxiety. Education of parents, teachers, and the affected child to avoid risky behaviors suffices in most circumstances.

Contact sports should be avoided if a midline bony defect persists.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

When large skull defects are identified prenatally, consideration should be given to delivery planning (e.g., indications to use scalp electrodes, forceps, or vacuum extraction could be reviewed). Elective Caesarian section may theoretically reduce the risk of traumatic birth injury.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of hearing loss and needs in an individual diagnosed with nonsyndromic mitochondrial hearing loss and deafness, the following evaluations are recommended:

A complete auditory assessment (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview)

Examination of the skin for evidence of keratoderma

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Appropriate rehabilitation, e.g., hearing aids, speech therapy, culturally appropriate language training, and evaluation for eligibility for cochlear implantation [Sinnathuray et al 2003]

Enrollment in educational programs appropriate for the hearing impaired

For mild keratoderma, use of lotions and emollients; for severe keratoderma, dermatologic evaluation

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

MT-RNR1-related aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. Physicians can inquire about a family history of aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss prior to the administration of aminoglycosides, either systemically or locally (e.g., into the cochlea as treatment for Meniere disease). In individuals with a positive family history, alternatives to aminoglycoside treatment should be considered when possible.

In the US, aminoglycoside use is most common in the neonatal intensive care unit; however, the therapeutic imperative of treatment with antibiotics in a neonatal intensive care unit setting does not always lend itself to pre-treatment screening by molecular genetic testing.

Bitner-Glindzicz et al [2009] report a population frequency of 0.19% for the A to G change in a European cohort of children age seven to nine years who had the pathogenic variant but did not have hearing loss because they were not exposed to aminoglycosides; they make an argument for screening on demand to avoid a preventable cause of hearing loss.

In a recent commentary by Boles & Friedlich [2010], the authors suggest a prospective study into the feasibility of screening for these mitochondrial pathogenic variants (especially in busy neonatal units) in order to identify a preventable form of hearing loss.

In the Tianjin Province in China, screening of 58,000 newborns with both audiologic and genetic methods determined that 1.8% of newborns had a pathogenic mitochondrial DNA variant and only one had hearing loss [Zhang et al 2013].

Surveillance

The following assessments are indicated:

Annual audiometric assessment to evaluate stability or progression of hearing loss

Annual examination by a physician to assess for related clinical findings (e.g., palmoplantar keratosis)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aminoglycosides and noise exposure should be avoided, particularly in individuals with normal hearing who have the m.1555A>G

MT-RNR1 pathogenic variant.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In a family in which the mtDNA pathogenic variant is known, prospective molecular genetic testing of at-risk maternal relatives allows early detection of those who have inherited the mtDNA pathogenic variant and would benefit from avoiding aminoglycosides to prevent onset of hearing loss.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Use of aminoglycoside antibiotics during pregnancy in a mother who has the MT-RNR1 m.1555A>G pathogenic variant should be considered only in the absence of other treatment options, as these antibiotics exhibit incomplete placental transfer.

Of note, if the mother has the MT-RNR1 m.1555A>G pathogenic variant, she will pass it on to the fetus; hence, use of aminoglycosides should be avoided in the newborn.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration (MPAN), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic examination, including evaluation of ambulation, speech, and swallowing

Ophthalmologic examination to assess for optic atrophy

Assessment by specialists in physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy

Brain MRI (T2 weighted at a minimum) if one has not been obtained within the past two years

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity, including consideration of oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen if indicated

Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism (response to levodopa has been variable in this population)

Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with significant neuropsychiatric symptoms

Physical, occupational, speech, and other therapies as indicated

Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed

A gastric feeding tube to help minimize weight loss (which becomes more frequent with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia

Glycopyrrolate or transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions

Tracheostomy as indicated for difficulty managing secretions

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Surveillance

Patients are typically followed most closely by a neurologist for medication management and for interval assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing. This is often done every three to six months, but may be annual for patients who are more stable.

Patients receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism) are monitored for adverse neuropsychiatric effects; conversely, patients receiving typical or atypical dopamine antagonist agents (for psychiatric features) are monitored for the development or worsening of parkinsonism.

Annual ophthalmologic examination is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has not been specifically studied in MPAN, even in case reports. DBS has become a common treatment for primary dystonia and is being used more frequently to attempt to treat the secondary dystonia in PKAN with some success. It is likely that the use of DBS in MPAN will eventually be reported.

Iron chelation using deferiprone is currently under investigation in PKAN (see clinicaltrials.gov). A small phase II pilot trial in PKAN showed statistically significant reduction of brain iron by MRI evaluation; however, no change in clinical status was observed [Zorzi et al 2011]. The current double-blind, placebo controlled trial in PKAN may inform whether deferiprone treatment should be considered for MPAN.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked centronuclear myopathy (XLCNM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of pulmonary function for long-term ventilatory management, either during initial hospitalization (if presentation at birth) or after the diagnosis has been established.

Ophthalmologic evaluation, either during initial hospitalization (if presentation at birth), or after the diagnosis has been established

In individuals with hemolysis or unexplained anemia, osmotic fragility test to detect spherocytosis

In the presence of infantile vomiting, investigation for pyloric stenosis

Baseline abdominal ultrasound examination to detect peliosis hepatis (although the specific risk for subsequent bleeding if peliosis is detected is not known)

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with XLCNM is based on supportive care measures and in large part is similar to that for other neuromuscular disorders. The management of an individual with XLCNM optimally involves a team of specialists with expertise in the long-term care of individuals with neuromuscular disorders. Such teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, and clinical geneticist. Of note, standard of care measures for all congenital myopathies are currently being developed.

Once the specific diagnosis of XLCNM is confirmed, management may be guided by family decisions regarding continued ventilatory support for the affected family member. Families may benefit from the involvement of professionals familiar with the data concerning the overall prognosis for XLCNM. Talking with other families who have children with the disorder can be extremely helpful (see Resources).

Because of the risks for aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure in infants with moderate or severe disease, tracheostomy and G-tube feeding should be seriously considered. Even individuals with mild disease are at risk for significant morbidity and mortality from intercurrent respiratory infection and hypoventilation.

For ventilator-dependent individuals, communication incorporates speech with a capped tracheostomy or Passy-Muir valve, sign language, and/or communication devices such as writing boards.

Affected individuals older than age five years attend school, usually assisted by a dedicated nurse or aide, or have home-based teachers to limit exposure to infectious agents.

Ophthalmologists, orthopedists specializing in scoliosis management, and orthodontists should address specific medical complications related to the underlying myopathy.

Children with XLCNM and an unexpected decline in motor skills should be evaluated for a potential abnormality in neuromuscular junction function. A recent study from Robb et al [2011] identified one individual with mild XLCNM and unexplained decline in motor skills (i.e., lost ambulation) consistent with a disorder of neuromuscular junction transmission. On evaluation this individual was found to have the electrodiagnostic features of neuromuscular junction disease (electrodecrement with repetitive stimulation and jitter with single fiber EMG) but no laboratory evidence to support a co-occurring diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Subsequent treatment with pyridostigmine resulted in rapid recovery of ambulation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of the risks for bleeding during or following surgery, clotting parameters should be examined prior to any surgical procedures. (Note, however, that clotting studies in two individuals were normal prior to a lethal bleeding event associated with surgery.)

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual pulmonary assessment, including pulmonary function testing if able to be performed;

Polysomnography every one to three years unless symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing are present on history;

Spinal examination for signs of scoliosis, particularly in late childhood and adolescence;

Annual ophthalmologic exams for ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and myopia;

Assessment for dental malocclusion, with referral for orthodontia if indicated.

Currently, the risk for non-neurologic events including bleeding diatheses and gastrointestinal complications is uncertain. Furthermore, the benefit of screening tests for such abnormalities has yet to be determined or systematically studied. Potential screening tests include the following:

Annual blood counts [Herman et al 1999]

Annual liver function test and abdominal ultrasound to address the potential risk of peliosis hepatis [Herman et al 1999]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Muenke syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of suture involvement by skull radiographs or preferably 3D skull CT

Assessment for hydrocephalus with brain CT or MRI

Assessment for exposure keratopathy

Hearing assessment

Developmental assessment in children

Ophthalmologic assessment including screening for strabismus and vision. Additionally, this assessment should include fundoscopy to assess for papilledema, a finding that is present when intracranial pressure (ICP) is increased.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Children with Muenke syndrome and craniosynostosis should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience. These individuals benefit most from a multidisciplinary approach to care. A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes: a surgical team (craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon), clinical geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, dentist, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker. Other disciplines are involved as needed.

Craniosynostosis. Depending on the severity, the first craniosynostosis repair is typically performed between age three and six months. This procedure is usually transcranial (i.e., the skull is opened down to the dura so that the bones can be physically repositioned during a procedure such as a midface advancement).

Newer approaches being performed include endoscopic strip craniectomy and posterior distraction (PD):

Endoscopic strip craniectomy is typically performed before the affected child reaches age three months and has an overall long-term improved symmetry compared to traditional cranial vault remodeling and fronto-orbital advancement.

Posterior distraction (PD) is used to manage individuals with severe brachycephaly or turribrachycephaly. The procedure has associated risks and more studies to establish long-term outcomes are needed [Wiberg et al 2012, Thomas et al 2014].

Following craniosynostosis repair, the need for a second procedure is increased in those with Muenke syndrome compared to those with craniosynostosis without the defining pathogenic variant. The reasons for a second procedure vary by individual and can include:

Severe initial clinical presentation requiring a staged repair

Cranial vault abnormalities including temporal bulging and recurrent supraorbital retrusion requiring extracranial contouring (i.e., use of a cement such as calcium phosphate to contour the surface of the skull)

Postoperative increased ICP

Recurrent deformity requiring a second transcranial repair:

The need for a surgical revision for aesthetic reasons (typically temporal bulging) has been reported in multiple series [Renier et al 2000, Cassileth et al 2001, Arnaud et al 2002, Thomas et al 2005, Honnebier et al 2008].

According to Thomas et al [2005], individuals with craniosynostosis and the defining pathogenic variant for Muenke syndrome were more likely to require early intervention with a posterior release operation (at age ~6 months) to prevent excess frontal bulging than were those without the defining pathogenic variant.

Seven (24.1%) of 29 individuals with the p.Pro250Arg pathogenic variant underwent a second surgery (6/7 had increased ICP) as compared to two (4.3%) of 47 without the pathogenic variant. This difference in reoperation rate was statistically significant (p=0.048) [Thomas et al 2005].

In the report of Honnebier et al [2008], 16 individuals with Muenke syndrome required a second procedure: seven required a second transcranial procedure; 15 were expected to undergo extracranial contouring. Note that none had increased ICP.

However, a study by Ridgway et al [2011] challenges the above findings, reporting a frequency of frontal revision in individuals with Muenke syndrome who had fronto-orbital advancements that was lower than previously reported. This study found that the need for secondary revision procedures was inversely related to the age of the affected individual at the time of the initial repair. The location of the fused/synostotic suture, type of fixation, and the use of bone grafting do not have a significant effect on the need for revision.

In Muenke syndrome a discrepancy between severity of the craniofacial findings (e.g., severe midface retrusion, widely spaced eyes) and neurologic findings (e.g., increased ICP, hydrocephalus, structural brain anomalies, severe developmental delay, or severe intellectual disability) has been noted [Lajeunie et al 1999, Arnaud et al 2002, Honnebier et al 2008]: severe early clinical findings such as recurrent deformity and the need for a second major procedure did not correlate with postoperative risk for increased ICP.

Hearing loss. Hearing loss is often sensorineural. Standard treatments for hearing loss apply, including special accommodations for school-aged children, hearing aids, and (potentially) cochlear implants (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) [Agochukwu et al 2014b].

Developmental delay. Individuals with Muenke syndrome are at increased risk for behavioral problems, intellectual disability, and developmental delay [Maliepaard et al 2014, Yarnell et al 2015]; thus, referral for speech therapy and early intervention is indicated. Referral to a developmental and/or behavioral specialist for assessment and treatment is recommended.

Ocular abnormalities

Strabismus surgery/correction is indicated to prevent amblyopia.

Because surgical correction of craniosynostosis is a priority, delay in strabismus surgery in the first two years of life is common; however, earlier correction of strabismus should be considered to achieve binocularity.

In those with proptosis, lubrication for exposure keratopathy is indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early surgical reconstruction for craniosynostosis may reduce the risk for complications including sequelae related to increased intracranial pressure (e.g., behavioral changes).

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular developmental assessments of affected children

Periodic repeat audiograms

Periodic assessment for strabismus

As part of protocol-driven care and management: annual multidisciplinary reviews and periodic review by a social work team. Protocol-driven approaches to surveillance currently in use include those of Flapper et al [2009] and de Jong et al [2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures (particularly in individuals affected with craniosynostosis, hearing loss, developmental delay, and/or cognitive disability).

Evaluation includes targeted molecular genetic testing for the FGFR3 c.749C>G pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Mansour et al [2009] determined that in the mouse model of Muenke syndrome all mice had low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss. The characteristic sensorineural hearing loss is probably due to abnormal development of the auditory sensory epithelium of the inner ear including excess pillar cells, too few Deiters’ cells, and extra outer hair cells in the organ of Corti. A further study revealed that the rescue of cochlear function and hearing loss phenotype of these mice is possible with a reduction in FGF-10, which normally activates FGFR-2b or FGFR-1b [Mansour et al 2013]. Aberrant signaling through the FGF signaling pathway that includes FGFR3 may be the cause of the abnormal development of auditory sensory cells in Muenke syndrome [Agochukwu et al 2014a].

Animal models indicate that FGFR3 is expressed at its highest levels in the developing central nervous system.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline echocardiogram

Baseline dental evaluation in early childhood

Baseline ophthalmology evaluation

Baseline audiology evaluation

Review history for evidence of chronic constipation

Review history for evidence of seizures

Renal ultrasound examination to assess for structural renal anomalies

Genitourinary evaluation, particularly for hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males

Physical examination for pectus anomalies and foot/ankle malpositioning

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following:

Dental. Referral to an orthodontist if significant dental anomalies are present

Neurologic. Referral to a pediatric neurologist if signs or symptoms suggest seizures. An EEG and/or head MRI may be warranted for diagnostic purposes or refractory seizures. Standard anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) should be used, as indicated.

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay

Ophthalmologic. Treatment and/or following of ocular abnormalities by a pediatric ophthalmologist

Cardiovascular. Referral to a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon for treatment of congenital heart defects

Gastrointestinal. Referral to a gastroenterologist for evaluation and treatment when chronic constipation is present; evaluation for HSCR and ultrashort HSCR. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview.

Genitourinary. Referral to a urologist or nephrologist as indicated

Musculoskeletal. Referral to an orthopedist for significant pectus anomalies of the chest and/or foot/ankle anomalies

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Annual eye examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors

Monitoring for the development of otitis media (OM); for those individuals with chronic OM, referral to an otolaryngologist

Regular developmental assessments to plan and refine educational interventions

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an MYH9-related disorder (MYH9RD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Microscopic assessment of platelet count (phase contrast microscopy by a counting chamber) to determine the degree of thrombocytopenia

In individuals with bleeding episodes, complete blood count to evaluate for anemia

In individuals with anemia, serum concentration of iron and ferritin level to evaluate for iron deficiency

Audiometric evaluation

In those with severe to profound deafness, speech recognition tests

Measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT, and GGT

Urinalysis, including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on a spot urine sample, and measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

In individuals with established renal involvement, testing appropriate to the severity of renal disease

Ophthalmologic examination

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Bleeding tendency

Local measures are the first-line treatment for mucocutaneous bleeding and often are sufficient to control mild or moderate bleeding. Local measures include packing or endoscopic cauterization of the bleeding site for treatment of epistaxis; suturing for treatment of accidental or surgical wounds; and compression and application of gauzes soaked in tranexamic acid for bleeding from superficial wounds. Mouthwash with tranexamic acid may control gingival bleeding.

Transfusions of platelet concentrates are currently used to transiently increase platelet count. Platelet transfusions have associated risks of possible alloimmunization and subsequent refractoriness to platelet infusions, infectious diseases, and acute reactions. Thus, platelet transfusions should be limited to treatment for active hemorrhages that cannot be otherwise managed, life-threatening bleedings, and/or hemorrhages at critical sites; platelet concentrates may also be used as prophylaxis prior to surgery or other major hemostatic stresses. When available, platelets from HLA-matched donors should be used to prevent or overcome alloimmunization.

Eltrombopag. A Phase II study in 12 persons with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia demonstrated that eltrombopag, an oral drug mimicking the natural hormone that stimulates platelet production, increased platelet counts and abolished bleeding tendency in most instances [Pecci et al 2010]. Thereafter, short-term eltrombopag courses have been successfully used in one affected adult prior to major surgery and in one child with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia [Pecci et al 2012b, Favier et al 2013b]. At the present time, this drug is approved in the US and Europe only for individuals with some forms of acquired thrombocytopenia.

Antifibrinolytic agents. Some authors recommend the systemic administration of antifibrinolytic agents, such as tranexamic or epsilon-aminocaproic acid, to treat mild or moderate mucocutaneous bleeding [Bolton-Maggs et al 2006, Althaus & Greinacher 2009].

Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, DDAVP) shortened bleeding time in some individuals with MYH9RD [Balduini et al 1999]. Successful surgery after prophylaxis with DDAVP has been reported [Pecci et al 2014b]. As not all affected individuals respond to the treatment, a test dose is recommended to identify those who will benefit from this treatment either in future bleeding episodes or in prevention of bleeding at the time of invasive procedures.

Deafness. A total of 11 individuals with an established diagnosis of MYH9RD and severe to profound deafness have received cochlear implantations [Pecci et al 2014b, Nabekura et al 2015]. Ten of them benefited from cochlear implants; nine of them obtained restoration of practically normal hearing and verbal communication abilities.

Glomerular nephropathy

Four affected individuals with renal involvement had their proteinuria greatly reduced by treatment with angiotensin receptor blockers and/or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [Pecci et al 2008]. It is premature to conclude whether this therapeutic approach prevents or delays the development of ESRD.

Dialysis or kidney transplantation is required in individuals with ESRD.

Cataracts. Cataract surgery remedies clouding of the lens.

Elevation of liver enzymes does not require any specific treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Thrombocytopenia cannot be prevented; however, the risk of bleeding can be significantly reduced through education regarding drugs that affect platelet function (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Affected individuals should be prepared for surgery or other invasive procedures with platelet transfusions, desmopressin, antifibrinolytic drugs, or eltrombopag according to the individual's platelet count and history of bleeding.

Oral contraceptives are often effective in preventing or controlling menorrhagia; however, oral contraceptives increase the risk of thrombosis, which has also been described in individuals with MYH9RD. Thus, the balance between risks and benefits associated with use of oral contraceptives should be considered [Heller et al 2006, Nishiyama et al 2008, Girolami et al 2011].

Regular dental care and good oral hygiene are essential to prevent gingival bleeding.

Surveillance

The following evaluations should be considered at the suggested maximum intervals:

Every six months. blood count in individuals with bleeding episodes to identify anemia; more frequent counts are appropriate in cases of recurrent profuse bleeding.

Every year

Urinalysis (including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on spot urine sample)

Measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

For individuals with an established renal defect, referral to a nephrologist

Every three years

Audiometric evaluation. Once hearing loss is identified, the frequency of follow-up evaluations is determined by the treating hearing specialists.

Ophthalmologic evaluation. Once cataract is identified, the frequency of evaluations is determined by the treating ophthalmologist.

Measurement of serum AST, ALT and GGT

In individuals with alterations of liver enzymes, alternative causes of liver damage should be investigated.

If alternative causes are excluded, the frequency of the liver enzyme measurements depends on the severity of the alteration.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Bleeding tendency

Agents. Drugs that inhibit platelet function or blood coagulation:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially aspirin, which are strong inhibitors of platelet aggregation

Other substances that interfere with platelet function including some antibiotics; cardiovascular, psychotropic, and oncologic drugs; drugs that affect platelet cAMP; some anesthetics; antihistamines; and radiographic contrast agentsNote: (1) Drugs that impair platelet function should be prescribed only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits. (2) Physicians should try to avoid prescribing any other drugs that increase the risk of bleeding in individuals with MYH9RD. (3) Individuals with MYH9RD can develop thromboembolic events [Girolami et al 2011]. The use of antithrombotic agents (such as heparin) must be carefully balanced against the risks according to the overall clinical picture of each affected individual.

Circumstances. In individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, avoidance of activities at high risk of trauma (e.g., contact sports)

Hearing loss

Agents. Ototoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicylates in large quantities, loop diuretics, some drugs used in chemotherapy regimens). These should be used only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits.

Circumstances. Exposure to hazardous noise. If noise exposure cannot be avoided, use ear devices (e.g., earplugs, headphones) to attenuate intense sound.

Nephropathy

Agents that can damage renal function, including radiocontrast, antibiotics, NSAIDs, diuretics, and oncologic drugs. The balance between benefit and risk of such agents should be carefully considered, especially in individuals with established kidney involvement or with MYH9 pathogenic variants associated with high risk for kidney damage.

Cataract

Agents. Glucocorticoids and radiation therapy, which predispose to development of cataracts

Elevation of liver enzymes

Agents. In affected individuals with liver enzyme elevation, assessment of risks versus benefits before use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Assessing platelet count and size in a newborn at risk for MYH9RD identifies those at risk for bleeding.

If the family-specific pathogenic variant is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate at-risk family members so that early diagnosis can inform treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Deliveries should be managed as they are in women with other forms of thrombocytopenia (MYH9RD is not usually associated with defects of platelet function). As expected, pregnant women whose thrombocytopenia and bleeding history before pregnancy are more severe have a higher incidence of delivery-related bleeding. In general, a platelet count of ≥50 x 109/L is recommended for safe delivery. Vaginal deliveries in women with severe thrombocytopenia should be considered at increased risk for neonatal intracranial bleeding [Noris et al 2014b].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Myhre syndrome, the following are recommended (if not completed previously as part of the diagnostic evaluation).

Cardiovascular

Upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements

Two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler

For those with abnormal findings, more extensive imaging if indicated including cardiac catheterization to document the characteristic hemodynamics of restrictive cardiomyopathy

Respiratory

Assessment for airway stenosis by the least invasive means possible with assessment for signs of upper-airway obstruction including noisy breathing, work of breathing, and oxygen saturation

Assessment of pulmonary function and oxygen saturation for evidence of obstructive or restrictive lung disease

Gastrointestinal. Based on clinical indication (by least invasive means possible), evaluate for evidence of stenosis.

Neuropsychiatric. Neuropsychometric evaluation may be indicated for individuals with autistic behaviors and/or cognitive involvement.

Other

Ophthalmology evaluation

Speech evaluation

Audiology evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is largely symptomatic and may include the following.

Cardiovascular

Management by a cardiologist trained in congenital heart disease, including pericardial disease and restrictive cardiomyopathy. At present, no evidence suggests that in Myhre syndrome management of specific lesions would differ from standard care in current clinical practice, except that any unnecessary instrumentation should be avoided as associated tissue trauma may induce stenosis and the scarring-type tissue response unique to Myhre syndrome.

Affected individuals who are in heart failure should be under the care of a cardiovascular specialist with access to a transplant center.

Maximize all medical treatment and minimize instrumentation for all cardiac studies and therapies.

Medical treatment of systemic hypertension and pulmonary hypertension (based on underlying cause).

Respiratory

Affected individuals have required long-term tracheostomy due to complete and recurrent tracheal stenosis following multiple and/or traumatic intubations [McGowan et al 2011, Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015]. To avoid traumatic intubation, consider using a size-smaller uncuffed endotracheal tube. Elective tracheal surgery/intubation should be avoided; tracheal resection is contraindicated [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Symptomatic treatment of restrictive lung disease

Oxygen supplementation as necessary

Gastrointestinal

Minimal instrumentation of the gastrointestinal tract is advised because post-operative adhesions can be fatal [Lindor et al 2012].

Endoscopy should be approached with caution to avoid airway manipulation which increases the risk for tracheal/laryngeal scarring/stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015]. Noninvasive 3D imaging may be preferred.

Aggressive management of constipation (through dietary means or medication if necessary) is indicated.

Neuropsychiatric. The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Global developmental disability/intellectual disability educational issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Social/behavioral issues

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Individualized behavioral therapy or pharmacologic treatment for anxiety, depression, or other psychological manifestations as per current clinical practice is appropriate.

Hearing

Hearing loss. Appropriate hearing augmentation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Persistent middle ear effusions. Myringotomy tubes as needed

Craniofacial

Individuals with orofacial clefting or velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience. These individuals benefit most from a multidisciplinary approach to care.

A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team (craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon), clinical geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, multiple dental specialists, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker.

Skeletal

Consider physical therapy to keep joints mobile (no study has been done on efficacy). Note: It is not known if passive range of motion exercises help maintain flexibility.

A systematic study of growth hormone treatment for short stature has not been done. One affected individual has been noted to have anecdotal improvement in growth velocity; however, it is unknown if adult height would be affected [Starr et al 2015].

Ophthalmology. Routine treatment of strabismus and refractive errors. Note: Complications from surgical repair have not been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive measure: The literature suggests increased risk of proliferative fibrosis following otherwise uncomplicated endotracheal intubation and surgical procedures. When possible, alternative noninvasive approaches should be pursued during diagnosis and management [Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015].

Extreme care with intubation and use of an endotracheal tube without a cuff (or careful monitoring of pressures with a cuff) may help prevent airway stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Minimize abdominal and pelvic procedures as extensive adhesions may develop postoperatively [Lindor et al 2012].

Hysterectomy should be an option of last resort for treatment of menorrhagia as post-surgical fibrosis is highly likely.

Surveillance

Cardiovascular

After normal baseline evaluations of upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements, two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler, and cardiology evaluation

In asymptomatic individuals with a normal echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiogram every 1-3 years. Note that pericardial effusion and restrictive cardiomyopathy may occur at any age and may be clinically asymptomatic [Starr et al 2015, Garavelli et al 2016, Lin et al 2016].

In individuals with abnormal findings at the time of initial diagnosis, more extensive imaging may be indicated given the progressive nature of the disorder (e.g., MRI to evaluate for pericardial thickening or effusion).

Respiratory

Consider oxygen saturation in children, with monitoring as needed for symptoms suggestive of restrictive/obstructive pulmonary disease and annual pulmonary function studies in children older than age six years if able to cooperate with test maneuvers.

Evaluation for upper airway stenosis (e.g., laryngotracheal stenosis) should be considered based on symptoms.

Other

Annual ophthalmologic and audiology evaluations

Monitoring of physical skill development and joint mobility

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Patients should be aggressively counseled not to smoke.

Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive concept in this disorder to communicate to all health care providers involved in their care (see Prevention of Secondary Findings).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with myoclonus-dystonia (M-D) the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical examination to evaluate the location, severity, and progression of dystonia and the severity and progression of myoclonus. This is best done by a neurologic specialist in movement disorders.

MRI

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Medications may improve either the myoclonus or the dystonia or both:

Benzodiazepines, particularly clonazepam, improve mostly myoclonus and tremor [Kurlan et al 1988, Bressman & Greene 1990, Kyllerman et al 1990, Nygaard et al 1999, Goetz & Horn 2001].

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), typically valproate but also topiramate, may improve myoclonus [Bressman & Greene 1990, Nygaard et al 1999].

Anticholinergic medication may improve dystonia [Bressman & Greene 1990, Goetz & Horn 2001] and botulinum toxin injection may be especially helpful for cervical dystonia [Bressman & Greene 2000, Goetz & Horn 2001, Berardelli & Curra 2002].

Improvement of dystonia with L-5-hydroxytryptophan [Scheidtmann et al 2000] and with L-dopa [Leuzzi et al 2002, Raymond et al 2008, Luciano et al 2009] has been reported.

One individual with M-D who represented a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence of M-D in the family) showed a robust response to zolpidem [Park et al 2009].

Gamma-hydroxybutyrate [Priori et al 2000] and the sodium oxybate may improve myoclonus [Frucht et al 2005].

Note: Although the symptoms of M-D usually resolve with ingestion of alcohol, the risk of long-term addiction to alcohol renders it an unacceptable treatment option.

Surgery. Stereotactic thalamotomy can improve myoclonus, but caused dysarthria in one individual and mild hemiparesis in another [Gasser et al 1996]. In two others, myoclonus improved, but without significant gain in function [Suchowersky et al 2000].

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). In a recent study, ten persons with M-D (9 with an identifiable SGCE pathogenic variant) had DBS of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) only (1 person), of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) only, or of both GPi and VIM (8 persons). All experienced substantial improvement of both myoclonus (61.5%) and dystonia (48.2%). No adverse effects on cognition or affect were noted. VIM DBS was associated with a slightly higher incidence of reversible adverse events, possibly accounting for the slightly less robust improvement noted in those treated with VIM vs GPi DBS. The authors also note that quadruple VIM/GPi stimulation may be slightly more effective than VIM or GPi alone [Gruber et al 2010].

The results of case studies are summarized below:

Improvement of M-D was reported in a 63-year old with symptoms from age two years, suggesting that the findings are responsive to DBS, even after more than 50 years [Kurtis et al 2010].

Neurostimulation of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) in an individual with medically intractable and progressive inherited M-D resulted in an 80% reduction of myoclonus score, but no significant effect on dystonia. A second individual who had genetically confirmed M-D had a 14% reduction of myoclonus score following VIM stimulation [Trottenberg et al 2001, Kuncel et al 2009].

DBS of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) improved myoclonus and dystonia in two individuals [Cif et al 2004, Magariños-Ascone et al 2005], one of whom had a confirmed SGCE pathogenic variant [Cif et al 2004].

DBS of the medial globus pallidus improved both myoclonus and dystonia at an eight-week follow-up [Liu et al 2002].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As self-treatment with alcohol is common, proper treatment and counseling regarding alcohol abuse may decrease alcohol-related toxicities, particularly in adolescents.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with myopathy with deficiency of ISCU, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consideration of cardiac evaluation in an affected individual who has at least one pathogenic variant that is not the common Swedish pathogenic splice site variant

No special evaluations in an affected individual who is homozygous for the common Swedish pathogenic splice site variant

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific therapy currently exists for this disorder.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The major management goal is to prevent episodes of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this goal may be achieved by avoiding sustained fatiguing physical exertion.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The major secondary complications are those attributable to rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria, including renal failure and hyperkalemia. Management is similar to that for other causes of rhabdomyolysis including monitoring of renal and electrolyte status, maintenance of intravascular volume and urinary output, urine alkalinization, and institution of dialysis when needed [Malinoski et al 2004].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid sustained fatiguing physical exertion.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Antisense oligonucleotides that induce skipping of the aberrant splice site produced by the pathogenic variant have restored normal mRNA splicing in fibroblasts from affected individuals [Kollberg & Holme 2009], suggesting a potential role for this type of therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with myotonia congenita, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consultation with a neurologist or other relevant specialist to evaluate the need for pharmacologic treatment

Treatment of Manifestations

Some individuals with minor complaints may only need to accommodate their activities and lifestyles to reduce symptoms [Shapiro & Ruff 2002]. Myotonic stiffness may respond to sodium channel blockers or other pharmacologic treatment options:

Mexiletine, a lidocaine derivative, is the best documented treatment option. In a double-blind randomized trial, mexiletine (200 mg 3x/day) significantly reduced stiffness in a group of 59 patients with myotonia, 34 of whom had myotonia congenita [Statland et al 2012]. In clinical practice, doses generally begin at 150 mg twice a day, increasing slowly as needed up to 200-300 mg three times a day. The most common potential side effects, including epigastric discomfort, nausea, lightheadedness, dizziness, tremor, and ataxia, are reversible with dose reduction.

Other sodium channel blockers such as phenytoin and carbamazepine have been reported to have beneficial effects [Conravey & Santana-Gould 2010].

Compounds with other presumed modes of action such as quinine, dantrolene, or acetazolamide may be beneficial in some cases [Shapiro & Ruff 2002].

See review in Conravey & Santana-Gould [2010] for a detailed description of these treatment options.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Exercise temporarily alleviates myotonia (the warm-up effect). A long-term beneficial effect of gymnastics is sometimes reported by affected individuals; the effect has not been systematically studied.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In general, anesthesia should be used with caution [Bandschapp & Laizzo 2013]. Particular care must be taken with the use of depolarizing muscle relaxants during anesthesia because they may cause adverse anesthesia-related events. Because life-threatening muscle spasms and secondary ventilation difficulties occurred following a preoperative injection of suxamethonium, Farbu et al [2003] recommended that suxamethonium be avoided in individuals with myotonia congenita.

Note: Non-depolarizing muscle relaxants appear to act normally in individuals with myotonia congenita but do not counteract a myotonic response caused by suxamethonium [Farbu et al 2003].

In rare cases, injections of adrenaline or selective beta-adrenergic agonists in high doses may aggravate myotonia.

The beta-antagonist propranolol has likewise been reported to worsen myotonia [Blessing & Walsh 1977]. Accordingly, beta-agonists and beta-antagonists should be used with caution and particular care should be taken with the use of intravenous fenoterol or ritodrine.

Colchicine may cause a myopathy with myotonia in individuals with renal insufficiency [Rutkove et al 1996] and may thus also, in theory, aggravate the myotonia of individuals with myotonia congenita.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because individuals with myotonia congenita may be at increased risk for adverse anesthesia-related events, testing of at-risk individuals during childhood to clarify their genetic status is appropriate.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, electromyography can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For an affected mother, a comprehensive birth plan is recommended [Gorthi et al 2013] to minimize the risks of muscular spasms due to factors such as medications, intramuscular injections, and cold.

Therapies Under Investigation

A trial with lamotrigine is ongoing (NCT01939561).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in adults with classic DM1, the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline neurologic examination

Baseline examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with the iridescent posterior subcapsular cataract characteristic of DM1

Assessment of thyroid function

ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiogram to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin

Pulmonary function test

Assessment of strength [Whittaker et al 2006]

Assessment of cognitive ability

Fasting blood glucose determination

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

To establish the extent of disease and needs in children diagnosed with congenital myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline neurologic examination

Baseline ophthalmologic examination

Assessment of motor skills

Assessment of cognitive ability

Baseline cardiac evaluation

Pulmonary function test

Baseline endocrine evaluation

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management guidelines have been developed [Gagnon et al 2010].

No specific treatment exists for the progressive weakness in individuals with DM1.

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help evaluate affected individuals regarding the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses. Orthopedic surgery may benefit children with musculoskeletal deformities [Canavese & Sussman 2009].

Special education evaluation is indicated for children with DM1.

Increased weakness in DM1 has been associated with both hypothyroidism and certain cholesterol-lowering medications (i.e. statins); thus, some strength may return if these causative factors are eliminated.

Myotonia in DM1 is typically mild to moderate and rarely requires treatment [Ricker et al 1999]. Anecdotally, some individuals have responded to mexilitene or carbamazepine. Logigian et al [2010] found mexilitene 150-200 mg TID effective and safe for treating myotonia.

Pain management can be an important part of DM1 treatment. Different medications and combinations of medications work for some individuals, although none has been routinely effective; medications that have been used include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids, and tricyclic antidepressants. When used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, low-dose analgesics may provide relief.

Consultation with a cardiologist is appropriate for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to other symptoms in individuals with DM1. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Sovari et al 2007].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. Recurrence after surgery has been reported [Garrott et al 2004].

Males with low serum concentration of testosterone require hormone replacement therapy if they are symptomatic.

In most cases, surgical excision of pilomatrixoma including clear margins and its overlying skin is the preferred treatment [Cigliano et al 2005].

An extensive review found no evidence for successful treatment of hypersomnia with routine psychostimulants [Annane et al 2006], although others have reported benefit [Talbot et al 2003, Wintzen et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed the anesthetic management of individuals with DM1. Choice of induction agents, airway care, local anesthesia, and neuromuscular blockade were found to minimize complications during surgery in individuals with DM1. Avoid using succinylcholine. Propofol-induced pain can induce myotonia. Sevoflurane has been used uneventfully.

Cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-defibrillators may prevent life-threatening arrhythmias [Wahbi et al 2012, Facenda-Lorenzo et al 2013].

Gagnon et al [2013] presented evidence that obesity, tobacco smoking, physical inactivity and alcohol/illicit drug consumption are lifestyle risk factors associated with more severe DM1 phenotypes.

Surveillance

Gagnon et al [2010] provide guidelines for surveillance.

The following are appropriate:

Annual ECG to detect asymptomatic cardiac conduction defects. Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring of individuals with DM1 who do not have cardiac symptoms [Sá et al 2007, Sovari et al 2007, Cudia et al 2009]. Tissue Doppler monitoring has also been proposed [Parisi et al 2007, Wahbi et al 2012].

Annual measurement of fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin concentration, with treatment for diabetes mellitus if indicated [Matsumura et al 2009]

Ophthalmologic examination every two years to evaluate for cataract formation

Attention to nutritional status including mastication and trouble eating [Motlagh et al 2005, Engvall et al 2009, Umemoto et al 2009]

Polysomnographic follow-up of sleep complaints [Kumar et al 2007]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Statins used to lower cholesterol may sometimes cause muscle pain and weakness.

Mathieu et al [1997] noted that “[n]umerous cases of perioperative complications in patients with DM have been reported. Hazards have been associated with the use of thiopentone, suxamethonium, neostigmine, and halothane. A retrospective study of perioperative complications was conducted for 219 patients who had their first surgery under general anesthesia at the Chicoutimi Hospital. The overall frequency of complications was 8.2% (18 of 219). Most complications (16 of 18) were pulmonary, including five patients with acute ventilatory failure necessitating ventilatory support, four patients with atelectasis, and three patients with pneumonia. Using multivariate analysis, [the authors] found that the risk of perioperative pulmonary complications (PPC) was significantly higher after an upper abdominal surgery and for patients with a severe muscular disability, as assessed by the presence of proximal limb weakness. The likelihood of PPC was not related to any specific anesthetic drug. Because of the increased risk of PPC, careful monitoring during the early postoperative period, protection of the upper airways, chest physiotherapy, and incentive spirometry are mandatory in all symptomatic patients with DM, particularly those with a severe muscular disability or those who have undergone an upper abdominal surgery.”

Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed appropriate anesthetic care for patients with DM1 and DM2.

Malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia including the use of vecuronium [Nishi et al 2004] has been reported in DM1 but is very uncommon [Kirzinger et al 2010]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Aggressive doxorunbicin-based chemotherapy for lymphoma in a person with DM1 produced sudden atrial fibrillations [Montella et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk adult relatives of an affected individual to allow for early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac manifestations, diabetes mellitus, and cataracts.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with DM1 are at risk for complications during pregnancy including increased spontaneous abortion rate, premature labor, prolonged labor, retained placenta, placenta previa, and postpartum hemorrhage [Zaki et al 2007, Argov & de Visser 2009]. Special surveillance during pregnancy of women with DM1 includes ultrasound examination; evaluation for placenta previa; and anticipation of possible polyhydramnios, prolonged labor, and/or need for delivery by cesarean section [Argov & de Visser 2009]. Complications related to the presence of congenital DM1 in the fetus include reduced fetal movement and polyhydramnios. Awater et al [2012] found increased rates of caesarean birth and preterm delivery among women with DM1.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Moderate-intensity strength training does no harm, but it is unclear whether it offers measurable benefits [van der Kooi et al 2005]. A controlled study of an exercise program for DM1 showed neither beneficial nor detrimental effects [Kierkegaard et al 2011].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Routine clinical evaluation of muscle strength and functional status

Examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with DM iridescent posterior subcapsular cataracts in order to establish a baseline

Initial cardiac evaluation including at minimum:

ECG to establish a baseline record for future comparison

Holter monitoring or invasive electrophysiologic testing if the person is either symptomatic or shows significant rhythm or conduction abnormalities on routine ECG

Because of the risk of cardiomyopathy, consideration of echocardiogram and possible cardiac MRI [Spengos et al 2012]

Baseline serologic testing including fasting lipid profiles, glucose, and glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations to assess for evidence of insulin insensitivity and diabetes mellitus

Measurement of serum concentrations of testosterone and FSH in post-pubertal males to assess gonadal function

Thyroid studies. While thyroid dysfunction has not been conclusively and causatively related to the DM2-causing pathogenic variants, hypothyroidism from any cause has been associated with increased muscle weakness and symptoms in individuals with DM2 [Sansone et al 2000, Day & Ranum 2005].

Measurement of the serum activities of CK, transaminases (AST and ALT), and γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT). Serum activities of AST, ALT, and GGT are frequently elevated in individuals with DM2, although it is unclear whether the abnormal levels are hepatocellular or myogenic in origin. Determination of baseline abnormal transaminase and GGT activities resulting from DM2 can help prevent needless investigations of the liver.

Serum protein electrophoresis and immunoprotein electrophoresis to establish a baseline, since the gamma fraction is frequently reduced in individuals with DM2 as a result of low levels of both IgG and IgM. Although these changes have not been associated with clinical problems, determination of abnormal immunoglobulin levels in persons with DM2 can establish individual baseline values and prevent misinterpretation of future studies demonstrating the hypogammaglobulinemia.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment guidelines for DM2 have been published. See Udd et al [2011] (full text).

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help determine the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses [Johnson et al 1995].

Routine physical activity appears to be beneficial for maintaining muscle strength and endurance in persons with DM2, and as an aid to control musculoskeletal pain.

Myotonia is typically mild and rarely requires treatment [Ricker 1999], though use of mexilitene, which is very effective in controlling some forms of myotonia, has helped control muscle pain in some individuals with DM2.

The effectiveness of medications and combination of medications in pain management varies. No one medication has been consistently effective; medications that have been used with some success include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids (e.g., 5 mg prednisone on alternate days), and tricyclic antidepressants. Low-dose narcotic analgesics, when used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, may help but may also lead to development of tolerance and escalating doses.

Consultation with a cardiologist is strongly recommended for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to the onset of other symptoms. ECG, Holter monitoring, and an echocardiogram should be performed to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Florek et al 1990, Hawley et al 1991]. Due to the increased risk for cardiomyopathy, echocardiography and possibly cardiac MRI should be considered.

The value of defibrillator placement is increasingly evident in individuals with DM2 who have overt arrhythmias, but the role of pacemaker/defibrillators in asymptomatic patients is yet to be determined [Schoser et al 2004b].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. As compared to the more typical senile nuclear cataracts, direct ophthalmoscopy and even slit lamp examination can underestimate the functional significance of cataracts in individuals with DM2 because the alteration of vision depends on location, not just the number of subcapsular opacities.

Testosterone replacement therapy can be beneficial in males with symptomatic hypogonadism.

Direct gastrointestinal manifestations of DM2 are yet to be characterized, but some patients complain of postprandial abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea. As in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), some individuals respond to prokinetic agents such as metochlopromide (Reglan™) and tegaserod (Zelnorm™).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthetic risk may be increased in those with DM2; therefore, careful assessment of cardiac and respiratory function before and after surgery are recommended [Veyckemans & Scholtes 2013].

Increased weakness in individuals with DM2 has been associated with hypothyroidism; thus, some strength may return if hypothyroidism is treated.

Surveillance

Annual ECG and echocardiogram or possible cardiac MRI is indicated to detect asymptomatic and progressive cardiac conduction defects and cardiomyopathy.

Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring even in the absence of cardiac symptoms.

Fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin level should be measured annually.

Males should be tested for hypogonadism if they become increasingly fatigued or have reduced sexual energy, and should be tested every few years even without symptoms to see if they would benefit from replacement therapy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Increased weakness has been associated with the use of certain cholesterol-lowering medications. In these cases, some strength can return if statin-type cholesterol-lowering medications are eliminated.

Note: Not all individuals with DM2 have an adverse response to statin medications, and thus diagnosis of DM2 is not an absolute contraindication to use of these drugs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nail-patella syndrome (NPS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Blood pressure measurement and urinalysis to screen for renal disease, plus a urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. The latter is a more sensitive measure of renal disease than urinalysis as it corrects for urine concentration. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should then be referred to a nephrologist.

Screening for glaucoma as soon as a child is able to cooperate with the examination. The examination should include measurement of intraocular pressure, examination of the optic disc, and assessment of visual fields in order to detect normal pressure glaucoma. If any abnormalities are detected, individuals should be referred to an ophthalmologist. Any infant or young child found to have an abnormal or absent red reflex on eye examination by a primary care physician should be referred to an ophthalmologist immediately.

History and physical examination to detect orthopedic problems

History to identify gastrointestinal, neurologic, or vasomotor abnormalities

Before surgery or intensive physiotherapy for orthopedic complaints, investigation via MRI for possible bone/soft tissue anatomic abnormalities

History and examination to detect dental anomalies

Consideration of formal quantification of bone mineral density (BMD) via dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) as indicator of fracture propensity based on reported low BMD and increased fracture risk in NPS

DEXA norms are readily available in most clinical settings for adults and may be pursued in all young adults (age >18 years) at least once.

Pediatric DEXA norms are often less readily available, but may be obtained via local pediatric endocrinologist or machine manufacturer. No formal recommendations for DEXA scanning of pediatric patients exist at this time, but DEXA should be pursued if fractures or unexplained skeletal pain occurs with additional clinical evaluation.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Hypertension and renal disease are treated as in the general population. When renal transplantation is necessary, results are usually favorable. ACE inhibitors are useful in slowing progression of proteinuria, but their use should be monitored carefully in children.

Orthopedic problems may be helped by analgesics, physiotherapy, splinting, bracing, or surgery. Because of the abnormal joint anatomy that may be present in individuals with NPS, MRI of joints to identify abnormal anatomy is important prior to surgery, so that appropriate surgical treatment can be planned in advance.

Treatment as in the general population for:

Glaucoma

Constipation

Dental problems

Surveillance

Annual measurement of the following is appropriate:

Measurement of blood pressure

Urinalysis

Urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should be referred to a nephrologist.

Screening for glaucoma from the time that a child is compliant with the examination

Dental examination is indicated at least every six months.

DEXA scanning frequency in adults is based on clinical symptoms, abnormalities detected on previous evaluations, and standard practice in peri- and post-menopausal females and older males.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided because of their detrimental effect on kidney function.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of NPS in at-risk family members allows for ophthalmologic and renal screening, especially in individuals with mild-moderate skeletal involvement who may not otherwise come to clinical attention. Molecular genetic testing can be used if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; otherwise, monitor renal findings (i.e., blood pressure, urinalysis, and urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine) and screen for glaucoma.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Renal problems may present during (or be exacerbated by) pregnancy and in one study 29% of pregnant women with NPS developed preeclampsia [Sweeney et al 2003]. Hence, frequent urinalysis and blood pressure measurement is recommended in pregnant women with NPS. Medication used to treat renal disease, such as ACE inhibitors, should be reviewed ideally prior to pregnancy, or at least as soon as pregnancy is recognized, so that transition to an alternative treatment can be considered in order to avoid potential adverse effects of ACE inhibitors on the developing fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of the disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), the following should be considered:

Neurologic examination for dystonia, spasticity, parkinsonism, and other neurologic findings, including evaluation of ambulation and speech.

Consider consultation with a movement disorders specialist

Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy assessments

Thorough ophthalmologic examination (if not performed during the diagnostic evaluation)

Dietary assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Note: The extent of disease in an affected individual is often well characterized during the diagnostic work up, which frequently includes neurophysiologic studies (EEG, EMG, electroretinogram, and/or visual evoked potentials) and brain MRI.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatments for NBIA are palliative. The following treatments should be considered (some do not apply to all subtypes of NBIA):

Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures

Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with significant dystonia

Botulinum toxin for those with focal dystonia

L-DOPA treatment, which is beneficial in rare cases. Note: Some will have an initially dramatic response that usually diminishes over time; some will develop prominent dyskinesias early in the treatment

Deep brain stimulation, used clinically for dystonia with increasing frequency; shows some evidence of benefit (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Psychiatric treatment for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms

As NBIA progresses, many affected individuals may experience episodes of extreme dystonia lasting for day or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain, which may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a non-ambulatory person with marked stress on the long bones from dystonia places many individuals with NBIA at high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition

Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated

Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy is appropriate as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia.

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners are indicated to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications.

Surveillance

The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Assessment of ambulation and speech abilities

Therapies Under Investigation

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). As DBS has become a common treatment for primary dystonia, it is also being used more frequently to attempt to treat the secondary dystonia seen in NBIA, most often in individuals with PKAN. Because a limited number of persons with PKAN have undergone such treatment and care has been provided at a variety of centers, it is not possible to evaluate the efficacy of DBS for this population.

The largest cohort studied at the same center included six individuals with PKAN. Those treated with DBS showed overall improvements in writing, speech, walking, and global measures of motor skills [Castelnau et al 2005]. However, at publication the length of follow-up time varied from only six to 42 months.

Another study of four individuals with PKAN suggested that DBS had decreasing benefit when measured at both six and 12 months following the procedure [Lim et al 2012].

Additional case reports with varying follow-up times and anecdotal reports from families with PKAN also support that DBS can provide benefit in some cases [Krause et al 2006, Shields et al 2007, Isaac et al 2008, Mikati et al 2009].

Even with these limitations, these studies suggested that DBS may hold more promise than previously recognized. Larger prospective studies may improve understanding of the factors that influence the outcomes of DBS use in NBIA [Pauls & Timmermann 2012].

Baclofen is one of the mainstay drugs, used both orally and intrathecally, to treat dystonia in NBIA. In 2009 Albright and Ferson reported favorable outcomes from a new technique used to deliver intraventricular baclofen in nine children and one adult with secondary dystonia, including one child with PKAN [Albright & Ferson 2009]. Additional studies are necessary to determine the optimal dose and efficacy in PKAN and other NBIAs. Intraventricular delivery of baclofen is of interest because delivery at this site may better treat upper-body and facial dystonia (e.g., blepharospasm) and may result in higher baclofen concentrations over the cortex.

Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as data on deferiprone (Ferriprox®) have accumulated in several patient populations. Iron chelating agents have been tried in the past without clear benefit [Dooling et al 1974]. Until recently, trials were limited by the development of systemic iron deficiency before any clinical neurologic benefits were evident. Unlike earlier drugs, deferiprone crosses the blood-brain barrier and removes intracellular iron.

Case reports suggest regression of symptoms in two adults with NBIA of unknown cause (i.e., non-PKAN NBIA) [Forni et al 2008, Kwiatkowski et al 2012].

A Phase II pilot trial in Italy with ten persons with PKAN found that deferiprone treatment was able to reduce brain iron levels; over the six-month treatment period there were no serious adverse events but also no significant changes in clinical status, suggesting that a longer treatment period is necessary to determine the utility of this drug [Zorzi et al 2011].

A clinical trial that has received FDA approval in the US is currently enrolling.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), the following evaluations are recommended:

EEG to determine if seizures are present, with consideration of referral to an epileptologist for seizure management

Neurologic and/or developmental examination to assess developmental milestones and identify neurologic findings or deficits

Evaluation for occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed

Dental evaluation if dental eruption is delayed

Audiology evaluation with auditory brain stem response testing and otoacoustic emission testing to assess for hearing loss

Ophthalmologic examination, including visual acuity and dilated fundus examination

Evaluation for cryptorchidism in males

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures under the care of a neurologist or epileptologist

Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy to optimize developmental outcomes

Spectacles as needed to correct refractive errors

Hearing aids as needed

Orchiopexy as needed

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

At least yearly evaluation by a neurologist to assess for and/or manage seizures

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with one of the neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinoses, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Developmental/cognitive and educational assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic treatment can be successful in mitigating the manifestations of NCL. Seizures, sleep-related problems, malnutrition, gastroesophageal reflux, pneumonia, sialorrhea, hyperactivity and behavior problems, psychosis, anxiety, spasticity, Parkinsonian symptoms, and dystonia can be palliated.

Seizures. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) should be selected with caution. The stage of the disease, age of the affected individual, and quality of life are important to consider in evaluating the effectiveness of AEDs.

Lamotrigine (LTG) had a favorable effect on 23/28 individuals with JNCL, 13/19 being continued on monotherapy with 100% control, compared to 70% control for those receiving valproic acid (VPA), 60% control for VPA-clonazepam (CZP), and 60% control for LTG-CZP [Aberg et al 1999, Aberg et al 2000].

Other newer AEDs including levetiracetam and topiramate may also be beneficial [Author, personal experience].

Other. Benzodiazepines may be of benefit for seizures, anxiety, spasticity, and sleep disorders.

Trihexyphenydil improves dystonia and sialorrhea.

Individuals with swallowing problems may benefit from placement of a gastric (G) tube.

Antidepressants and antipsychotic agents are sometimes indicated for those with CLN3 disease.

Surveillance

Routine medical management of children and young adults with complex neurodisability will be relevant to all those affected by NCL. This may include clinical surveillance for the following:

Swallowing difficulties and recurrent aspiration

X-ray surveillance of hip joints and spine

Screening ECG for those individuals with CLN3 disease who are older than age 16 years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Carbamazepine (CZP) and phenytoin may increase seizure activity and myoclonus in NCL and result in clinical deterioration.

Lamotrigine may exacerbate seizures and myoclonus especially in CLN2 disease.

In a series of 60 individuals with JNCL, valproic acid (VPA) was withdrawn in 20% and clonazepam (CZP) in 16% because of side effects [Aberg et al 2000].

Fifty percent of individuals receiving VPA had sleep disturbances or excessive sedation.

CZP stimulates salivation and respiratory secretions, increasing the risk for pneumonia in bedridden individuals, many of whom have gastroesophageal reflux. CZP is a sedative and can cause behavior disturbances.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Crystal et al [2004] initiated gene therapy for children with LINCL caused by pathogenic variants in CLN2. They administered a replication-deficient adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector expressing human CLN2 cDNA directly into the brains of children with either severe or moderate LINCL in an attempt to produce sufficient amounts of TPP-1, to prevent further loss of neurons and hence limit disease progression. The research is ongoing.

Stem cell therapy for phenotypes caused by pathogenic variants in CLN1 and CLN2 is in progress [Author, personal communication].

The drug EGIS-8332, which targets AMPA receptors, improved performance in a CLN3 disease mouse model. Trials in humans have not yet started. Talampanel (LY300164) is a drug which targets the same receptors and is being assessed in a clinical trial to treat epilepsy and Parkinson disease in humans. Plans to test this drug in a mouse model for CLN3 disease are underway at the University of Rochester Medical Center (Rochester, New York, USA).

The University of Rochester Medical Center is also conducting a clinical trial using the immunosuppressant mycophenolate (mycophenolate mofetil, Cellcept®, Myfortic®, mycophenolate sodium or mycophenolic acid) in individuals with juvenile CLN3.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for hydronephrosis, dilatation of the urinary tract, and megacystis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is usually best accomplished by a team consisting of a nutritionist, a pediatric (or adult) nephrologist or endocrinologist, and a clinical geneticist.

General management. The essence of management is the provision of free access to drinking water and to toilet facilities. Infants, who are naturally unable to seek out water when thirsty, must be offered water between regular feedings. Children and adults who are heavy sleepers may need to be awakened at night by a family member or an alarm clock in order to drink water and to urinate. As long as an individual's thirst mechanism remains intact and the person is otherwise well, these measures prevent hypernatremic dehydration. Education of friends, teachers, caretakers, and neighbors and a willingness to find creative solutions are helpful.

Polyuria (and thus polydipsia) can be reduced by up to 50% without inducing hypernatremia by the use of one of the following drugs/combinations. Therapy is considered effective when urine output declines below a documented baseline in individuals with ad libitum water intake. Objective measurements of 24-hour urine volume are more valuable than subjective reports of the volume or frequency of voiding, although reduction in the latter provides a benefit to lifestyle.

Thiazide diuretics (i.e., hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide) in standard to high doses. Since these diuretics cause potassium wasting, serum potassium concentration should be monitored and supplemental potassium provided in the diet or pharmacologically as needed. Thiazides are often used in combination with either amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic) or indomethacin.

Note: When thiazide diuretic therapy is initiated, a transient increase in urine output may occur as a result of salt diuresis.

Dietary restriction of sodium to 300 mg/day to maximize the effectiveness of thiazide diuretics in reducing urine output. Although previously a diet low in protein (2 g/kg/day) to reduce the renal osmolar load and obligatory water excretion was recommended, severe limitation of dietary protein may introduce nutritional deficiencies. Thus, it is preferable to prescribe dietary restriction of sodium only.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, to potentially improve urine concentrating ability and reduce urine output. NSAIDs have been used individually and in combination with thiazide diuretics (with or without amiloride). Because NSAIDs have undesirable effects, such as gastric and renal tubular damage, caution is warranted in the chronic use of NSAIDs for treatment of NDI.

Emergency treatment for dehydration. When individuals with NDI present with dehydration or shock, it is essential to establish whether the deficit is primarily in free water (through water deprivation or excessive urine, stool, or sweat) or in extracellular fluid (bleeding, fluid extravasation). The natural tendency of healthcare providers to treat dehydration with normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is dangerous in individuals with NDI if the deficit is primarily in free water.

Acute blood loss or shock may be treated with isotonic fluid until the blood pressure and heart rate are stabilized, after which 2.5% dextrose in water is the preferred solution.

Dehydration associated with free water deficit is treated by gradually replacing the deficit water as well as ongoing urinary losses. Whenever possible, rehydration should occur with the oral intake of drinking water. If administration of IV fluids is required, 2.5% dextrose in water and/or quarter-normal saline should be used.

If significant hypernatremia is present, serum sodium concentration should be monitored and the hydration solution modified to avoid reducing serum sodium concentration faster than 1 mEq/L per hour. Rapid increases or decreases in plasma osmolality can cause seizures, coma, brain damage, and death.

Special situations. Individuals being prepared for surgery are often denied oral intake for many hours and are described as having 'NPO' (nothing per ora) status. In individuals with NDI, an IV must be provided from the beginning of NPO status and the person's oral intake of water for that period, which is typically much larger than that of an individual who does not have NDI, should be given intravenously as 2.5% dextrose in water [Moug et al 2005].

Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megacystis. Treatment involves medical management to reduce urine output and continuous or intermittent bladder catheterization when significant post-void urinary bladder residuals are present.

Psychomotor development. Children with a history of an episode of severe dehydration, delayed developmental milestones, or a delay in establishing the correct diagnosis and management warrant a formal developmental evaluation and intervention before school age.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prevention of primary manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations) is possible when the diagnosis is made promptly after birth via molecular genetic testing. A genetic diagnosis may be performed after a few days; treatment and monitoring may then start immediately.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention or reduction of serious renal, ureteral, or bladder dilatation may be achieved by reduction of urine production by drug therapy and voiding at two-hour intervals.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth and development in infants and children

Periodic measurement of serum sodium concentration to identify unrecognized hyperosmolality and early dehydration

Note: Urine output and urine specific gravity are useless as indicators of hydration status.

Annual renal ultrasound evaluation to monitor for hydronephrosis and megacystis [Shalev et al 2004]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Water intake must not be restricted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to test at-risk infants for the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) as early as possible to allow for prompt diagnosis and treatment to reduce morbidity from hypernatremia, dehydration, and dilation of the urinary tract.

Since autosomal dominant NDI is usually less severe than X-linked or autosomal recessive NDI, genetic testing of sibs of affected children may be performed at a later stage.

Asymptomatic female family members of a male with X-linked NDI who are at risk of being a carrier of the pathogenic variant may undergo genetic counseling and genetic testing when they are of reproductive age.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Carriers of X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may experience a mild increase in urinary output and associated thirst during pregnancy.

No pregnancies in women with NDI resulting from two AQP2 pathogenic variants have been reported to date.

Polyhydramnios is found in a minority of pregnancies in which the fetus is affected by NDI. In cases of severe polyhydramnios and maternal discomfort, frequent amniotic fluid drainage may be necessary [Kollamparambil et al 2011].

Therapies Under Investigation

In an individual with a milder AVPR2 pathogenic variant resulting in a partial response to AVP and DDAVP®, high doses of DDAVP® in combination with a thiazide diuretic significantly decreased urinary volume [Mizuno et al 2003]. Effectiveness and safety of this treatment in partial NDI needs to be explored further.

Because of the known gastrointestinal safety of selective cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors compared to nonselective COX inhibitors (such as indomethacin), use of these drugs has been proposed for the treatment of NDI. The effectiveness of a specific COX-2 inhibitor in decreasing free water losses was demonstrated in male infants with NDI [Pattaragarn & Alon 2003, Soylu et al 2005]. However, in view of the recent discovery that prolonged use of this COX-2 inhibitor can cause severe cardiac side effects, it is not appropriate to use these inhibitors in the treatment of NDI until it has been determined which of the specific COX-2 inhibitors are completely safe.

Because in vitro expression studies reveal that the majority of AVPR2 pathogenic variants in X-linked NDI and all AQP2 pathogenic variants in autosomal recessive NDI result in normal protein that is retained within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), agents that restore plasma routing are under investigation as potential treatments. Promising agents for X-linked NDI are cell-permeable AVPR2 antagonists or agonists that in vitro rescue the intracellular retention of several AVPR2 mutants [Morello et al 2000, Tan et al 2003, Bernier et al 2004, Robben et al 2006, Robben et al 2007, Robben et al 2009]. The feasibility of treatment with these so-called pharmacologic "chaperones" has recently been tested in vivo. In individuals with NDI who have AVPR2 pathogenic missense variants, Bernier et al [2006] showed that treatment with a non-peptide V1a receptor antagonist had beneficial effects on urine volume and osmolality starting a few hours after administration. However, the long-term effect of this drug could not be tested because the clinical development of this V1a receptor antagonist was interrupted during the course of this study as a result of possible interference with the cytochrome P450 metabolic pathway. Confirmation of the putative beneficial effect of pharmacologic chaperones in NDI awaits further in vivo testing.

Aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin, allow read-through of stop codon variants in AVPR2 in vitro, resulting in the production of full-length vasopressin V2 receptor proteins [Schulz et al 2002]. However, in view of the toxic effect of these antibiotics on the kidney, the application of such a therapy to NDI in the future is unlikely.

Another mechanism circumventing the vasopressin type-2 receptor has been tested in vitro. By stimulation of the E-prostanoid receptor EP4, NDI symptoms were greatly reduced in a conditional AVPR2-deletion mouse model [Li et al 2009]. This was due to raised AQP2 levels, most probably as a consequence of cAMP production caused by EP4 stimulation. Recently, a similar effect was seen after stimulation of the EP2 receptor by the agonist butaprost [Olesen et al 2011]. The EP2 receptor is a more interesting candidate for treatment of NDI than the EP4 receptor since EP2 agonists have already been tested in clinical studies for other diseases and have shown promising results concerning safety issues. However, clinical trials in NDI have not yet been performed and are necessary to evaluate the effects and safety of EP2 agonists for this disorder.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nemaline myopathy (NM), the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough assessment of respiratory status, including pulmonary function studies and assessment for nocturnal hypoxia

For early-onset forms, assessment of feeding abilities (sucking, swallowing, gastroesophageal reflux) and growth parameters to determine the need for feeding interventions such as gavage feeding or gastrostomy insertion

Physical examination to evaluate for joint contractures

Physical examination to evaluate for scoliosis, followed by spinal x-ray if scoliosis is suspected

Physical and occupational therapy evaluations relevant to the degree of weakness

Speech therapy evaluation if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present

Orthodontic evaluation if palatal anomalies are present

Evaluation for the presence of dilated cardiomyopathy (rare association)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Consensus for management of congenital myopathies have been published [Wang et al 2012] (full text).

A multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival:

Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory tract infections

Evaluation at an early stage of the need for intermittent or permanent use of a mechanical ventilator to prevent insidious nocturnal hypoxia

Assurance of adequate caloric intake and appropriate nutritional status, including special feeding techniques and high-calorie formulas and foods, if indicated

Standard treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, if present

Referral to an orthopedist for management of scoliosis and joint contractures, as in the general population

Physical therapy for maintenance/improvement of function and joint mobility

Speech therapy if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk (albeit low) of cardiomyopathy or cor pulmonale

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Preoperative assessment of pulmonary function is essential to ensure optimal timing of surgical procedures and to minimize anesthetic risk.

Anesthetics are generally well tolerated in individuals with NM. Ryan et al [2001] reviewed the outcome of 130 affected individuals who underwent one or more surgical procedures. None developed malignant hyperthermia. However, five developed unexpected postoperative respiratory failure (following scoliosis repair in 4 individuals and fundoplication in 1), necessitating prolonged ventilation in three individuals and resulting in the death of another.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular formal assessment of respiratory function, including monitoring of sleep studies when significant respiratory impairment is identified

Routine assessment for scoliosis and joint contractures

Routine assessment of physical function and the need for mechanical assistance, such as a wheelchair

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Malignant hyperthermia is a risk in congenital myopathies such as central core disease and in some muscular dystrophies. NM has not been definitively associated with malignant hyperthermia to date, although bradycardia and slight hyperthermia have been reported during cardiac surgery. It is advisable to avoid neuromuscular blocking agents when possible, especially given the reports of core-rod myopathies linking to genes for ryanodine receptor pathogenic variants [Monnier et al 2000, Scacheri et al 2000].

Prolonged periods of immobilization should be avoided after illness or surgery, as immobility may markedly exacerbate muscle weakness [Ryan et al 2001].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from medical surveillance and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, a targeted clinical examination, with or without neurophysiologic testing, can clarify whether a muscle biopsy should be considered.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy and delivery are relatively well tolerated by women with NM [Ryan et al 2001].

A high frequency of obstetric complications is associated with an affected fetus, including polyhydramnios, decreased fetal movements, and abnormal presentation and/or fetal distress [Ryan et al 2001].

Therapies Under Investigation

L-tyrosine has been proposed as a potential therapy. A precursor of the neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, L-tyrosine has been shown after oral administration in rats to increase catecholamine production and release, and to improve reaction and attention time and tolerance of physical stress.

Two reports have shown subjectively improved muscle strength and clearance of oral secretions after oral tyrosine supplementation in individuals with NM. Subjective benefits from dietary supplementation with tyrosine have been reported in a small series of individuals with nemaline myopathy. L-tyrosine may be particularly effective in improving bulbar dysfunction and exercise tolerance in this condition [Ryan et al 2008].

L-tyrosine was shown to improve muscle strength in a mouse model of severe ACTA1 nemaline myopathy [Nguyen et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In a mouse model, endurance exercise programs may overcome the increase in muscle weakness that follows prolonged periods of immobilization [Nair-Shalliker et al 2004]. Human data are lacking; however, the authors have cared for some individuals with typical congenital-onset NM who have demonstrated clinical improvement after a program of regular low-impact exercise (cycling and swimming) [Authors, personal observation].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nephronophthisis, the following evaluations are recommended [Parisi et al 2007, Simms et al 2011, KDIGO 2013]:

Detailed family history and physical examination including blood pressure, growth parameters, developmental assessment, and dysmorphology examination to evaluate for extrarenal manifestations (Table 3a)

Tests to evaluate the kidneys:

Tests of renal function including serum creatinine concentration, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and electrolytes

Complete blood count (CBC) to evaluate for anemia

Tests to evaluate for the metabolic bone disease of chronic kidney disease (CKD) including serum calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and alkaline phosphatase activity

Urinalysis from first-morning void for specific gravity to test concentrating ability (if feasible), proteinuria

Tests of liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin, and prothrombin time

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate renal findings consistent with nephronophthisis and to evaluate for additional anomalies in liver, bile duct, spleen, and/ or pancreas (including situs inversus)

Referral as needed for evaluation of extrarenal manifestations, including:

Ophthalmologic examination

Brain MRI

Skeletal radiographs

Assessment of psychomotor development and/or behavior

Neurologic assessment

Endocrine assessment

Cardiac ultrasound examination

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

This section discusses only the management of the phenotype of nephronophthisis. Management of other findings associated with syndromic NPH (Table 3a) are beyond the scope of this GeneReview.

Currently no cure for nephronophthisis exists. Treatment is aimed at slowing the progression of CKD and its complications, according to international clinical practice guidelines for chronic renal failure (Kidney Disease – Improving Global Outcomes [KDIGO] 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text):

Correction of water and electrolyte imbalances, especially during intercurrent illness

Treatment of anemia, hypertension, and proteinuria if present. Preferred therapy may differ between adult and pediatric patients [KDIGO 2013].

Growth hormone treatment for children who have severe growth retardation as a result of chronic renal insufficiency and meet criteria for treatment [Wilson et al 2003]

Dialysis or renal transplantation when patients reach ESRD. Renal transplantation is the preferred treatment as disease does not recur in the transplanted kidney [Pistor et al 1985].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Annual influenza vaccination is indicated for patients with CKD. Other vaccinations (e.g., pneumococcal vaccine and hepatitis B) should follow local practice guidelines [KDIGO 2013].

For measures to prevent secondary cardiovascular complications, see KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text).

Surveillance

Evaluations are recommended at least annually. More frequent monitoring is recommended for individuals with advanced-stage CKD, individuals at higher risk of disease progression, or when assessment will affect therapeutic decision making [KDIGO 2013].

Monitoring of blood pressure, growth parameters, and development

Renal function including serum creatinine concentration and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or BUN, electrolytes, CBC, CKD metabolic bone disease including serum calcium, phosphate, PTH and alkaline phosphatase activity

Liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin and prothrombin time

Urinalysis to monitor proteinuria

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate progression of renal disease and possible liver, bile duct, spleen or pancreas anomalies

Routine evaluations for extrarenal manifestations of syndromic NPH that can appear with time, especially ophthalmologic examination for visual acuity, visual field examination, and evidence of retinal dystrophy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Nephrotoxic agents, e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), aminoglycosides, and radiocontrast studies should be avoided.

Individuals with liver function impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medication.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband with NPH in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and surveillance measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the NPH-related pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Monitoring of renal function and blood pressure if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For reviews of management of CKD in pregnancy see Smyth et al [2013] and Piccoli et al [2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with neuroferritinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Psychometric assessment

Physiotherapy assessment

Speech therapy assessment

Dietary assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

The movement disorder is particularly resistant to conventional therapy, but some response has been recorded with levodopa, tetrabenazine, orphenadrine, benzhexol, sulpiride, diazepam, clonazepam, and deanol in standard doses [Chinnery et al 2007, Ondo et al 2010]

Botulinum toxin is helpful for painful focal dystonia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Dietary assessment is helpful; affected individuals should maintain caloric intake.

Physiotherapy helps to maintain mobility and prevent contractures.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Iron supplements are not recommended for affected individuals and those at risk. This recommendation is empiric [Chinnery et al 2007] Iron replacement therapy with careful monitoring may be required if affected individuals develop coincidental iron deficiency anemia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Current treatments under evaluation:

Venesection

Iron chelation with deferiprone

Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone); the therapeutic role is being evaluated based on evidence of mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction in neuroferritinopathy [Caparros-Lefebvre et al 1997, Chinnery et al 2003].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Personal medical history with particular attention to features of NF1

Physical examination with particular attention to the skin, skeleton, cardiovascular system, and neurologic systems

Ophthalmologic evaluation including slit lamp examination of the irides

Developmental assessment in children

Other studies as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms

Clinical genetics consultation

In addition, a family history with particular attention to features of NF1 should be obtained, and physical examinations and ophthalmologic examinations (including slit lamp exams) should be performed on both parents to determine if the condition in the affected individual was inherited or occurred de novo. This determination is necessary for genetic counseling and may help identify patients who have a condition that is not caused by mutation of NF1, such as Legius syndrome or constitutive mismatch repair deficiency (see Differential Diagnosis).

The value of performing routine head MRI scanning in individuals with NF1 at the time of diagnosis is controversial.

Proponents state that such studies are useful in helping to establish the diagnosis in some individuals, in identifying any structural anomaly of the brain or skull, tumors, or vascular disease before it becomes clinically apparent in others, and in evaluating the context in which extracranial complications occur in still others.

Those who oppose routine head MRI scanning point to the uncertain clinical significance of features such as UBOs, the cost of such imaging, and the requirement for sedation in small children. Although clinical management should not be affected by the presence of intracranial lesions such as UBOs or optic nerve thickening in asymptomatic individuals with NF1, finding such lesions may result in regularly repeating the MRI for reassurance despite the continued absence of related symptoms, adding further to the cost as well as to the anxiety of the individual and family, without any benefit.

Treatment of Manifestations

Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013].

Individuals with NF1 who have abnormalities involving the eye, central or peripheral nervous system, spine or long bones, or cardiovascular system should be referred to an appropriate specialist for treatment.

Discrete cutaneous or subcutaneous neurofibromas that are disfiguring or in inconvenient locations (e.g., at belt or collar lines) can be removed surgically, or, if small, by laser or electrocautery.

Surgical treatment of plexiform neurofibromas is often unsatisfactory because of their intimate involvement with nerves and their tendency to grow back at the site of removal [Fadda et al 2007, Serletis et al 2007, Prada et al 2012, Nguyen et al 2013a].

In one small series in which surgical removal of superficial plexiform neurofibromas was undertaken in children while the tumors were still relatively small, it was possible to resect the neurofibromas without producing any neurologic deficit [Friedrich et al 2005].

Radiotherapy is contraindicated because of the risk of inducing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in these genetically predisposed individuals [Evans et al 2002].

A 54% reduction in the volume of a plexiform neurofibroma has been reported in an individual with NF1 who received two cycles of carboplatin chemotherapy for a coincident seminoma [Hummel et al 2011].

A phase II clinical trial reported apparent benefit in approximately 25% of patients with large plexiform neurofibromas treated with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor [Robertson et al 2012]. Further studies are in progress.

Pain, development of a neurologic deficit, or enlargement of a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma may signal a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and require immediate evaluation [Valeyrie-Allanore et al 2005]. Examination by MRI, PET, or PET/CT [Ferner et al 2008, Matsumine et al 2009, Warbey et al 2009, Salamon et al 2013] is useful in distinguishing benign and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, but definitive differentiation can only be made by histologic examination of the tumor. Complete surgical excision, when possible, is the only treatment that offers the possibility of cure of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors [Friedrich et al 2007, Dunn et al 2013]. Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy is sometimes used as well and appears to have benefitted some (but not most) patients with NF1 [Gottfried et al 2006, Chaudhary & Borker 2012, Zehou et al 2013].

Most optic pathway gliomas found on MRI in people with NF1 are asymptomatic and do not require treatment [Segal et al 2010, Oh et al 2011, Cassiman et al 2013]. Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for progressive optic pathway gliomas in children with NF1, although the results are mixed [Rosenfeld et al 2010, Ardern-Holmes & North 2011, Fisher et al 2012]. Surgical treatment of optic nerve glioma is usually reserved for cosmetic palliation in a blind eye, and radiotherapy is usually avoided because of the risk of inducing malignancy or moyamoya in the exposed field [Evans et al 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a].

The natural history of brain stem and cerebellar astrocytomas in individuals with NF1 should be taken into consideration in deciding on management of such tumors [Vinchon et al 2000, Rosser & Packer 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a].

Dystrophic scoliosis in children with NF1 often requires surgical management, which may be complex and difficult [Shen et al 2005, Tsirikos et al 2005, Stoker et al 2012, Kawabata et al 2013]. Nondystrophic scoliosis in persons with NF1 can be treated in a manner similar to idiopathic scoliosis.

Surgical treatment of tibial pseudarthrosis is difficult and often unsatisfactory [Stevenson et al 2013].

Surveillance

Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013].

The following are recommended:

Annual physical examination by a physician who is familiar with the individual and with the disease

Annual ophthalmologic examination in early childhood, less frequent examination in older children and adults

Regular developmental assessment by screening questionnaire (in childhood)

Regular blood pressure monitoring

Other studies (e.g., MRI) only as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms

Monitoring of those who have abnormalities of the central nervous system, skeletal system, or cardiovascular system by an appropriate specialist

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No limitations are necessary for most individuals with NF1. Limitations may be required if certain particular features such as tibial dysplasia or dysplastic scoliosis are present; in these instances the limitation is determined by the feature, not by the presence of NF1 itself.

Radiotherapy of individuals with NF1 appears to be associated with a high risk of developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors within the field of treatment [Evans et al 2002, Sharif et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although most pregnancies in women with NF1 are normal, serious complications can occur [Chetty et al 2011, Terry et al 2013].

Many women with NF1 experience a rapid increase in the number and size of neurofibromas during pregnancy.

Hypertension may first become symptomatic or, if preexisting, may be greatly exacerbated during pregnancy.

Large pelvic or genital neurofibromas can complicate delivery, and cesarean section appears to be necessary more often in pregnant women with NF1 than in other women.

Therapies Under Investigation

Various medical treatments for plexiform and spinal neurofibromas are being evaluated in clinical trials [Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013]. Preliminary studies suggest that sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, may be useful in treating pain associated with plexiform neurofibromas [Hua et al 2014] (see Note).

Radiofrequency therapy has shown promise for treatment of facial diffuse plexiform neurofibromas and café-au-lait spots in small clinical series [Baujat et al 2006, Yoshida et al 2007].

Controlled trials of several therapeutic approaches to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are available to individuals with NF1 [Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013] (see Note).

Several controlled trials for treatment of optic pathway gliomas are available to individuals with NF1 [Schnur 2012, Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013] (see Note).

Note:

NIH ClinicalTrials.gov has a list of current clinical trials for NF1.

Other

Hormonal contraception appears not to stimulate the growth of neurofibromas in women with NF1 [Lammert et al 2006].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Head MRI

Hearing evaluation, including BAER

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cutaneous examination

Clinical genetics consultation

Note: Evaluation and treatment of individuals with neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) are best undertaken in an NF2 center experienced in managing the multiple complications of the disease [Baser et al 2002, Evans et al 2005a].

For NF specialists see www.ctf.org.

For NF2 service centers in UK see www.nfauk.org.

Treatment of Manifestations

Vestibular schwannoma. Untreated tumors may be slow growing and not require active intervention in the short term [Masuda et al 2004, Slattery et al 2004]. Therapy remains primarily surgical.

Small vestibular tumors (<1.5 mm) that are completely intercanalicular can often be completely resected, with preservation of both hearing and facial nerve function.

Larger tumors are probably best managed expectantly, with debulking or decompression carried out only when brain stem compression, deterioration of hearing, and/or facial nerve dysfunction occur [Evans et al 2005a]. However, balancing between early surgery and preservation of facial function and later surgery when a patient is still hearing is difficult [Evans et al 2005a].

Stereotactic radiosurgery, most commonly with the gamma knife, has been offered as an alternative to surgery in select individuals with vestibular schwannoma. However, the outcomes from radiation treatment in individuals with NF2 are not as good as for individuals with sporadic unilateral vestibular schwannoma, with only approximately 60% long-term tumor control [Rowe et al 2003].

Malignant transformation is a possible, though probably not common, sequela [Baser et al 2000]; however, it should be noted that tumor development following radiation may take 15 years [Evans et al 2006]. This may involve development of a malignancy within the treated lesion or a new malignancy (e.g., glioblastoma) in the radiation field [Balasubramaniam et al 2007].

Management of individuals with vestibular tumors should include counseling for insidious problems with balance and underwater disorientation, which can result in drowning.

Other tumors. Other intracranial, cranial nerve, or spinal nerve tumors are very slow growing, and surgical intervention for a tumor producing little impairment may cause disability years before it would occur naturally.

Although ependymoma in individuals without NF2 is optimally treated with complete resection, and occasionally with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, it is unclear whether ependymoma in individuals with NF2 warrants aggressive management.

Radiation therapy of NF2-associated tumors should be carefully considered because radiation exposure may induce, accelerate, or transform tumors in an individual (especially a child) with an inactive tumor suppressor gene [Baser et al 2000, Evans et al 2006].

Hearing. Hearing preservation and augmentation are important in the management of individuals with NF2. All affected individuals and their families should be referred to an audiologist to receive training in optimization of hearing and speech production.

Lip-reading skills may be enhanced by instruction.

Sign language may often be more effectively acquired before the individual loses hearing.

Hearing aids may be helpful early in the course of the disease [Evans et al 2005a].

Auditory rehabilitation with a cochlear or brain stem implant should be discussed with those who have lost hearing [Evans et al 2005a]. Rarely, individuals who have had vascular insult to the cochlea, but otherwise are without nerve damage, may benefit from a cochlear implant.

Ocular involvement. Early recognition and management of visual impairment from other manifestations of NF2 are extremely important.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment concentrates on prevention of secondary complications. Prevention of substantial handicap from the disease can be achieved by appropriate expert treatment of tumors:

A cervical spinal scan should be performed before cranial surgery to prevent complications from manipulation under anesthesia [Evans et al 2005a].

Spinal tumors may make epidural analgesia difficult; therefore, lumbosacral imaging should be performed before regional analgesia is given [Sakai et al 2005, Spiegel et al 2005].

Surveillance

For at-risk individuals (1) in whom the known pathogenic variant in the family has been identified or (2) whose genetic status cannot be clarified by molecular genetic testing:

MRI is usually begun between ages ten and 12 years but can be delayed in families in which the onset is known to be later [Evans et al 2005a]. MRI should be continued on an annual basis until at least the fourth decade of life. It is not clear if earlier surveillance (i.e., cranial MRI before age 10 years) is beneficial, and it is not known at what age monitoring can be safely stopped. Although some individuals with NF2 do not have symptoms until they are in their fifties, it is likely that "silent" tumors would be detected on an MRI performed at a younger age.

Hearing evaluation, including BAER testing, may be useful in detecting changes in auditory nerve function before changes can be visualized by MRI.

Routine complete eye examinations should be part of the care of all individuals with NF2.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Radiotherapy should be avoided in children with NF2 [Evans et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Consideration of molecular genetic testing of at-risk family members (see Genetic Counseling) during childhood is appropriate for surveillance:

Early identification of relatives who have inherited the family-specific NF2 pathogenic variant allows for appropriate screening using MRI for neuroimaging and brain stem auditory evoked response (BAER) testing for audiologic evaluation, thus resulting in earlier detection of disease manifestations and improved final outcomes [Evans et al 2005a].

Early identification of those who have not inherited the family-specific NF2 pathogenic variant eliminates the need for costly screening with MRI and BAER testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although no convincing evidence exists that schwannomas increase in size during pregnancy, hormonal effects on meningiomas are possible; therefore, assessment of the potential risk of increased intracranial pressure is important for women considering pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

The search for an effective medical treatment for NF2-related tumors continues.

One of the first groups of agents suggested were PAK1-blocking drugs [Hirokawa et al 2004]. Targeting the ERK1, AKT, integrin/focal adhesion kinase/Src/Ras signaling cascades, PDGFRbeta, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase C/Src/c-Raf pathway, VEG-F, and other pathways [Hanemann 2008, Evans et al 2009, Blair et al 2011], drugs such as avastin, elotinib [Plotkin et al 2008], lapatinib, and sorafenib [Ammoun et al 2008] may well be effective treatments for NF2. These agents could be tried on the Nf2 mouse model; the first human clinical trials in North America and the UK are also commencing.

The most promising results have come from short- to medium-term treatment with avastin [Plotkin et al 2009], which seems to have efficacy against rapidly growing schwannomas and possibly ependymomas, although not meningiomas. Further development of treatment trials is underway [Evans et al 2009].

Recently drug trials have identified bevacizumab as a potential treatment [Plotkin et al 2009].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), the following evaluations are recommended (if they were not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation):

Assessment of growth

Evaluation of immunologic status to include:

Complete blood count;

Absolute number of B-cells, T-cells, and T-cell subsets, with special attention to naïve CD4+CD45RA cells;

Proliferative response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells to stimuli;

Concentration of total serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM) and IgG subclasses;

Evaluation for viruses with lymphotrotropic capacity (i.e., EBV and CMV).

Evaluation for malignancy, including a focused family history of other individuals with cancer

Evaluation of the endocrinologic status in females who are of pubertal age to include pelvic ultrasound to evaluate for streak gonads and plasma levels of FSH, LH, and estrogen [Chrzanowska et al 2010a]

Assessment of cognitive development and intellectual abilities

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Nutrition. Because of chromosome instability, vitamin E and folic acid supplementation in doses appropriate for body weight is recommended.

Infections. In individuals with severe humoral immunodeficiency and frequent infections, Ig replacement therapy should be considered.

Ig replacement is typically administered either intravenously (IVIg) or subcutaneously (SCIg).

The spectrum of recurrent infections in NBS is not opportunistic; therefore, the antibiotic selected should be appropriate for the microorganism being treated.

Malignancy. Standard treatment chemotherapy protocols for lymphoid malignancies in NBS need to be adopted according to individual tolerance [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Pastorczak et al 2016]. Treatment of affected individuals with solid tumors is also challenging. Radiotherapy of CNS tumors (medulloblastoma) caused severe complications and death in three individuals with NBS [Chrzanowska et al 1997, Bakhshi et al 2003, Distel et al 2003].

Although complete clinical remission (for >5 years) can be successfully achieved, in a proportion of affected individuals outcome is complicated by relapse or the development of a second malignancy [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Bienemann et al 2011].

For individuals who achieve first remission, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) may be considered:

The first successful bone marrow transplantation was performed in an individual with NBS who was initially misdiagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA) [Gennery et al 2004, Gennery et al 2005].

Wolska-Kuśnierz et al [2015] summarized the results of HSCT in 14 individuals with NBS, nine of whom were alive [Gennery et al 2005, New et al 2005, Albert et al 2010].

Woźniak et al [2015] reported the successful use of non-myeloablative umbilical cord transplantation in a child age 19 months with NBS and severe combined immune deficiency.

Further long-term follow up is needed to determine the outcome of HSCT in individuals with NBS.

Puberty and fertility. Females with NBS who are of pubertal age should be referred for evaluation by a gynecologist and/or endocrinologist to evaluate for hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.

Hormonal replacement therapy should be considered with careful monitoring of secondary sexual characteristics and uterus development.

Females are infertile; similarly, no male paternity has been reported.

Surveillance

Affected individuals

Periodic follow-up to monitor developmental progress, physical growth (including weight, length/height, and head circumference) and frequency of infections; monitoring for weight loss, which may signal the presence of a malignancy

Lifelong monitoring of immune biomarkers to include the parameters listed in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Careful follow up by oncologist: in individuals with NBS who are immunodeficient symptoms of lymphoid malignancies can be misleading.

Monitoring for pubertal progression in both females and males and for premature ovarian insufficiency in females [Chrzanowska et al 2010b]

Breast self-examination and ultrasonographic evaluation recommended in affected females

Carriers (heterozygotes)

Parents. As obligate carriers, parents should be monitored for malignancy, in particular breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men. No consensus tumor screening protocols for carriers have been published.

At-risk sibs. Evidence of cancer risk in young carriers is insufficient to warrant screening in childhood.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because the cells from individuals with NBS are as radiosensitive in vitro as those from individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia (another chromosome instability syndrome), conventional doses of radiation used in radiotherapy could be lethal in individuals with NBS. Family members should be made aware of this risk so that they can discuss appropriate treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed.

Similarly, unnecessary exposure to ionizing radiation should be avoided; instead of radiograph or CT scan, MR imaging and ultrasound examination are strongly recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing for the NBN pathogenic variants identified in the proband to apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband and young adult relatives at risk of being carriers (heterozygotes) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from monitoring for malignancy (see Surveillance) and to inform treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycine encephalopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI of the brain in neonates. The presence of brain malformations is a prognostic indicator of severe outcome. Abnormalities in the posterior fossa should raise suspicion for the development of hydrocephalus. In a single case study, Mourmans et al [2006] showed that serial follow up of the diffusion-weighted images/apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and the diffusion tensor images can provide evidence for the progressive loss of axonal structures seen in children with severe outcome.

EEG. The presence of a burst suppression pattern, rather than multifocal seizures, is a poor prognostic indicator.

Developmental assessment throughout the first years of life

Neurologic assessment in the first year to identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and of chorea in more mildly affected patients

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No effective treatment for severe glycine encephalopathy exists. Circumstantial evidence is however accumulating that in patients with pathogenic variants associated with residual enzyme activity (although not in patients with two severe pathogenic variants [Korman et al 2006]) early and aggressive treatment (benzoate and NMDA receptor blockade) results in improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Korman et al 2004; Flusser et al 2005; Van Hove et al, unpublished].

Current treatment of glycine encephalopathy consists of reduction of plasma concentration of glycine through treatment with sodium benzoate and blocking of glycinergic receptors, most commonly at the N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site.

Sodium benzoate. Oral administration of sodium benzoate at doses of 250-750 mg/kg/day can reduce the plasma glycine concentration into the normal range (see Table 1); however, this treatment does not normalize CSF glycine concentration. Lowering the plasma glycine concentration into the low normal range (between 120 and 300 µmol/L) is often required in order to observe beneficial effects. Benzoate is also a useful anticonvulsant agent in this disorder; it increases alertness. In more mildly affected individuals, it may also improve behavior.

In patients with the attenuated or mild phenotype, benzoate eliminates the intermittent episodes of severe lethargy often seen in this group. However, in patients with the severe phenotype, even high doses of benzoate administered early in the disease course do not affect the natural progression toward severe intellectual disability/seizure disorder.

The dose of sodium benzoate required varies and thus must be tailored to the individual patient. The dose should be gradually increased (usually by 50 mg/kg/day) until the plasma glycine concentration is within treatment range. The higher dose of this range (500-750 mg/kg/day) is frequently associated with gastritis, which may require oral administration of antacids, H2 antagonists, or proton pump inhibitors.

Patients with a mild form of the disease require a lower dose (200-450 mg/kg/day)

Patients with a severe form of the disease require a higher dose (550-750 mg/kg/day) [Van Hove et al 2005].

Dosing of benzoate in excess of the individual requirement is dangerous: benzoate toxicity has high morbidity and mortality [Van Hove et al 2005]. Hypocalcemia and low plasma glycine concentration (<150 µmol/L) are frequent early signs of benzoate overdose. Measurement of plasma benzoate concentration can be helpful in evaluating potential toxicity.

NMDA receptor site antagonists. Antagonists at the NMDA receptor site include dextromethorphan, ketamine, and felbamate. Use of each has resulted in improved seizure control.

In contrast, antagonism of a presumably overstimulated N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel complex with use of dextromethorphan, ketamine, or felbamate has been of limited benefit to the ultimate neurodevelopmental outcome of severely affected children; this may be different in mildly affected children.

Dextromethorphan doses commonly range from five to 15 mg/kg/day, but individual variability is substantial. Blood concentration can be monitored; the therapeutic level is not defined, but should be greater than 0 and lower than 100 nmol/L. Overdose of dextromethorphan causes increased sleepiness and while awake, more movement.

Note: Cimetidine slows the metabolism of dextromethorphan and should not be used in dextromethorphan slow metabolizers (a separate pharmacogenetic phenotype) as it may cause toxicity.

Seizure control is important for symptomatic benefit.

Control of severe seizure disorders such as burst suppression pattern or hypsarrhythmia tends to result in improved developmental progress.

Children with myoclonic seizures, such as newborns and infants, may benefit from benzodiazepines.

Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as phenobarbital or phenytoin have limited efficacy for control of the seizures of glycine encephalopathy by themselves in neonates with this condition. However, because the nature of the epilepsy changes in late infancy, phenobarbital is often useful in seizures in older affected children.

Various antiepileptic drugs have been used with variable success. Felbamate has been successfully used in some children with difficult-to-treat seizures. This treatment must be closely monitored for signs of liver or hematopoietic toxicity.

Ketogenic diet has been used in some patients with variable success for the treatment of seizures. Ketogenic diet always lowers the amount of glycine substantially and the dose of benzoate should be reduced accordingly to avoid benzoate toxicity [Cusmai et al 2012].

For some older patients with severe glycine encephalopathy and difficult-to-control seizures, a vagal nerve stimulator has been used with varying (sometimes very high) levels of success [Tsao 2010].

Other. Gastrostomy tube placement should be considered early in the management of patients with swallowing dysfunction associated with severe disease.

Gastroesophageal reflux is common, and a Nissen procedure can be very helpful in reducing the risk of aspiration pneumonia.

Most affected individuals need physical therapy.

Scoliosis is managed with standard techniques.

Note: Although strychnine improves tone and respiration, its use has been abandoned because of serious side effects that result from its long-term use.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There is no way to prevent primary manifestations of this disorder. Note: The effect of therapy in mildly affected children with pathogenic variants that result in residual enzyme activity is still under investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients on sodium benzoate should have plasma carnitine concentration monitored. Those with free carnitine below the lower limit of normal should receive supplementation to maintain normal plasma concentrations.

Surveillance

Developmental assessment should be performed throughout the first years of life.

Neurologic assessments in the first year can identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and early development of chorea in more mildly affected patients.

Severely affected individuals should be monitored for scoliosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproate is contraindicated in glycine encephalopathy as an antiepileptic drug (AED). It raises blood and CSF glycine concentrations and may increase seizure frequency. It has resulted in severe lethargy, coma, severe seizures, and chorea particularly in mildly affected patients [Hall & Ringel 2004; Author, personal observation].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Biochemical genetic testing to promote early diagnosis and treatment of at-risk newborn sibs is indicated. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, such testing can be followed with molecular genetic testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy has been reported in one woman with mild glycine encephalopathy. No obvious teratogenic effect was observed [Ellaway et al 2001].

There is currently no effective treatment for pregnancies in which the fetus is affected with glycine encephalopathy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an NKX2-1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

For benign hereditary chorea*

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

For brain-lung-thyroid syndrome (choreoathetosis*, congenital hypothyroidism, and neonatal respiratory distress)

Lung

Pulmonary function testing, if not performed at the time of diagnosis

Pulmonary consultation for further evaluation and treatment of pulmonary dysfunction

Screening for pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest

Thyroid

Thyroid function testing (TSH, T3, T4) for evaluation of possible hypothyroidism, if not performed at the time of diagnosis

Endocrinology consultation for further evaluation and treatment of thyroid abnormalities

Consider evaluation for thyroid malignancy by physical examination that includes thyroid palpation.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

*Note that brain MRI is typically obtained as part of the diagnostic evaluation.

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with NKX2-1-related disorders is recommended.

Chorea. Tetrabenazine, which has been reported to reduce chorea in low doses [Jankovic 2009, Salvatore et al 2010, Jankovic & Clarence-Smith 2011, Gras et al 2012, Jimenez-Shahed & Jankovic 2013], is a first-line treatment for chorea. Starting at low doses and gradually increasing to the dose most effective in controlling symptoms is recommended.

Children: 0.5 mg/kg/day starting dose divided into 2-3 doses

Adults: 37.5 mg/day starting dose divided in 2-3 doses

Levodopa therapy has been reported to improve chorea in four children and can be considered as second-line therapy for the treatment of chorea [Asmus et al 2005, Rosati et al 2015]. Rosati et al [2015] and Asmus et al [2005] noted a dramatic and substantial improvement in gait symptoms (specifically falls) in the same four children with levodopa therapy; this medication can be used as first-line therapy in children with gait impairment.

Of note:

Although Devos et al [2006] found a beneficial effect of methylphenidate on chorea in one patient, methylphenidate is not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea.

Although Glik et al [2008] reported amelioration of choreic movements in an individual with benign hereditary chorea treated with olanzapine for psychosis, dopamine receptor blockers are not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea.

Other neurologic manifestations. Gross motor and gait abnormalities can occur during early development [Harper 1978]; physical therapy is recommended to address delays in motor and gait development identified in childhood.

Pulmonary dysfunction. Treat asthma and interstitial lung disease as needed.

Hypothyroidism. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Neonatal screening for thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine (T4) levels with appropriate thyroid replacement can prevent systemic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Screening and treatment of hypothyroidism can prevent the systematic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.

Early and aggressive medical intervention for respiratory infections and asthma can prevent respiratory distress, intubation and/or death.

Early intervention for motor development delays with physical therapy and/or medication for the treatment of chorea can improve function.

Annual screening for pulmonary and thyroid cancer can reduce morbidity and mortality associated with malignancy with NKX2-1 related disorders.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

For individuals with no neurologic manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual neurologic evaluation

For individuals with no pulmonary manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for pulmonary dysfunction (pulmonary function tests) and pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest

For individuals with no manifestations of thyroid disease or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for thyroid dysfunction (serum concentration of thyroid stimulating hormone) and for thyroid cancer (physical examination that includes thyroid palpation)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No agents or circumstances are known to trigger or exacerbate NKX2-1-related disorders.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of at-risk relatives prenatally or as soon as possible after birth enables early identification of infants at high risk for congenital hypothyroidism and pulmonary disease, permitting early diagnosis and management, and particularly, prevention of the neurodevelopmental consequences of untreated hypothyroidism.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the NKX2-1 pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If a pathogenic variant has not been identified, assessment of thyroid function in a family with benign hereditary chorea or brain-lung-thyroid syndrome.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no known increased risk during pregnancy for a woman with an NKX2-1-related disorder.

Prior to pregnancy or early in gestation, it is recommended that a woman work with her physician to determine the safety for the fetus of the use of any medication she is taking for chorea.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Noonan syndrome (NS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on NS growth charts

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography and electrocardiography

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Hearing evaluation

Coagulation screen to include CBC with differential, PT/PTT (repeat after 12 months if younger than 12 months at the time of first screening [Romano et al 2010, Roberts et al 2013]

Renal ultrasound examination; urinalysis if the urinary tract is anomalous

Clinical and radiographic assessment of spine and rib cage

Brain and cervical spine MRI if neurologic symptoms are present

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of the complications of Noonan syndrome is generally standard and does not differ from treatment in the general population.

Management guidelines have been developed by Dyscerne, a European consortium [Noonan Syndrome Guideline Development Group 2010] (full text); a separate set has been published by an American consortium working with the Noonan Syndrome Support Group [Romano et al 2010] (full text) and in the Lancet [Roberts et al 2013].

Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies is generally the same as in the general population. Pulmonary valve stenosis treated with percutaneous balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty has a higher re-intervention rate versus pulmonary valve stenosis without NS [Prendiville et al 2014]. There is substantial early mortality associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; infants presenting before age six months in congestive heart failure have the worst prognosis (2-year survival of 30%) [Hickey et al 2011, Wilkinson et al 2012].

Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

The bleeding diathesis in Noonan syndrome can have a variety of causes. Specific treatment for serious bleeding may be guided by knowledge of a factor deficiency or platelet aggregation anomaly. Factor VIIa has been successfully used to control bleeding caused by hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, thrombocytopenia, and thrombasthenia. It has also been used in an infant with Noonan syndrome whose platelet count and prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, to control severe postoperative blood loss resulting from gastritis [Tofil et al 2005].

Studies of growth hormone (GH) treatment have been published from the UK, Japan [Ogawa et al 2004], the Netherlands [Noordam 2007, Noordam et al 2008], Sweden [Osio et al 2005], and the United States [Romano et al 2009].

The rationale for GH treatment of individuals with Noonan syndrome includes:

Significant short stature compared with normal peers;

Possible impairment of the GH-insulin-like-growth-factor type I (GH-IGF-I) axis; and

Documented response to GH treatment in studies.

In Europe, GH treatment is the standard of care for children with abnormalities of the GH-IGF-I axis and could be used when GH physiology is normal.

No standard dose has been established; no correlation between dosage used and final height is apparent.

Short stature due to Noonan syndrome is an FDA-approved indication for growth hormone treatment.

Short- and long-term studies have demonstrated a consistent and significant increase in height velocity in children with Noonan syndrome who have been treated [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Romano et al 2009].

The increase in height SD varies from 0.6 to 1.8 SD and may depend on age at start of treatment, duration of study, age at onset of puberty, and/or GH sensitivity [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Dahlgren 2009].

Subsequent studies have shown that children with prepubertal NS growth hormone deficiency have been shown to increase their growth rate with growth hormone therapy at a rate equivalent to girls with Turner syndrome but at a lower rate than that seen in idiopathic growth hormone deficiency [Lee et al 2015, Zavras et al 2015].

Surveillance

If anomalies are found in any system (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis), periodic follow up should be planned and life-long monitoring may be necessary; for example, periodic eye examination if a refraction error or strabismus is found, urinalysis if there are structural abnormalities of the collecting system. Despite the apparent increased incidence of hematologic and solid tumor malignancies, no surveillance strategies have been evaluated or recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aspirin therapy should be avoided because it may exacerbate a bleeding diathesis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with NDP-related retinopathies, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete ophthalmologic examination

Baseline audiologic evaluation

Neurodevelopmental assessment in early childhood if developmental milestones are not met

Behavioral evaluation as needed

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Ocular manifestations

The majority of males with the classic Norrie disease (ND) phenotype have complete retinal detachment at the time of birth; therefore, interventional therapy may not offer much with regard to preservation of sight. Ophthalmologic evaluation is warranted..

Individuals without complete retinal detachment may benefit from surgery and/or laser therapy with the potential for improved outcomes if done at an early age.

A report by Chow et al [2010] described successful laser photocoagulation at birth (37 weeks’ gestation) of a male with ND in which Teller visual acuity was measured at 20/100 O.D. at 23 months of life

Retrospective medical record review of all patients seen in a tertiary care pediatric retinal clinical practice (1988-2008) of 14 males with ND documented maintenance of light perception in at least one eye (7/14 cases) with early vitrectomy done by age 12 months (median 4.5 months) [Walsh et al 2010].

In the progressive stage of the Norrie disease phenotype, development of increased intraocular pressure may require surgery. Rarely, enucleation of the eye is required to control pain.

Sensorineural hearing loss

Hearing aid augmentation is usually successful well into middle or late adulthood.

Cochlear implantation should be considered when hearing-assisted audiologic function is significantly impaired.

Behavioral issues are a lifelong challenge to many individuals with Norrie disease and to their guardians/caretakers, whether or not intellectual disability or cognitive impairment is present. Intervention and therapy are supportive and aimed at maximizing educational opportunities.

An empiric trial of psychotropic medications may be warranted, although no studies have addressed or supported the use of specific medications for treatment of Norrie disease.

Surveillance

The following are recommended:

Routine follow up with an ophthalmologist in all individuals with an NDP-related retinopathy, even when vision is severely reduced

Given that most individuals with the NDP-related spectrum of retinopathies are blind, routine monitoring of hearing so that hearing loss can be detected early and managed appropriately

Observation for clinical evidence of venous stasis or ulcer disease

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Given the increased risk of hearing loss, exposure to loud noises should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

A planned delivery at 34 weeks’ gestation of a male with an established NDP pathogenic variant (in whom retinal detachment was excluded following fetal ultrasonography at 28 and 33 weeks) was reported [Sisk et al 2014]. Authors describe treatment at two days of life with laser ablation of the avascular retina in both eyes and ten-month follow up which showed the retina to remain completely attached in both eyes [Sisk et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

Ohlmann et al [2005] have elaborated in the mouse knockout a failure of retinal angiogenesis and documented correction of the ocular-vascular phenotype by transgenic ectopic lens expression of norrin. These authors also noted a potential effect of norrin on retinal ganglion cell proliferation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Infants with NPD-A

Ophthalmologic examination, if not yet performed

Comprehensive neurologic evaluation

Compete blood count

Serum chemistries including liver function tests

Dietary consultation

Occupational and physical therapy evaluations

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

NPD-B

Chest radiograph to assess the extent of interstitial lung disease

Pulmonary function testing, including assessment of diffusing capacity, in individuals old enough to cooperate

Bone age in children under age 18 years

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic examination

Baseline laboratory studies including complete blood count, fasting lipid profile, serum chemistries, liver function tests

Liver biopsy in individuals with evidence of deteriorating liver function

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Severe neurodegenerative form (NPD-A)

Progressive neurologic disease. Physical and occupational therapy to maximize function and to prevent contractures is appropriate. Aggressive therapy is not warranted and the plan for such treatment should be made in consultation with the neurologist, therapist(s), and family to establish realistic goals.

Nutrition. Feeding difficulties can make provision of adequate calories a major challenge. Regular consultation with a dietician should be provided. The use of nasogastric tube feeding or surgical placement of a feeding tube should be discussed with the family.

Sleep disorder. Irritability and sleep disturbance are quality-of-life issues for the entire family that sometimes require the use of sedatives.

NPD-B

Bleeding. Most affected individuals have thrombocytopenia. When bleeding is life threatening, transfusion of blood products is indicated. While partial splenectomy may be considered for individuals with severe hypersplenism, total splenectomy should be avoided because removal of the spleen exacerbates the pulmonary disease.

Pulmonary disease. Individuals with symptomatic pulmonary disease may require supplemental oxygen. Other measures to treat interstitial lung disease, such as steroids, have not been well studied. Several individuals have undergone bronchopulmonary lavage with variable results [Nicholson et al 2002].

Hyperlipidemia. Adults with hyperlipidemia should be treated to bring the serum concentration of total cholesterol into the normal range.

Growth retardation. Dietary assessment is indicated in all cases to assure that calorie intake is adequate for growth.

Note: Orthotopic liver transplantation in an infant with NPD-A and amniotic cell transplantation in several individuals with NPD-B have been attempted with little or no success [Kayler et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Variable results have been reported with HSCT. Shah et al [2005] reported successful HSCT for NPD-A. Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver and spleen volumes. However, stabilization of the neurologic component following HSCT has not been reported; therefore, any attempts to perform HSCT in individuals with clinically evident neurologic disease should be considered experimental. The morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT limit its use.

Enzyme replacement therapy. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Liver function needs to be monitored in individuals receiving medications with known hepatotoxicity (e.g., statins for treatment of hypercholesterolemia).

Surveillance

Individuals with NPD-A should receive routine care from a pediatrician and a neurologist including evaluation of the following:

Nutrition status

Occupational and physical therapy needs

Individuals with NPD-B should be evaluated at least yearly for the following:

History (at least every 6-12 months): growth and weight gain in children; fatigue; any change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities; bleeding, shortness of breath; abdominal pain; headaches; extremity pain

Physical examination including assessment of neurologic function

Blood tests including liver enzymes, platelet count, and fasting lipid profile

Pulmonary function testing and chest radiograph

Skeletal assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)

Nutrition assessment

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the SMPD1 pathogenic variants in the family are known it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early identification and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For pregnant women with NPD-B, prenatal care by a high-risk obstetrician is indicated to ensure appropriate monitoring of pulmonary function and hematologic status.

Therapies Under Investigation

Enzyme replacement therapy. A Phase I study of recombinant human acid sphingomyelinase in five adults with NPD-B using an intra-patient dose-escalation scheme was recently completed. This regimen was generally well tolerated with study subjects showing a reduced liver and spleen volumes and improved lung-diffusing capacity [Wasserstein et al 2015]. A Phase II study is currently underway in children with NPD-B, and a Phase II/III study is planned in adults with NPD-B.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of ability to walk and transfer, manage secretions, and communicate (language, speech, and hearing)

For individuals with hepatosplenomegaly, complete blood count and tests of hepatic function

MRI of the head; usually performed in the course of the workup and usually normal until the disease is advanced

Consideration of EEG and sleep studies if the history suggests seizures or sleep disturbances

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No curative therapy for NPC exists.

Symptomatic therapy may be at least partially effective in the management of seizures, dystonia, and cataplexy.

If disordered sleep is identified, a nocturnal sedative may be indicated. In complex cases, formal evaluation by a sleep specialist should be considered.

Bronchoalveolar lavage has been described as effective in improving function in one child with pulmonary infiltrates [Palmeri et al 2005].

General supportive care, including respite for primary caregivers, is crucial to the maintenance of the family unit in the face of this devastating illness.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Chest physical therapy with aggressive bronchodilation and antibiotic therapy for intercurrent infection appears beneficial, although no systematic study has been performed.

Individuals whose mobility is compromised should have a regular bowel program to prevent severe constipation, which may present as increased seizure frequency or increased spasticity in some impaired individuals with NPC.

Physical therapy is indicated to maintain mobility as long as possible.

Swallowing must be monitored to allow consideration of gastrostomy tube placement when aspiration or nutritional compromise is imminent.

Surveillance

General pediatric evaluations, with special attention to pulmonary function, swallowing, bowel habit, and mood (for occult depression) at six-month intervals are appropriate for most juvenile and adult affected individuals. Sleep disturbances are common in NPC; the affected individual or caregiver should be questioned regarding sleep hygiene as a part of regular evaluation.

Annual psychometric testing may be helpful in arranging appropriate school or work placement.

Teenagers and adults with motor or sensory impairments who are driving should be monitored at six- to 12-month intervals to ensure that they do not present a risk to themselves or others.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs that cause excessive salivation or that may exacerbate seizures directly by interacting with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided.

Alcohol as well as many drugs exacerbate ataxia and should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Inhibition of glycosphingolipid synthesis by n-butyldeoxynojirimycin has been shown to delay onset and prolong survival in both murine and feline models of NPC [Zervas et al 2001, Stein et al 2012]. A prospective trial of the same agent showed evidence of stabilization or benefit in some individuals [Patterson et al 2007]. Subsequent clinical studies have supported a role of miglustat in stabilizing NPC [Pineda et al 2009, Wraith & Imrie 2009, Patterson et al 2010, Pineda et al 2010, Wraith et al 2010, Fecarotta et al 2011, Di Rocco et al 2012, Héron et al 2012, Chien et al 2013]. The agent has been approved for the management of neurologic manifestations of NPC in several countries, not including the United States.

Laboratory studies of cellular and murine models of NPC have raised the possibility of small-molecule therapies to interdict pathways triggering apoptosis and related routes to cell death and dysfunction [Patterson & Platt 2004]; to date, these have not proceeded to clinical trials.

Preliminary studies of neurosteroid replacement therapy with allopregnanolone in NPC mice suggested similar improvements in survival to those seen with n-butyldeoxynojirimycin, provided that the steroid is administered early in postnatal life [Mellon & Griffin 2002]. Subsequent studies have shown that the active agent was the vehicle, hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin, which has shown dramatic effects in the murine model of NPC [Abi-Mosleh et al 2009, Davidson et al 2009, Ramirez et al 2010, Rosenbaum et al 2010, Ward et al 2010, Vance & Peake 2011, Peake & Vance 2012].

Studies in tissue culture have demonstrated that direct or indirect over-expression of the GTPase Rab 9 reverses the NPC phenotype [Choudhury et al 2002, Walter et al 2003]. Although not yet applicable in human trials, this finding suggests the existence of alternate pathways for mobilization of endosomal cargoes that are potential targets for small-molecule therapies.

Treatment of certain NPC fibroblast cell lines with an HDAC inhibitor produced marked reduction of cholesterol storage [Pipalia et al 2011]; a clinical trial is being considered.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In the C57 murine model of NPC, all treatment modalities, including bone marrow transplantation, combined bone marrow and liver transplantation, and aggressive cholesterol-lowering therapy, have proven ineffective.

Although a trial of cholesterol-lowering agents showed that the amount of free cholesterol in the liver of individuals with NPC could be reduced by the administration of cholestyramine, lovastatin, and nicotinic acid [Patterson et al 1993], there is no evidence that this approach modifies the neurologic progression of NPC.

Liver transplantation in humans corrects hepatic dysfunction but does not ameliorate the neurologic disease.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CHILD syndrome, the following are recommended:

Dermatologic evaluation

Radiologic examination of trunk and extremities for skeletal malformations

Abdominal and pelvic ultrasounds examination to identify visceral malformations

Chest imaging to evaluate for lung hypoplasia

Echocardiogram to identify cardiac involvement

Magnetic resonance imaging to determine brain involvement

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CK syndrome, the following are recommended:

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

Evaluation of neurologic history and EEG for evidence of seizures

Psychoeducational evaluations to define delays and facilitate appropriate interventions

Psychiatric evaluation if behavioral problems are present

Ophthalmologic consultation for evaluation of ocular findings including strabismus and optic atrophy

Orthopedic evaluation to determine the presence of scoliosis/kyphosis

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

CHILD syndrome

Oral aromatic retinoids (etretinate) to ameliorate cutaneous symptoms; however, this drug is often poorly tolerated [Happle et al 1980] and does not prove effective in every case [Liu et al 2015].

Topical treatments including lactic acid 12% creams or lotions for itching and urea creams for dry skin. Oral and topical ketoconazole were found to result in a 90% reduction of cutaneous lesions after ten days of therapy [Liu et al 2015].

Topical statins. The use of lovastatin topically led to complete healing of the inflammatory CHILD nevus in a few single cases, whereas cholesterol application alone had no satisfactory effect [Merino De Paz et al 2011, Paller et al 2011]. Alexopoulos & Kakourou [2015] recently reported the combined topical use of simvastatin and cholesterol and showed a correction in the cutaneous phenotype of one patient.

Dermatologic surgery. An inflammatory nevus was removed from an affected boy by dermabrasion; however, it recurred within eight months [Happle et al 1996]. König et al [2010] reported successful treatment of an inflammatory nevus by grafting skin obtained from a contralateral unaffected region.

Note: No one therapy described to date appears to ameliorate the cutaneous findings for every reported individual with CHILD syndrome. Trying different methods until the clinician finds a successful therapy seems to be typical for most affected individuals.

Orthopedic abnormalities. Treatment of orthopedic abnormalities such as scoliosis and joint contractures with braces and/or corrective surgery

Other medical care as appropriate based on clinical findings

CK syndrome

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) to control seizures

Behavior modification and/or drug therapy to control aggression and help with ADHD symptoms

Ophthalmologic management of ocular abnormalities

Surveillance

CHILD syndrome

Regular surveillance for cutaneous manifestations as new lesions may occur in puberty or early adulthood

Orthopedic surveillance for musculoskeletal deformities such as scoliosis and joint contractures

Neurologic, cardiologic, or renal surveillance depending on clinical involvement

CK syndrome

Neurologic surveillance of seizures for readjustment of medications if necessary

Orthopedic surveillance for scoliosis/kyphosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete ophthalmologic evaluation, including assessment for the presence of nystagmus, ocular alignment and strabismus, iris pigmentation and transillumination, dilated retinal examination assessing retinal pigment epithelial hypopigmentation and foveal hypoplasia, and best corrected visual acuity (with cycloplegic refraction);

Evaluation of the pigmentation status of the skin, especially the solar-exposed skin, and the adnexa (brows, lashes, and when appropriate extremity hair and pubic hair), linked to a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation for sun-protective clothing, lotions, and future self-care;

Clinical genetics consultation to review natural history, pattern of inheritance and recurrence risks, and to clarify genotype.

Parents should be assured repeatedly that the visual disability with OCA1 does not deteriorate over time, that changes in acuity are usually refractive in nature, that the nystagmus tends to dampen with age (but never disappears), that many children with OCA1B manifest slow improvement in acuity and some plateau by their teen years, and that intellectual disabilities are not a component of this group of disorders.

Treatment of Manifestations

Ophthalmologic care. Correction with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Notably, visual acuity is never correctable to normal, but parents should be advised that the achievable acuity never deteriorates.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory but may be performed if the strabismus is marked. Surgery may improve peripheral binocularity or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn or head tilt, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point to a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position. Nystagmus surgery remains highly controversial; no comparative clinical trial has compared the surgical reduction of amplitude of nystagmus to the outcomes of the natural history of dampened nystagmus with age among those forms of albinism in which increasing pigment occurs normally over time.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from “photophobia,” which is painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among all individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in acuity from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function substantively because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

Most children with albinism should remain in mainstream classrooms, as long as the school attends to their special needs resulting from visual limitation. Preschoool evaluations allow teachers and parents to develop an Individual Education Plan (IEP). Neither Braille nor “white cane” mobility training is needed in the overwhelming majority of children with albinism.

Additional classroom aids may include:

High contrast reading materials (black on white);

Large font texts or xerographically enlarged worksheets;

Preferential seating near the front of the class and work boards;

Selective optical devices, especially mobile ones such as stand magnifiers and monocular telescopes, and closed circuit chip-camera televisions; and

Computers and tablets with zoom-magnification text software.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare, to reduce some photodysphoria, and to provide some sun protection to the face.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Skin care in individuals with OCA1 is guided by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight.

For individuals with OCA1A, the white skin is completely devoid of melanin and needs to be protected whenever exposed to the sun. Sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be substantial in very sensitive individuals, and exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually substantial in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves, pants, and socks) and sun screens with a high SPF value (blocks with SPF 45-50+). Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing validity of numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

For individuals with OCA1B, the amount of skin pigmentation varies and the use of sun screen should correlate with skin pigmentation and the ability to tan. Skin that burns with sun exposure needs protection. An early (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

During the first few years of life, annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error and strabismus

In adults, dermatologic surveillance of unusual skin thickening, hyperkeratosis, and erosive lesions that may be harbingers of skin cancer

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Other than the avoidance of prolonged solar exposure because of the enhanced damage to the skin and increasing cumulative risk of cutaneous neoplasms, no special precautions are needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In classic OCA1 of either type, an affected mother who is pregnant needs no exceptional consideration. Similarly, a pregnancy affected with OCA1 requires no exceptional prenatal care.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Complete ophthalmologic evaluation including measurement of visual acuity and refractive error

Assessment for strabismus

Assessment by dermatologist to instruct parents regarding use of sun-protective clothing, lotions, and formulas

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Ophthalmologic care is the most important part of the ongoing care for most individuals with OCA4.

The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors with spectacles or contact lenses can improve visual acuity. Except in the very unusual individual, correction of refractive errors cannot restore visual acuity to normal because of the foveal hypoplasia.

The alternating strabismus found in most individuals with albinism is generally not associated with the development of amblyopia. Strabismus surgery is usually not required, but can be considered for cosmetic reasons if the strabismus is marked or fixed.

Photophobia is common in individuals with OCA4, but the degree of discomfort varies and does not depend entirely on the amount of melanin pigment present in the iris or skin. In general, opaque contact lenses or darkly tinted lenses do not improve visual function. Dark glasses may be helpful for individuals with albinism, but many prefer to go without dark glasses because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. A hat with a brim (e.g., a baseball hat with a visor) is often the best way to achieve reduction in photophobia and sun protection.

Protection from the sun through the wearing of protective clothing and the regular application of sunscreen is essential to prevent sunburn and secondary skin changes, and to decrease the risk of skin cancer in later life. Regular skin check-ups for skin cancer are recommended for adult individuals with OCA4, especially in cases of severe hypopigmentation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with OCA4 should stay out of the sun from an early age, as cumulative ultraviolet exposure is a major risk factor for skin cancers (see Skin Cancer Risk).

Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, socks) and sunscreen with a high SPF number (total blocks with SPF 45-50+). There is no scientific evidence to indicate how high an SPF value is enough; individuals with OCA4 should use sunscreen with higher SPF values (45-50+) to lessen as much as possible the cumulative effect of ultraviolet to their skin.

Surveillance

Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment for accurate correction of refractive error are appropriate.

There is no definitive guideline supported by scientific evidence as to how often an individual should be evaluated by a dermatologist, though an evaluation of the skin for cancer screening every six months is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid prolonged exposure of the skin to the sun.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with oral-facial-digital syndrome type I (OFD1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination of the face, especially the mouth, and the hands for characteristic anomalies

Formal, age-appropriate assessment of development and behavior

Evaluation of CNS involvement

Blood pressure and serum creatinine concentration

Urinalysis, serum chemistries, and ultrasound examination of the kidneys, liver, ovary and pancreas for cysts if the individual is age ten years or older

Audiology evaluation if cleft palate is present

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Cosmetic or reconstructive surgery for clefts of the lip and/or palate, tongue nodules, and accessory frenulae; treatment as for isolated cleft palate, including speech therapy and assessment for and aggressive treatment of otitis media

Removal of accessory teeth

Orthodontia for malocclusion

Surgery to repair syndactyly, if present

Routine management of renal disease, which may require hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis and renal transplantation

Routine management of seizures

Special educational evaluation and input to address learning disabilities and other cognitive impairments

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Annual audiology evaluation and assessment of speech development and frequency of ear infections in children if cleft lip and/or cleft palate is present

Annual blood pressure examination and serum creatinine concentration to monitor renal function in individuals age ten years or older

Annual ultrasound examination for renal, hepatic, pancreatic, and ovarian cystic disease in individuals age ten years and older

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If an OFD1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic female relatives (even in the absence of oral, facial, and digital anomalies) to determine if they are at risk for renal disease.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected pregnant women should undergo careful monitoring of their blood pressure and renal function during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with COL1A1/2-related osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to assess deformities and presence of joint laxity

Hearing assessed through formal audiology

Screening for basilar impression, best performed by CT and/or MRI scanning with views across the base of the skull. There is no universal agreement on when screening for basilar impression should be done; currently, it is recommended on the basis of concerning signs or symptoms on annual physical examination or on reported symptoms by the affected individual.

Cervical spine flexion and extension radiographs, obtained when children are able to cooperate with the examination or prior to participating in sporting activities in more mildly affected individuals

Dental evaluation by age two to three years for all children with OI and at the time that teeth erupt in those with DI or at risk for DI

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management focuses on supportive therapy to minimize fractures and maximize function, minimize disability, foster independence, and maintain overall health [Marini & Gerber 1997]. Ideally, OI is managed by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in the medical management of OI, orthopedics, rehabilitation medicine, pediatric dentistry, and otology/otolaryngology.

Supportive therapy is individualized depending on the severity, the degree of impairment, and the age of the affected individual. Considerable support from medical personnel is generally required by parents caring for infants with perinatally lethal OI.

Physical medicine treatment

Parents and other caregivers should be instructed in safe handling techniques. These are mostly common sense practices in order to relieve stress on a single point. For example: lift an affected infant by bracing the torso, neck and lower body; avoid any situation where increased pressure is placed on a single point on any long bone; when assisting an affected child in standing up, do not pull excessively on an extended arm but bend down and brace a greater surface area (such as placing a hand behind the back and pulling gently from the front (using the arm) while applying pressure from the rear); avoid sudden acceleration/deceleration movements; and avoid throwing a child in the air. Older children should not ride on amusement park rides. Caregivers should avoid recreating the circumstances of a fracture, as it is likely to happen again.

The use of bracing to try to stabilize progressively deforming limbs depends in part on the subtype of OI. Progressively deforming OI has proven to be progressive despite external or internal bracing. The use of internal rods or braces to support and stabilize deforming limbs is more successful in the milder subtypes of OI and is guided by the expertise of the managing orthopedist.

Orthotics to support ankle instability are used in toddlers with delayed walking secondary to joint hypermobility and in other affected individuals who suffer recurrent subluxations of their ankle joints.

Physical activity serves a number of purposes. It provides gravitational stressors required for bone growth and remodeling. The muscles supporting joints are strengthened by activity and as an overall benefit, improved joint stability aides in overall well-being as pain levels are reduced and mobility is increased. Physical activity can be self-directed or coordinated through the services of a physical therapist. Each affected individual’s needs are unique and thus both physical and occupational therapy should be initiated for increased stability of bone, improved mobility, prevention of contractures, prevention of head and spinal deformity, aerobic fitness, and muscle strengthening

Mobility devices, such as scooters and chairs for children, and modified automobiles for adults should be considered.

Some individuals with OI experience chronic daily pain associated with both fractures and non-specific myofascial pain associated with the generalized connective tissue disorder. Pain management plays an important role in the management of OI. Some affected individuals do well with minimal analgesics, but many benefit from a multidisciplinary pain management service. Analgesics can be used to control pain from fractures.

Orthopedic treatment. Fractures are treated as they would be in unaffected children and adults with attention to the following:

The period of immobility in children with OI should be shortened as much as is practical.

Casts should be small and lightweight.

Physical therapy should begin as soon as the cast is removed to promote mobility and enhance muscle strength and bone mass.

At this time, intramedullary rodding remains a mainstay of orthopedic care to provide anatomic positioning of limbs that permits more normal function.

Progressive spinal deformities are particularly difficult to treat because of the poor quality of bone in severely affected children. Progressive scoliosis in severe OI does not respond to conservative management and response to surgical intervention may be limited.

Pharmacologic treatment. Bisphosphonates, analogs of pyrophosphate that decrease bone resorption, are being evaluated in both uncontrolled and controlled trials to assess the extent to which they can increase bone mass and bone strength and improve function in children with OI. These studies are still ongoing. Bisphosphonates have been used most extensively in severely affected children with OI; they may be useful in adults with OI as well [Adami et al 2003].

The role of treatment with bisphosphonates in changing the natural history of OI is incompletely understood. The Cochrane Collaboration is an international network which assembles reviews on various management strategies based on randomized controlled clinical trials within its database in order to improve the practice of evidence-based medicine. As of the Cochrane Collaboration’s most recent update of the OI review, bisphosphonate therapy did not appear to reduce fracture incidence but it did impact bone density and adult height [Dwan et al 2014] (full text).

An open-label trial of cyclical intravenous pamidronate (bisphosphonate) was reported by Glorieux et al [1998], and the effects of relatively long-term use in adults by Aström & Soderhall [2002] and Zeitlin et al [2003]. Falk et al [2003] replicated the study of Glorieux et al [1998] in children older than age 22 months, but did report one child with fracture non-union following treatment with pamidronate. No randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of pamidronate has been published. Bisphosphonate treatment has produced improvements in bone histomorphometry, increased bone mineral density (BMD), decreased some biochemical markers of bone resorption, and possibly reduced fracture risk. In addition, some investigators have reported decreased bone pain in young, but not older, children following treatment.

Pamidronate use is invasive and inconvenient, typically requiring intravenous infusions every three months four hours a day for three days and has real and potential complications. Recently, pamidronate has been offered even to very young children with OI, but complications including transient asymptomatic hypocalcemia [Plotkin et al 2000] and symptomatic hypocalcemia [Chien et al 2002] have been noted. The long-term consequences of lowering bone turnover in children with OI are unknown, but may include delayed bone union after fracture or osteotomy.

A randomized controlled clinical trial using the oral bisphosphonate alendronate was recently completed and the results published. Ward and colleagues found that treatment with oral alendronate for two years in children with OI significantly decreased bone turnover and increased spine areal BMD but was not associated with improved fracture outcomes [Ward et al 2011]. In a second study with a different oral bisphosphonate, Bishop and colleagues found that oral risedronate increased areal BMD and reduced first and recurrent clinical fractures in children with OI [Bishop et al 2010]. There have not been additional large placebo-controlled trials of IV bisphosphonates, and it is unlikely that additional large randomized placebo controlled studies comparing bisphosphonates with placebo to determine the impact of these agents in altering the natural history of OI will be conducted.

Zoledronic acid, a newer bisphosphonate with a longer half life, greater potency, and more convenient dosing, is being studied in children with OI. A study comparing pamidronate to zoledronic acid was completed; to date, the results have not been published.

Basilar impression. Criteria for surgical intervention are not well defined. If surgery is undertaken, it should be done in a center experienced in the procedures used.

Dental treatment. The goals are the maintenance of both primary and permanent dentition, functional bite or occlusion, optimal gingival health, and overall appearance. Pediatric dentists are the most knowledgeable about DI in children. Some consensus exists that early dental restorative coverage of the primary molars and (if possible) aesthetic coverage of the upper anterior teeth is optimal. Plastic polymers are sometimes used to coat teeth. As anxiety can be an issue with children, pre-medication for anxiolysis (e.g., nitrous oxide analgesia or midazolam) can be used for treatment in a clinic setting.

If warranted, orthodontic treatment can be initiated, but care must be taken in the use of orthodontic appliances because of the brittleness of the teeth.

Dental restorations in adults may best be done by a general dentist knowledgeable about OI or a specialist in prosthetic dentistry.

Hearing loss. Surgical repair of the middle-ear bones and creation of a prosthetic incus can improve unaided hearing.

Later hearing loss appears to have a significant sensorineural component that does not respond to middle ear surgery. Cochlear implantation has been used in a small number of individuals; outcome data are limited.

Management of lethal OI. It is appropriate to offer parents the option of allowing the infant to expire without attempting interventions such as assisted ventilation.

Other therapies. Early trials of anabolic steroids, sodium fluoride, testosterone, vitamins C and D, flavinoids, and calcitonin showed minimal or no improvement in bone formation, or too small a sample size was utilized for meaningful conclusions [reviewed in Byers & Steiner 1992].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Special attention should be paid to anesthesia concerns including proper positioning on the operating room table, for which egg crate foam is recommended.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Dental examinations twice a year for those with DI or at risk for DI

Hearing evaluation at three- to five-year intervals perhaps beginning as early as age five years until hearing loss is identified, then as indicated based on the nature and degree of hearing loss and associated interventions

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contact sports should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with OI who have significant skeletal deformity and short stature should be followed during pregnancy by a high-risk prenatal care center.

Delivery of an infant with OI by cesarean section or by vagina has about the same rate of complications for each type of OI. Delivery of an infant with OI by cesarean section is more frequent than in the general population because a non-vertex presentation cannot be corrected by external manipulation.

Therapies Under Investigation

Human growth hormone has been evaluated as an adjunctive therapy in conjunction with bisphosphonates in a randomized controlled study. In this study, growth hormone therapy was reported to correlate with improved linear growth and increased BMD [Antoniazzi et al 2010]. An additional study presented similar results in 26 children with moderate to severe OI when growth hormone was used in isolation [Marini et al 2003].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) to introduce normal mesenchymal stem cells that have the capacity to differentiate into normal osteoblasts as well as transplanted mesenchymal stromal cells which produce factors that stimulate endogenous bone growth in individuals with OI has been evaluated in a pilot clinical trial. Preliminary data was promising and a clinical to evaluate this treatment further has recently concluded [Otsuru et al 2012, www.clinicaltrials.gov].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) or later-onset CCHS (LO-CCHS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment in a pediatric respiratory physiology laboratory, with:

Clinical study of spontaneous breathing awake and asleep including (at a minimum) tidal volume, respiratory inductance plethysmography of the chest and abdomen, hemoglobin saturation with pulse waveform, end-tidal carbon dioxide level with visible waveform, and electrocardiogram; and

Evaluation of the awake and asleep responses to exogenous and endogenous challenges of hypercarbia and/or hypoxemia.

Venous or arterial blood gas or serum bicarbonate level to look for elevated carbon dioxide content at the time of presentation

Hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count to assess for polycythemia

72-hour Holter recording to assess for abrupt, prolonged asystoles

Echocardiogram to assess for changes consistent with right ventricular hypertrophy and cor pulmonale

Neurocognitive assessment to determine baseline function

Comprehensive autonomic testing of all organ systems regulated by the ANS, including but not limited to pupillometry, head up-tilt testing, thermoregulatory chamber sweat testing, Q-Sweat testing, heart rate deep breathing, Valsalva maneuver, and measures of regional blood flow in activities of daily living as well as orthostatic testing.

Clinical genetics consultation

See Table 4 for additional details.

Treatment of Manifestations

Ventilatory support. The treatment goals for classic CCHS are to secure the airway and to use chronic ventilatory support at home to compensate for the altered/absent ventilatory responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Of note, although oxygen administration without artificial ventilation improves the PaO2 (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood) and relieves cyanosis, it is not an adequate treatment of hypoventilation.

Because individuals with CCHS may experience complete respiratory arrest or severe hypoventilation and, thus, the sequelae of hypoxemia, they require monitoring of objective measures of oxygenation (i.e., pulse oximeter) and ventilation (i.e., PETco2 monitor) continuously during sleep and at regular intervals while awake. They also require observation and continuous care, especially during all sleep, by an RN trained and experienced in ventilator management.

For each of the options listed below, the goal is to provide the affected individual with the technology optimal for her/his life style needs.

Typically, the infant needing ventilatory support 24 hours per day is most safely and effectively supported via tracheostomy and use of a home mechanical ventilator. Tracheostomy is also recommended for children and adults who require ventilator support during sleep only.

As children who require continuous ventilatory support become ambulatory, diaphragm pacing by phrenic nerve stimulation can be considered to allow for increased mobility and improved quality of life. Diaphragm pacing is not typically recommended for the young child who requires only nighttime ventilatory support because the benefits do not outweigh the risks; however, for older adolescents and young adults, this could be an appropriate consideration. Tracheal decannulation is not assured in affected individuals who use diaphragm pacing during sleep.

Diaphragm pacers for the active child with CCHS should be implanted at each phrenic nerve in the chest, ideally by thoracoscopic technique [Weese-Mayer et al 1996, Shaul et al 2002, Chin et al 2012].

Older infants, toddlers, and children with diaphragm pacers should be assessed for use of a Passy-Muir one-way speaking valve while awake, allowing for vocalization and use of the upper airway on exhalation.

Children with diaphragm pacers may be assessed for capping of the tracheostomy tube while awake and paced, thereby allowing for inspiration and exhalation via the upper airway; tracheostomy is typically still required for mechanical ventilation during sleep to avoid upper airway obstruction and physiologic compromise.

Although not yet accomplished, the older child with an entirely normal airway may be able to eliminate the need for a tracheostomy by relying on diaphragm pacing while awake and on mask ventilation while asleep; however, such a child may require interim endotracheal intubation to allow for optimal oxygenation and ventilation during acute illness that requires more aggressive ventilatory management.

Cooperative older children with CCHS who consistently require ventilatory support only while sleeping may be candidates for noninvasive support with either mask ventilation or negative-pressure ventilation; however, this must be done with careful consideration of each child’s needs. If successful, tracheal decannulation can be considered (with the caveat that in the event of severe illness, interim endotracheal intubation may be required in a pediatric intensive care unit). The child who normally requires ventilatory support during sleep only may, during an intercurrent illness, also require artificial ventilation both awake and asleep.

Note: Straus et al [2010] reported that the ventilatory response to hypercarbia seemed to improve with the use of oral contraceptives in two young women heterozygous for 20/25 and 20/26 genotypes. Ongoing studies have not confirmed this report.

Cardiac. Prolonged transient asystoles may present as syncope and/or staring spells, and may be of such significant duration (≥3.0 seconds) as to warrant placement of a cardiac pacemaker for management [Silvestri et al 2000, Gronli et al 2008].

Hirschsprung disease. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview.

Tumors of neural crest origin. Neuroblastomas are removed surgically and followed by chemotherapy if they have advanced beyond Stage 1. Other tumors of neural crest origin are treated individually by location and type, though surgical removal is typically recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Mask ventilation in the infant and young child is strongly discouraged. Mask ventilation is not adequately stable as a life-sustaining support, with risk for repeated hypoxemia and neurocognitive compromise in the infant and young child. If mask ventilation is used, an actual ventilator is needed as the traditional Bi-PAP machine is not approved for life-sustaining support. Also, close longitudinal follow up by specialists with craniofacial and dental expertise is essential as the potential for doing harm with facial deformation is an important consideration and may necessitate midface advancement in the teen years.

Surveillance

For all individuals with CCHS, the following evaluations are recommended:

At least yearly (every 6 months until age 3 years) comprehensive, multiple-day in-hospital physiologic evaluation (see Table 4)

Yearly echocardiogram to identify right ventricular hypertrophy and/or cor pulmonale

Yearly hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte counts to identify polycythemia

Table 4 summarizes the recommended clinical evaluations for affected individuals with CCHS based on the PHOX2B variant present.

Table 4. 

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

PHOX2B Variant

Annual In-Hospital Comprehensive Testing 1

Annual Neurocognitive Assessment

Annual 72-hr Holter and ECG

Hirschsprung Disease Assessment

Tumors of Neural Crest Origin Assessment

PARM genotype:20/24, 20/25

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/26, 20/27

X

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/2820/33

X

X

X

X

X 2

NPARM

X

X

X

X

X 3

Deletion/ duplication 4

X

X

X

X

X 2

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

1. 

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

2. 

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

3. 

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

4. 

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Ideally, children with CCHS should not go swimming. If they do, they should be carefully supervised, regardless of the presence or absence of a tracheostomy. Children with CCHS should not compete in underwater swimming contests as they cannot perceive the asphyxia that occurs with drowning and breath-holding and, therefore, are likely to swim longer and farther than children without CCHS, thereby increasing the risk of drowning. Furthermore, breath-holding contests can lead to asphyxia and/or death.

Alcohol (respiratory depression), recreational drugs (varied effects), and prescribed as well as non-prescribed medications/sedatives/anesthetics that could induce respiratory depression should be avoided [Chen et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The molecular genetic test method used to evaluate parents, children, and at-risk sibs of individuals with CCHS depends on the pathogenic variant identified in the proband (see Testing Strategy). Parents of children with a known PHOX2B variant should be tested for the family-specific variant to determine their risk for later-onset CCHS or mosaicism.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Though not prospectively evaluated, the ventilatory needs of a pregnant woman with CCHS warrant careful consideration by the obstetrician.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual with optic atrophy type 1 (OPA1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of visual acuity, color vision, and visual fields

Assessment of extraocular muscles (the affected individual is asked to follow the ophthalmoscope with his/her eyes without moving the head)

Hearing evaluation: auditory brain stem responses (ABRs), auditory evoked potentials (AEPs), and evoked otoacoustic emissions

Oral glucose tolerance test

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No treatment for OPA1 is of proven efficacy.

Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids).

For treatment of sensorineural hearing loss, see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview.

For treatment of ataxia, see Ataxia Overview.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual ophthalmologic examination, including measurement of visual acuity and visual fields and optical coherence tomography (OCT);

Annual hearing evaluation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with an OPA1 pathogenic variant are advised:

Not to smoke;

To moderate their alcohol intake;

To use sunglasses to limit UV exposure;

Note: While limiting UV exposure is a good practice, no evidence for its effectiveness exists.

To avoid medications (antibiotics, antivirals) that interfere with mitochondrial metabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A study using the antioxidant EPI-743 in individuals with autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA), including persons with OPA1, is in preparation in Italy (Dr. Valerio Carelli, University of Bologna).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with otopalatodigital (OPD) spectrum disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Full clinical examination

Full radiologic skeletal survey

Audiometry (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Ear, nose, and throat examination

Renal tract ultrasound examination

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Deafness is managed with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). The conductive hearing loss can be caused by fused and misshapen ossicles; attempts to separate the ossicles are usually unsuccessful and can lead to formation of a perilymphatic gusher.

Stridor in the neonatal period on account of laryngeal stenosis rarely requires surgical intervention and is non-progressive with growth.

Cosmetic surgery to correct the fronto-orbital deformity has been attempted in some individuals. Re-growth post surgery does not seem to occur [Kung & Sloan 1998]. Hand and foot malformations may also require surgery.

Orthopedic surgery

Surgical correction of limb bowing has not been reported.

Several individuals have had scoliosis surgically addressed, with satisfactory results.

Chest expansion surgery has been attempted in several individuals with Melnick-Needles syndrome, with only marginal clinical benefit.

Apnea prevention. Micrognathia and tracheobronchomalacia in severely affected individuals can lead to airway collapse and sleep apnea that have been successfully corrected with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) [Lan et al 2006] and mandibular distraction in the most severe instances of MNS.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthetists should be aware of the associated laryngeal stenosis, if intubation and ventilation are required [Leggett 1988, Mehta & Schou 1988].

Surveillance

Clinical evaluation for development of orthopedic manifestations (e.g., hand contractures in FMD, scoliosis in FMD and MNS) is appropriate. Head size and shape should be monitored as part of the surveillance for evolving craniosynostosis.

Monitoring of hearing loss should be ongoing, as the sensorineural component can be progressive.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Consider molecular genetic testing for the family-specific mutation in all at-risk relatives

Because affected individuals may benefit from early evaluations for hearing loss and orthopedic complications, including scoliosis, molecular genetic testing for the family-specific mutation in all at-risk relatives should be considered.

If molecular genetic testing is not an option for an at-risk child, evaluations for hearing loss and orthopedic complications, including scoliosis, should be instituted as soon as possible after a clinical diagnosis is established in the at-risk relative.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome, the following evaluations by a multidisciplinary team (including craniofacial surgeon, ophthalmologist, pediatrician, pediatric urologist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, speech pathologist, and clinical geneticist) are recommended:

Past medical history and physical examination with attention to head and facial measurements, palate, heart, genitourinary system, and lower respiratory system

Complete eye evaluation including assessment of visual acuity, refractive error, and ocular alignment for possible strabismus

Assessment of hypospadias by a urologist, including ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal/urinary tract abnormalities in males with severe hypospadias

Laryngoscopy and chest x-ray in individuals who have choking with feeding, recurrent pneumonia, and/or aspiration

Assessment of cleft lip/palate (CLP) by a craniofacial surgeon

Age-appropriate assessment of development and intellectual abilities

Assessment of anal position and patency

Echocardiogram

Cranial imaging

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of anomalies by a multidisciplinary team (including craniofacial surgeon, ophthalmologist, pediatrician, pediatric urologist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, speech pathologist, and clinical geneticist) to help assure coordination of care is indicated.

Treatment as needed by an ophthalmologist

Surgical intervention as needed for hypospadias

Surgical treatment of medically significant laryngotracheoesophageal (LTE) abnormalities; often tracheostomy is necessary initially to assure an adequate airway.

Surgical management for cleft lip/palate and other craniofacial anomalies; therapy for speech problems secondary to the cleft lip and palate

Neuropsychological support; many males with X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome require special educational programs.

Surgical intervention for imperforate anus

Surgical repair as needed for heart defects

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

All primary manifestations are present at birth. To date no factors that can influence their expression have been identified.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antireflux pharmacologic therapy minimizes the risk for aspiration until laryngeal competence is assured.

Surveillance

Regular follow-up depending on the type of malformations present:

Craniofacial team follow-up for those with cleft lip/palate, including regular monitoring of hearing

Urology follow-up for those with significant hypospadias and/or renal defects

Cardiac follow-up for those with cardiac defects

Gastroenterology, pulmonary, and/or surgical follow-up for those with LTE defects

Gastroenterology and/or surgical follow-up for those with anal defects

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation for swallowing difficulties by history and in more severe cases with a videoendoscopic swallowing study (VESS) and/or videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) [Dodds et al 1990, Langmore et al 1991, St Guily et al 1995, Périé et al 1998].

VESS gives indirect signs of upper esophageal sphincter (UES) dysfunction

VFSS gives a direct evaluation of the UES using radiopaque barite in the tracheobronchial tree

The drink test, a global quantitative functional evaluation of swallowing, is abnormal when it takes longer than seven seconds to drink 80 mL of ice-cold water [Bouchard et al 1992, Brais et al 1995]. Questionnaires can also be used to evaluate the degree of dysphagia (i.e., the Mc Horney score [McHorney et al 2002] and the Salassa grade [Salassa 1999].

Neuromuscular examination performed by a neurologist to determine overall disease progression and the presence (and severity) of ptosis, dysphagia, proximal weakness, and the presence or absence of any other neurologic findings

Consideration of muscle biopsy in those cases with more severe or complicated presentations

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Ptosis

Surgery is recommended when ptosis interferes with vision or appears to cause cervical pain secondary to constant dorsiflexion of the neck. The two types of blepharoplasty used to correct the ptosis are resection of the levator palpebrae aponeurosis and frontal suspension of the eyelids [Codere 1993].

Resection of the aponeurosis is easily done, but usually needs to be repeated once or twice [Rodrigue & Molgat 1997].

Frontal suspension of the eyelids uses a thread of muscle fascia as a sling; the fascia is inserted through the tarsal plate of the upper eyelid and the ends are attached in the frontalis muscle, which is relatively preserved in OPMD [Codere 1993]. The major advantage of frontal suspension of the eyelids is that it is permanent; however, the procedure requires general anesthesia.

Dysphagia

Food should be cut into small pieces.

Although no controlled trials have been performed [Hill et al 2004], surgical intervention for dysphagia should be considered when symptomatic dysphagia is accompanied by marked weight loss, near-fatal choking, and/or recurrent pneumonia [Duranceau et al 1983, St Guily et al 1995, Périé et al 1997, Coiffier et al 2006].

Cricopharyngeal myotomy, consisting of extramucosal section of the cricopharyngeal muscle that improves swallowing through the upper esophageal sphincter [Montgomery & Lynch 1971, Duranceau et al 1980, St Guily et al 1994, St Guily et al 1995, Duranceau 1997], is easily performed and immediately improves symptoms in most cases [Duranceau et al 1983]; however, in a very high proportion of patients progressive dysphagia recurs within years [Coiffier et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The major complications of OPMD are aspiration pneumonia, weight loss, and social withdrawal because of frequent choking while eating. To reduce the risk for these complications:

Annual flu vaccination is recommended for elderly affected individuals

Consultation should be sought promptly for a productive cough because of the increased risk for lung abscesses.

Dietary supplements should be added if weight loss is significant.

When eating in social settings, affected individuals should either avoid eating or choose foods that are easy to swallow.

General anesthesia is not contraindicated even though individuals with OPMD may respond differently to certain anesthetics [Caron et al 2005].

Surveillance

The frequency of follow-up neurologic evaluations depends on the degree of ptosis, dysphagia, and muscle weakness.

Perform routine ophthalmologic evaluation o determine if ptosis interferes with driving or is associated with neck pain, and or if the eyelids cover more than 50% of the pupil, findings that might lead to consideration of surgical intervention.

Perform routine reevaluation for functional signs of dysphagia using videoscopy and fiberoscopy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Repetitive dilatations of the upper-esophageal sphincter with bougies [Mathieu et al 1997, Manjaly et al 2012] and botulinum toxin injection of the cricopharyngeal muscle [Restivo et al 2000] have been suggested as treatment for dysphagia.

An autologous cell transplantation clinical phase I/IIa study (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00773227) has also been recently described [Périé et al 2014]. The trial was based on the observation that cells isolated from unaffected muscles of persons with OPMD are able to proliferate and differentiate normally, whereas cells isolated from affected muscles have reduced myogenicity (ability to proliferate and differentiate normally) [Périé et al 2006]. The therapeutic strategy is to isolate muscle progenitors (myoblasts) from clinically unaffected muscles of persons with OPMD and implant them into dystrophic pharyngeal muscles to reinforce their motor ability and restore contractility and, thus, reduce the dysphagia. The conclusions of this trial on 12 patients with OPMD support the hypothesis that an injection of autologous myoblasts into pharyngeal muscles is a safe and efficient procedure [Périé et al 2014].

In cellular models of OPMD, investigators have reduced cellular toxicity by inducing heat shock protein expression using ZnSO4, 8-hydroxyquinoline, ibuprofen, and indomethacin [Wang et al 2005] or exposing cells to an anti-PABPN1 single-domain antibody called intrabody that interferes with oligomerization [Verheesen et al 2006]. These intrabodies also reduced intranuclear inclusion (INI) formation and symptoms related to OPMD in a drosophila OPMD model [Chartier et al 2009].

More recently, investigators have tested molecules that interfere with the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway such as lithium chloride [Abu-Baker et al 2013].

In a transgenic mouse model of OPMD, investigators have reduced inclusion formation and cell death with agents that interfere with protein aggregation such as doxycycline [Davies et al 2005] and trehalose [Davies et al 2006].These studies suggest that therapeutic trials in OPMD are possible given that some of the tested molecules have already been given to humans.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Plasma ammonia concentration

Plasma amino acid analysis

Laboratory values that reflect nutritional status (e.g., vitamin D level, ferritin, pre-albumin)

Liver function tests (liver enzymes, bilirubin, albumin)

PT/PTT and fibrinogen

Developmental/neuropsychological/psychological evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is best provided by a clinical geneticist and a nutritionist experienced in the treatment of metabolic disease.

Care of Hyperammonemic Coma

Care should be provided by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a tertiary care center experienced in the management of individuals with OTC deficiency. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following.

Rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia

Level should be 200 μmol/L or lower even if a diagnosis has not yet been established because of the severely toxic effect of an elevated ammonia level on the brain.

The fastest method for lowering the ammonia level is hemodialysis [Tuchman 1992, McBryde et al 2004]:

A neonate should not be hemodialysed longer than four hours and should then be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

An older individual can be dialysed longer and should also be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization.

Depending on the height of the ammonia level (≤1500 μmol/L), one can also start with high flow hemofiltration methods to achieve a similarly speedy reduction of the ammonia level and then switch to regular hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

Note: Peritoneal dialysis is ineffective for management of acute hyperammonemia and is not recommended.

Ammonia scavenger therapy

Treatment allows an alternative pathway for the excretion of excess nitrogen (see Table 2).

Nitrogen scavenger therapy is available as an intravenous infusion of a mixture of sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate for acute management and as an oral preparation of phenylbutyrate or sodium benzoate for long-term maintenance therapy.

Citrulline is supplemented at 170 mg/kg/day or 3.8g/m2/day (enterally).

Table 2. 

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Patient Weight

Components of Infusion Solution

Loading 1 and Maintenance Dose 2, 3

Sodium phenylacetate & sodium benzoate 4

Arginine HCl injection, 10%

Sodium phenylacetate

Sodium benzoate

Arginine HCl 5

<25 kg

Undiluted: 2.5 mL (contains 250 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

2.0 mL at 100 mg/mL

250 mg/kg

250 mg/kg

200 mg/kg

≥25 kg

Undiluted: 55 mL (contains 5,500 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

40 mL at 100 mg/mL

5,500 mg/m2

5,500 mg/m2

4,000 mg/m2

Batshaw et al [2001]

1. 

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

2. 

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

3. 

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

4. 

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

5. 

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Batshaw et al [2001]

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Reversal of catabolism

Provide calories from glucose and fat, and resume protein intake (in the form of natural protein and an essential amino acid mix) no later than 24 hours after protein intake was discontinued

Note: Persons on hemodialysis or hemofiltration in particular need adequate nutrition to overcome catabolism because nutrients are removed by these procedures. Discontinuation of protein intake should not exceed 24 hours because deficiency of essential amino acids results in muscle breakdown and uncontrolled nitrogen release. Daily quantitative plasma amino acid analysis should guide nutritional therapy, the goal of which is to keep essential amino acid levels in the normal range.

Use of a high glucose infusion rate supported by continuous insulin infusion to maintain high set point normoglycemia (140 mg/dL) as needed. For a newborn in crisis the goal is to deliver at least 100 kcal/kg/day, mostly from glucose and fat.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage

Affected individuals who are intubated and sedated may not show clinical signs of seizures, which are prevalent in acute hyperammonemia. EEG surveillance is thus highly recommended to allow electroencephalographic detection and subsequent treatment of seizures.

Note: Phenobarbital is removed by dialysis and valproic acid is contraindicated in urea cycle disorders.

The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007] but has yet to be proven efficacious. A pilot study showed feasibility and safety (see Therapies Under Investigation).

No other interventions (besides lowering the ammonia level) have proven efficacy for neuroprotection in hyperammonemic coma due to a urea cycle disorder or other conditions.

Long-Term Treatment

Long-term treatment (including restriction of protein intake, use of nitrogen scavengers, and in some cases liver transplantation) is aimed at promoting growth and development and preventing hyperammonemic episodes.

Protein intake

should be restricted to the required dietary allowance (RDA) for protein or the minimum amount necessary to allow growth and prevent catabolism depending on the severity of the disease. Use of an essential amino acid mixture is generally necessary to maintain normal essential amino acid levels in those on significant protein restriction, even persons with partial OTC deficiency. The diet should also provide vitamins, minerals, and trace elements, either in a calorie-rich, protein-free formula or in the form of supplements.

Although protein restriction is the mainstay of therapy, when protein intake is too low, catabolism can cause chronic hyperammonemia just as high protein intake does. Careful monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations is necessary to detect essential amino acid deficiencies. High glutamine concentrations are interpreted as evidence of poor metabolic control and chronic hyperammonemia.

Nitrogen scavengers provide alternative routes for nitrogen disposal and allow more protein intake [Batshaw et al 2001, Berry & Steiner 2001].

Although it removes only half as much nitrogen as phenylbutyrate, oral sodium benzoate is the ammonia scavenger of choice in European countries and Australia rather than phenylbutyrate because it is felt to have fewer side effects.

Phenylbutyrate causes menstrual dysfunction and body odor, and appears to deplete branched chain amino acids; sodium benzoate causes hypokalemia due to increased renal losses of potassium [Scaglia et al 2004, Häberle et al 2012].

Recommendations for ammonia scavenger therapy:

Long-term ammonia scavenger treatment may consist of 450-600 mg/kg/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 170 mg/kg/day of L-citrulline in children <25 kg, and 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 3.8 g/m2/day of L-citrulline in individuals weighing ≥25 kg. Treatment should be accompanied by an appropriate low-protein diet [Batshaw et al 2001].

Note: (1) Citrulline offers the advantage over arginine of incorporating aspartate into the pathway thus pulling one additional nitrogen molecule into the urea cycle. (2) Sodium benzoate is being used instead of sodium phenylbutyrate in conjunction with L-citrulline. The recommended dose is ≤250 mg/kg/d in children <25 kg and a maximum of 12 g/d [Häberle et al 2012].

Glycerol phenylbutyrate, which is significantly more palatable than sodium phenylbutyrate, is another treatment option. It has the same mechanism of action as sodium phenylbutyrate.

Liver transplantation. No matter how mild OTC deficiency appears to be, stressors can at any age precipitate a hyperammonemic crisis that becomes life threatening. The fear of such an event, along with the restrictions on daily living imposed by the dietary therapy, prompt many families to consider liver transplantation even if the disease has been manageable up to that point with diet and medication.

In severe, neonatal-onset urea cycle disorders, liver transplantation remains the most effective means of preventing further hyperammonemic crises and neurodevelopmental deterioration [Leonard & McKiernan 2004]. It is typically performed by age six months.

Females and males with partial OTC deficiency can, after diagnosis, be maintained on a low-protein diet and oral ammonia scavenger treatment for life; the need for liver transplant depends on the individual and is typically considered when an affected individual is unstable and has frequent hyperammonemic episodes.

Living related donor livers are often considered for partial liver transplantation (LT) in individuals with a urea cycle disorder. The suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor has been discussed [Wong 2012]. According to Wakiya et al [2012], enzyme activity measurement in a liver biopsy sample is useful in determining the suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor. However, this approach is problematic for several reasons:

A liver biopsy sample may not adequately represent the enzyme activity in the liver of a heterozygous female. It can thus not be known whether a transplanted lobe contains enough enzyme activity to prevent symptoms in the recipient.

After partial hepatectomy the liver of the donor mother will regenerate. Since the X-chromosome inactivation pattern in the regenerated liver in the donor cannot be predicted, it is also impossible to predict whether the overall enzyme activity in the donor mother will remain adequate to prevent symptoms in her.

Likewise, the lobe that is transplanted into the recipient child will undergo changes after transplantation; thus, the enzyme activity in the donated lobe cannot be accurately determined at the time of transplantation, since additional post-transplantation changes could make the final enzyme activity in the recipient even more unpredictable.

Note: The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity to bridge the time to liver transplantation in unstable individuals with neonatal-onset disease is currently under investigation (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Instruction in small classroom settings to minimize distraction and extra support to manage executive function deficits are often required and necessary to maximize success in school.

Monotherapy or combination therapy with non-stimulant or stimulant medication is often necessary for the treatment of ADHD (at least during times of learning) [Gyato et al 2004, Krivitzky et al 2009]. However, these medications negatively affect appetite and their use warrants even closer monitoring of intake and body weight to avoid a catabolic state that could lead to hyperammonemia.

Seizure disorders. Valproic acid is contraindicated for treatment of seizures in urea cycle disorders because it can cause a hyperammonemic crisis.

Learning disability/intellectual disability. Brain damage from an initial hyperammonemic coma, frequent hyperammonemic episodes with moderate to severe hyperammonemia, and chronic hyperammonemia can lead to learning disabilities and intellectual disability. Appropriate support services are necessary to optimize intellectual outcome in these individuals.

Also see Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In neonatal-onset OTC deficiency diagnosed prenatally, prospective intravenous (IV) treatment with ammonia scavengers within a few hours of birth (before the ammonia level rises) can prevent a hyperammonemic crisis and coma.

Later on, prevention of hyperammonemic episodes is focused on restriction of dietary protein through low-protein diet and administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs balanced with supplementation of essential amino acids (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are recommended:

Avoid over-restriction of protein/amino acids, a common cause of hyperammonemia and poor growth. Gastrostomy tube feedings help avoid malnutrition in affected individuals who self-restrict protein intake and object to the taste of the essential amino acid formulas used for the treatment of urea cycle disorders.

Minimize risk of respiratory and gastrointestinal illnesses through hand hygiene.

Give immunizations on the usual schedule, including annual flu vaccine.

Provide multivitamin and vitamin D supplementation.

Use antipyretics appropriately. Note: Ibuprofen is preferred in the home setting over acetaminophen because of the potential liver toxicity of acetaminophen.

See also Therapies Under Investigation regarding the use of hypothermia as neuroprotective therapy to prevent intellectual disability, a complication of hyperammonemia.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

At the start of therapy, measure plasma ammonia concentration at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months, as possible.

At the start of therapy, perform plasma amino acid (PAA) analysis at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months.

Perform liver function tests depending on symptoms every three to six months or more often if they have been previously elevated.

Perform neuropsychological testing at the time that significant developmental milestones are expected to be achieved (e.g., at 6-9 months, 18 months, 3 years)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Valproate

Haloperidol

Fasting

Stress, especially physical stress; potentially also psychological stress

Systemic corticosteroids because they cause catabolism, which can trigger a hyperammonemic crisis

Note: If systemic corticosteroids need to be administered as a life-saving therapy (e.g., during a severe asthma attack or an anaphylactic reaction), a metabolic specialist should be consulted; at the same time, preemptive measures (e.g., increased calorie intake) should be instituted to prevent catabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (both male and female) of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If prenatal testing has not been performed, it is appropriate to perform biochemical (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level) and molecular genetic testing on at-risk newborns (males and females) as soon after birth as possible to clarify their disease status so that the appropriate treatment or surveillance of those with the family-specific pathogenic variant can be promptly established before the child experiences a metabolic crisis.

Biochemical analysis (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level), an allopurinol challenge test (in older individuals), and/or OTC enzyme activity measurement in liver (males only) if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

In general for children with neonatal-onset disease, such testing cannot be performed rapidly enough to prevent a metabolic crisis. Therefore, preventive measures at birth should be instituted until such a time as the diagnosis can be ruled out (see the description of prospective treatment in Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Heterozygous females are at risk of becoming catabolic during pregnancy and (especially) post partum [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000, Mendez-Figueroa et al 2010, Celik et al 2011, Lipskind et al 2011, Ituk et al 2012].

A symptomatic heterozygous female needs to be treated throughout pregnancy according to her pre-pregnancy protocol with adaptation for her needs during pregnancy. In the peripartum and immediate postpartum periods proactive measures to prevent catabolism include, for example, administration of a 10% dextrose solution with appropriate electrolytes at 1.5 times maintenance and addition of intralipids as needed to meet caloric requirements during these periods.

In an asymptomatic female known to be heterozygous, precautions should be taken in the peripartum and postpartum period to prevent catabolism; in addition, measurement of ammonia levels and administration of dextrose should be considered as heterozygous females have become symptomatic for the first time in the peripartum period.

Therapies Under Investigation

The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007]. Two case reports were published about its use in UCD [Whitelaw et al 2001, Vargha et al 2012].

Whole-body therapeutic hypothermia (TH) may decrease ammonia production through an overall slowing of metabolism. Decreased ammonia production was indicated in acute liver failure studies by lower arterial ammonia levels with cooling. The success of hemodialysis in lowering the ammonia level depends on whether the amount of ammonia removed by dialysis exceeds the amount of ammonia produced. If TH reduces ammonia production, dialysis will be more effective. In addition to its direct effect on ammonia metabolism TH may have a neuroprotective effect, at least in part due to reduced brain uptake of ammonia, reduced brain glutamine production, normal osmolyte levels, reduced intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow, and improved cerebral perfusion [Jalan et al 1999, Jalan et al 2004].

Results of a pilot study assessing the feasibility and safety of whole-body therapeutic hypothermia during neonatal hyperammonemic coma have been published [ClinicalTrials.gov, Lichter-Konecki et al 2013]. While the study was not able to determine if the treatment was efficacious, the authors concluded that it was feasible and could be conducted safely.

The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity is under investigation (see ClinicalTrials.gov).

In September 2009 a meeting in London assessed the ‘state of the art’ of hepatocyte transplantation and limits to its success; according to Puppi et al [2012] the participating experts agreed that, ‘to obtain sufficient levels of repopulation of the liver with donor cells in patients with metabolic liver disease, some form of liver preconditioning would likely be required to enhance the engraftment and/or proliferation of donor cells. It was reported that clinical protocols for preconditioning by hepatic irradiation, portal vein embolization, and surgical resection had been developed.’

Use of human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells is under consideration. The principal concept is the use of an affected individual’s somatic cells to generate pluripotent stem cells that are then induced to become hepatocytes. Gene therapy could be performed on those hepatocytes in vitro, and the ‘corrected’ hepatocytes could then be used for liver regeneration in the same person without the need for immune suppression [Soto-Gutierrez et al 2011].

Current gene therapy approach. An adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector construct harboring the OTC cDNA has been developed; its efficient delivery to the liver of animal models has been accomplished [Wang et al 2010, Wang et al 2012a, Wang et al 2012b]. However, most recent efforts have focused on AAV-mediated gene correction using the CRISPR-Cas9 system [Yang et al 2016].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with complete plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Questions to elicit a patient’s history of:

Epistaxis

Poor wound healing

Bleeding in association with injury or trauma

Bleeding with dental extractions

Additional oral bleeding

Post-surgical bleeding

In females:

Heavy menstrual bleeding

Postpartum bleeding

Bleeding during pregnancy

Preterm delivery

Bleeding in association with ovulation

History of therapies tried in the past and the response to each specific therapy

Note that response to antifibrinolytic therapy supports the diagnosis of complete PAI-1 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Evaluation by a hematologist with training in hemostasis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Bleeding disorder. Management by a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is highly recommended. In the US, such teams are often identified through the federally funded hemophilia treatment center network.

Severe bleeding manifestations, including intracranial hemorrhage (with or without hematoma evacuation) have been successfully managed with intravenous antifibrinolytics. Response to both epsilon-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid have been documented.

If PAI-1 activity needs to be increased prior to achieving the therapeutic steady state level of antifibrinolytics, infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) (10-15 mL/kg) can be used. Duration of use of FFP is individualized based on clinical course and response to therapy. Note: The use of FFP does not appear to be effective in pregnancy for the prevention of bleeding in women with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Iwaki et al 2012]. Fresh-frozen plasma to replace PAI-1 during pregnancy may be difficult due to the PAI-1 level achieved with plasma, the volume required, and the need for repeated infusion, all of which may be associated with risk of volume overload and/or infusion reactions [Gupta et al 2014].

Heavy menstrual bleeding can often be effectively managed with antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppression therapy (oral contraceptives).

Occasionally, patients with complete PAI-1 deficiency experience excessive menstrual bleeding or bleeding following a procedure or trauma that requires infusion of packed red blood cells to manage the acute blood loss.

Education regarding bleeding manifestations and when to seek treatment includes the following:

For females, anticipatory counseling regarding onset of menses and potential complications

Prompt reporting of injuries and planned procedures to allow early initiation of treatment to prevent significant bleeding

Cardiac fibrosis. There is currently no specific treatment for cardiac fibrosis associated with complete PAI-1 deficiency; treatment is symptomatic.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Antifibrinolytics should be used to prevent bleeding for surgical and dental procedures, childbirth, and other invasive procedures. Antifibrinolytics can be administered IV, PO, or topically, the latter especially during dental procedures.

Women who have heavy menstrual bleeding often benefit from continuous or intermittent prophylactic use of the antifibrinolytics tranexamic acid and epsilon-aminocaproic acid.

Surveillance

Bleeding disorder. Regular follow up with a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is recommended. Such teams are often identified through the federal hemophilia treatment center network in the US.

For menstruating females:

Regular monitoring: hemoglobin and/or hematocrit and iron studies including ferritin for possible iron deficiency and/or anemia

Assessment of the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions such as antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppressive agents (oral contraceptives)

Cardiac fibrosis. Because of clinical experience (albeit limited to date) with cardiac fibrosis in persons with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Flevaris et al 2017; Author, personal observation], screening echocardiogram can be considered beginning at age 15 years. In those with no cardiac findings, follow-up screening in two years is indicated; and in those with cardiac findings, follow up yearly or more frequently if indicated by a cardiologist [Ghosh et al 2010; Ghosh et al 2013; Author, personal observation].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Medications that affect coagulation including aspirin, ibuprofen, and some herbal remedies

High-risk activities such as contact sports

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an individual with complete PAI-1 deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurement of PAI-1 antigen levels and PAI-1 activity if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Recommendations based on published findings during pregnancies in two women with complete PAI-1 deficiency are administration of either tranexamic acid (25 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 1300 milligrams, orally 3-4x/day) or epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) (100 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 3 g, orally 4x/day) for intermittent bleeding in the first and second trimester, from 26 weeks’ gestation through delivery, and for at least two weeks post partum [Heiman et al 2014]. Note that evidence that these recommendations would be effective in all pregnancies of women with complete PAI-1 deficiency is lacking.

A woman with complete PAI-1 deficiency was treated with FFP during three pregnancies at eight to 11 weeks’ gestation two to three times per week; treatment was increased to daily at 20-28 weeks’ gestation. The first pregnancy ended in miscarriage at 19 weeks. The second and third pregnancies were delivered at 32 and 27 weeks’ gestation, respectively, as a result of uncontrollable contractions and placental abruption [Iwaki et al 2012].

Of note, the teratogenicity of EACA and tranexamic acid is unknown and information regarding their safety during pregnancy and lactation is limited. There is a need to establish dosing guidelines for the use of antifibrinolytics during pregnancy and the postpartum period.

To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, see www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary pancreatitis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of pancreatic exocrine function (see Chronic Pancreatitis, Maldigestion)

Evaluation of pancreatic endocrine function (i.e., assessment of glucose tolerance)

Consideration of pancreatic cancer surveillance in persons with chronic pancreatitis

Treatment of Manifestations

Medical treatment and management for hereditary pancreatitis are similar to those for non-hereditary pancreatitis.

Acute Pancreatitis

Treatment of acute pancreatitis usually focuses on pain management and discontinuation of smoking and alcohol use to slow the rate of progression and to decrease the likelihood of complications, including pancreatic cancer.

Pancreatic pain can result from pancreatic duct obstruction, parenchyma hypertension, pancreatic ischemia, inflammation, neuropathy, and central pain [Fasanella et al 2007, Mullady et al 2011]. Genetic factors, many of which remain unknown or not convincingly accountable, are thought to play a role in pain perception, tolerance, and response to medication.

Analgesics are offered when pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is not sufficient to control pain.

Antioxidants have been reported to improve pain control in a few individuals with hereditary pancreatitis [Perrault 1994, Uomo et al 2001] and non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Endoscopic or surgical interventions may be useful for treating obstructive pain [Clarke et al 2012].

Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation is sometimes considered in patients with severe pain and/or inflammation that cannot be controlled by other approaches [Bellin et al 2011].

Endoscopic and surgical interventions are also useful for complications such as pseudocysts, bile-duct or duodenal obstruction, infected pancreatic necrosis, and malignancy.

Obstructions or calcifications in the pancreatic ducts may be relieved by procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), in which endoscopic cannulation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct is followed by injection of radiographic dye. Decompressing/clearing of blockage decreases pain as well as the number of hospitalizations required and recurrent attacks in many persons with HP [Dever et al 2010]. Of note, patients with obstruction of a shorter duration have better outcomes than patients in whom treatment is delayed [Clarke et al 2012]. Note: Because of the risk for acute pancreatitis following ERCP, it is only recommended for obtaining brushings (for evaluation of strictures) and for therapeutic intervention, not for diagnosis.

Although a variety of surgical approaches are used for non-cancerous pancreatic disorders that cause pain or obstruction from multiple strictures, pancreatic surgery in those with hereditary pancreatitis is unlikely to stop the underlying inflammatory process. Furthermore, pancreatic surgery often reduces the number of islet cells which are essential in pancreatic endocrine function [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. Because total pancreatectomy with islet cell auto-transplantation (TPIAT) may be a future option for persons with HP, retaining as many islet cells as possible is an important consideration before proceeding with any pancreatic surgery [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2011].

Pancreatectomy. Although controversial, pancreatectomy has been performed as a last resort to improve the quality of life in those with uncontrolled pain, particularly young adults and children [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2014]. It is recommended that persons in whom pancreatectomy is being considered be referred to specialized centers. In persons with adequate endocrine pancreatic function, islet cell isolation and autotransplantation may be considered at the time of total pancreatectomy [Bellin et al 2008]. Note: Caution is needed for islet autotransplantation in older adults with longstanding chronic pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus because the number of islet cells is limited and because of the potential for transplanting malignant cells.

Total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (TPIAT) is increasingly used to manage severe manifestations of pancreatitis; however, in most cases pancreatitis can be managed without TPIAT. Thus, TPIAT should only be used as a last resort [Bellin et al 2014]. See Bellin et al [2014] for consensus guidelines (full text).

Issues to consider prior to referral for TPIAT:

The operation is irreversible.

Serious and life-threatening complications are associated with the operation (as with other major surgeries).

Pain relief is not universal.

Protection from diabetes mellitus is often incomplete and of variable duration.

Life-long, full-dose pancreatic digestive enzyme replacement therapy will be necessary.

Chronic Pancreatitis

Treatment of chronic pancreatitis focuses on improving quality of life by managing pancreatic pain, maldigestion, and diabetes mellitus.

Pain is a variable complication of recurrent and chronic inflammation and ranges from minimal to severe and disabling. Pain can result from inflammation, ischemia, obstructed pancreatic ducts, pseudocysts, and/or maldigestion [Fasanella et al 2007].

One small study from Italy suggested that vitamins and antioxidants reduced pain in hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]; two larger studies found that antioxidants helped relieve pain in idiopathic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Pain from maldigestion can be improved with pancreatic digestive enzymes [Dhanasekaran & Toskes 2010, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011].

If the main pancreatic duct is obstructed, a trial of endoscopic treatment is often used for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic reasons in determining longer-term therapy.

Surgery has been reported to be helpful by many patients; however, surgical approaches should be postponed if islet autotransplantation is being considered.

Pancreatic islet autotransplantation, available in several major centers expert in the treatment of pancreatitis, is used in an attempt to both control severe pain and delay the development of diabetes mellitus [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. It is recommended that physicians and patients work closely with expert centers since pancreatic islet autotransplantation is irreversible.

Maldigestion results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which is the failure of the pancreas to produce enough digestive enzymes to digest a meal.

Clinical measures of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency include observation of steatorrhea (fat and oil in the stool), symptoms of maldigestion (bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea), and nutritional deficiencies (e.g., fat-soluble vitamin deficiency and protein malnutrition with low albumin, prealbumin, or retinal binding protein).

Pancreatic enzyme deficiency can be identified using invasive or noninvasive testing (see review by Lieb & Draganov [2008]). The first two are most commonly used by expert centers in the United States:

Fecal elastase-1 analysis (ScheBo® Biotech AG; Giessen, Germany) is a simple and relatively inexpensive test that evaluates the amount of human elastase-1 present in the stool. It can be falsely positive with diarrhea, but can be used while an individual is taking pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. The test is insensitive for mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [Amann et al 1996].

Secretin-stimulated pancreatic bicarbonate secretion testing (ChiRhoStim®, ChiRhoClin, Inc; Burtonsville, MD) requires intubation of the duodenum and careful measurement of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion over about an hour (depending on the method). It is considered very sensitive, but only assesses pancreatic duct function.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) and its analogs (e.g., CCK-8) or receptor agonists (e.g., cerulean) have also been used to assess acinar cell function.

13C-mixed triglyceride breath test is of limited availability in the US. This test measures the ability of pancreatic lipase to digest a special substrate in the intestine after a test meal [Domínguez-Muñoz et al 2007].

72-hour fecal fat is used to demonstrate that pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements are effective in digesting fat in the intestine of persons with severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. It is usually performed in a clinical research unit over four to five days during which time the patient eats a special high-fat meal (>100 grams of fat per day) and all stool samples are collected and analyzed. It is not used for diagnosis because of the complexity and inconvenience of the test.

Sudan stain, which identifies fat in the stool, is not sensitive or specific for pancreatic insufficiency since undigested oils or fats can be present as a result of:

Their nature (e.g., mineral oil, olestra), or

Blocking of pancreatic lipase (e.g., orlistat), or

Diseases of the intestinal mucosa.

Diffusion-weighted MRI. Various “functional” tests have been advocated using abdominal imaging techniques, including secretin-stimulated MRI. Although diffusion-weighted MRI is probably better at detecting the structural changes of chronic pancreatitis than standard MRI [Akisik et al 2009], it does not measure function, and fluid volume cannot measure bicarbonate output.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy improves digestion in those with pancreatic insufficiency who have pain with eating, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), and/or diarrhea [Perrault 1994, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. Pancreatic enzymes most effectively relieve symptoms in persons with steatorrhea and in a subset of persons without steatorrhea [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

The amount of pancreatic enzyme replacement necessary depends on the diet and on the amount of residual pancreatic function (which diminishes over time). The normal amount of lipase secreted is about 750,000-1,000,000 units (USP) per meal. (Note that earlier papers used IU, and 1 IU = 3 USP units [Pongprasobchai & DiMagno 2005].) Since a minimum of 10% of normal pancreatic enzyme output is needed to digest a meal, about 70,000-80,000 USP units of lipase are required for an average-sized adult (70 kg) with total pancreatic insufficiency. The amount can be reduced for smaller persons and those with residual pancreatic exocrine function – while monitoring symptoms and nutritional parameters.

Diabetes mellitus is a common disorder and both type 1 and type 2 can occur in patients with pancreatitis by random chance.

Type 3c diabetes mellitus is caused by loss of pancreatic tissue as a result of surgery, chronic pancreatitis, or other rare pancreatic diseases [Rossi et al 2004, Cui & Andersen 2011, Andersen et al 2013]. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is important because loss of both the insulin-producing beta cells and the glucagon-producing alpha cells results in loss of counter-regulatory hormones and risk for hypoglycemia. Furthermore, it appears to be associated with increased risk for pancreatic cancer, and use of some anti-diabetic agents (e.g., the incretins) may be of concern [Andersen et al 2013].

Chronic pancreatitis is associated with a gradual loss of islet cell function. The following may be of benefit [Cui & Andersen 2011].

Monitoring for glucose intolerance

Optimizing pancreatic insulin secretion with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy via amino acid and fatty acid-stimulated release of endogenous incretins from the foregut, with the addition of anti-diabetic agents as needed

Synchronizing the entry of nutrients into the circulation with exogenous insulin therapy delivery through diet and promoting predictable early nutrient digestion and absorption with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy

Use of metformin as an oral anti-diabetic agent [Decensi et al 2010]

Routine screening of patients with chronic pancreatitis for glucose intolerance; recommendations for management and referral have recently been published [Rickels et al 2013b].

See also Rickels et al [2013a] for new consensus guidelines on management of diabetes in pancreatitis (click here for full text).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The ability to prevent the primary manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis (regardless of genetic cause) is limited.

The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation. If a low-fat diet is chosen, extra attention to providing fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) is needed.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals may minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]. Anti-oxidant therapy is very low risk and low cost, and thus, an appropriate first course of action [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Cessation/abstinence from smoking and alcohol, the strongest recommendation for all persons with pancreatitis. Substantial evidence shows that oxidative stress from alcohol and tobacco smoke is inherently linked to progression and pain in pancreatitis [Schoenberg et al 1995, Petrov 2010, Tandon & Garg 2011]. This observation provides a pathophysiologic link for alcohol and tobacco smoking as risk factors, and also suggests that nutrition control may be an important preventive measure. Smoking is also a major risk for pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Note: Men with one high-risk CLDN2 variant and women with two high-risk CLDN2 variants should be strongly urged to stop drinking immediately and directed to effective treatment programs.

Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels & Whitcomb 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Surveillance

Surveillance for pancreatic cancer in high-risk groups with pancreatitis has been considered (see Definitions, Chronic pancreatitis for discussion of pancreatic cancer risk). However, because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Ulrich 2001, Brand et al 2007], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is recommended that relatives at risk for PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis be offered molecular genetic testing for the family-specific germline PRSS1 pathogenic variant (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Molecular Genetic Testing) to allow early diagnosis and prevention and/or management of symptoms [Applebaum et al 2000, Ellis et al 2001, Fink et al 2007]. Testing of children is appropriate in families with early onset symptoms. Presymptomatic testing is best performed in the context of genetic counseling [Fink et al 2007].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently, chemopreventive agents such as calcium-channel blockers are being investigated for treatment of manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis [Morinville et al 2007].

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with renal coloboma syndrome, the following are recommended:

Evaluation of renal structure by renal ultrasound examination

Measurement of renal function by serum electrolyte concentrations, BUN, and creatinine

Urinalysis to evaluate for the presence of blood and protein

Evaluation for vesicoureteral reflux, by voiding cytourethrogram (VCUG) if clinically indicated

Dilated eye examination

Audiologic assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for details of audiologic assessment.)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A team approach that includes specialists in ophthalmology, nephrology, medical genetics, and audiology is recommended.

Management is focused on preventing complications of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and/or vision loss resulting from retinal detachment.

Treatment of hypertension and/or vesicoureteral reflux (if present) may preserve renal function.

ESRD is treated with renal replacement therapy (i.e., dialysis and/or renal transplantation).

Low vision experts can assist with adaptive functioning of those with significant vision loss.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

For patients with known mutation of PAX2, regular monitoring of blood pressure, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, and urine analysis and serum studies of renal function are indicated to allow for early diagnosis, as more than 90% of affected patients will develop ESRD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of retinal detachment in those with congenital optic nerve abnormalities includes close follow up with an ophthalmologist and use of protective lenses.

Surveillance

No disease-specific guidelines have been developed. The following ongoing evaluations are recommended in all individuals in whom pathogenic variants have been confirmed.

Follow up by a nephrologist to monitor renal function and blood pressure

Follow up by an ophthalmologist to monitor vision. Any change in vision could indicate a retinal detachment and should be treated as a medical emergency.

Audiometric evaluation with periodic follow up

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Consultation with a specialist in nephrology before using medications known to impact renal function is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the PAX2 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, dilated ophthalmologic examination and renal ultrasound examination, tests of renal function, urinalysis, and blood pressure evaluation should be performed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

It is important that a female who has a pathogenic variant have a thorough renal evaluation prior to becoming pregnant. Individuals with clinical renal disease should consult with appropriate professionals including nephrologists and maternal fetal medicine specialists to establish a plan for medical management during pregnancy.

Pregnancies at 50% risk for renal coloboma syndrome should be monitored for fetal renal function. Comprehensive ultrasound in the second trimester is recommended to evaluate fetal renal anatomy. Ongoing monitoring for oligohydramnios in the second and third trimesters is recommended in at-risk pregnancies.

Eighteen individuals with pathogenic variants have been reported to have prenatal ultrasound abnormalities including oligohydramnios/anhydramnios, cystic renal dysplasia, multicystic dysplastic kidneys, and renal hypoplasia [Bower et al 2012]. Seven fetuses with a confirmed PAX2 pathogenic variant and severe prenatal renal failure (Potter sequence) have been reported [Martinovic-Bouriel et al 2010, Bower et al 2012]. In addition, four cases of severe prenatal renal failure have been reported in families with renal coloboma syndrome in which the presence of the familial pathogenic variant could not be verified in the affected fetus [Ford et al 2001, Bower et al 2012]. In several instances, parents with mild renal disease had pregnancies where the fetus presented with severe renal disease in utero.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a hereditary paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome, the following are recommended:

Imaging studies using MRI/CT, 123I-MIBG, and possibly PET to localize tumors and quantify the disease burden

Evaluation of individuals with extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas for blood pressure elevations, tachycardia, and other signs and symptoms of catecholamine hypersecretion that must be controlled prior to definitive therapy

Consideration of evaluation for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) in children, adolescents, or young adults who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia [Pasini et al 2008]

Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice guidelines for the management of individuals with PGL/PCC have recently been published [Lenders et al 2014] (full text; registration or institutional access required).

The management of tumors in individuals with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes resembles management of sporadic tumors [Young 2011]; however, persons with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes are more likely to have multiple tumors and multifocal and/or malignant disease than are those with sporadic tumors.

For secretory tumors, treatment is directed toward containing the disease through antagonism of catecholamine excess with pharmacologic adrenergic blockade prior to surgical removal; treatment for malignant tumors is directed toward surgical removal and mitigation of the deleterious effects of metastatic spread [Eisenhofer et al 2004, Lenders et al 2005].

For nonsecretory skull base and neck paragangliomas, early detection allows for timely surgical resection and is believed to reduce operative morbidity and improve prognosis [Rinaldo et al 2004, Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For carotid body and low vagal paragangliomas, surgical resection is the treatment of choice in almost all cases. Most are benign and can be completely excised.

Note: In elderly individuals or those with clinically important comorbidities, surgery may be delayed and tumors monitored by serial imaging. Radiation therapy can also be considered in these patients [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For jugulotympanic paragangliomas, small tumors can usually be removed without difficulty; resection of larger tumors may be associated with CSF leak, meningitis, stroke, hearing loss, cranial nerve palsy, or even death. Therefore, close observation with symptomatically guided surgery may be prudent. Radiation therapy can also be considered, but potential long-term risks include malignant transformation of the primary tumor and other radiation-induced malignancies. In selected patients, stereotactic radiosurgery may also be performed [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For pheochromocytomas, surgery, preferably laparoscopic, is the treatment of choice [Lenders et al 2005, Young 2011].

Preoperative. The chronic and acute effects of catecholamine hypersecretion from adrenal chromaffin tumors must be reversed preoperatively. Combined α- and β- adrenergic blockade is required to control blood pressure and prevent intraoperative hypertensive crises. Using the following approach, only 7% of patients undergoing catecholamine-secreting tumor resection at the Mayo Clinic needed postoperative hemodynamic management [Young 2006, Young 2011]:

Alpha-adrenergic blockade starting at least seven to ten days preoperatively to allow for normalization of blood pressure and volume expansion. The dose of the alpha blocker is adjusted for a low normal systolic blood pressure for age.

A liberal sodium diet

Once adequate α-adrenergic blockade is achieved, initiation of β-adrenergic blockade (e.g., 3 days prior to surgery). The dose of the β-adrenergic blocker is adjusted for a target heart rate of 80 beats per minute.

Postoperative. Approximately one to two weeks after surgery, 24-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines should be measured.

If the levels are normal, resection of the biochemically active pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be considered complete.

If the levels are increased, an unresected second tumor and/or occult metastases should be suspected.

In individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants, paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas should be resected as soon as possible after tumor discovery. Prompt resection is particularly important for extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas because of their tendency to metastasize.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize complications related to mass effects, catecholamine hypersecretion, and malignant transformation.

Surveillance

Individuals known to have a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations of a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome but known to have a SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD,

SDHAF2, or MAX pathogenic variant, and relatives at risk based on family history who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team with expertise in treatment of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes.

Screening should begin at age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family. Benn et al [2006] estimated that if lifelong screening were to begin at age ten years, disease would be detected in all persons with SDHD pathogenic variants and 96% of persons with SDHB pathogenic variants.

Although no clear consensus has been developed regarding when, how, and how often biochemical studies and imaging should be done in at-risk individuals, it is reasonable to consider lifelong annual biochemical and clinical surveillance. The findings of these evaluations should guide imaging studies [Mannelli 2006, Pacak et al 2007, Lenders et al 2014]. Monitoring includes the following:

Twenty-four hour urinary excretion of fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines, and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines to detect metastatic disease, tumor recurrence, or the development of additional tumors

Follow-up imaging by MRI, CT, 123I-MIBG, or FDG-PET if the fractionated metanephrine and/or catecholamine levels become elevated, or if the original tumor had minimal or no catecholamine/fractionated metanephrine excess. In some individuals the image modality that was most effective in identifying the original tumor may prove to be equally effective in surveillance. Given the concern for cumulative radiation exposure in individuals who harbor germline pathogenic variants in genes associated with PGL/PCC, MRI may be the preferable imaging modality, with CT and nuclear imaging modalities reserved to further characterize tumors that are detected.

In persons with SDHD and SDHC pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the skull base and neck to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) body MRI or CT and 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may occur beyond the neck and skull base

In persons with SDHB pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the abdomen, thorax, and pelvis to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may not be detected with MRI or CT

In individuals (especially children, adolescents, or young adults) who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia, consideration of evaluation for GISTs [Pasini et al 2008]

Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with an SDHB pathogenic variant

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Penetrance of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes may be increased in those who live in high altitudes or are chronically exposed to hypoxic conditions [Pacheco-Ojeda et al 1988, Astrom et al 2003]. Avoidance of habitation at high altitudes and activities that promote long-term exposure to hypoxia should be considered.

Activities such as cigarette smoking that predispose to chronic lung disease should be discouraged in persons who have a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because early diagnosis and treatment is very likely to change the outcome for individuals (especially in the context of SDHB pathogenic variants, which portend aggressive disease), it is recommended that relatives at risk be offered genetic testing as early as possible when the family pathogenic variant is known.

By age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family, presymptomatic testing, including genetic testing, should be offered to all first-degree relatives of an individual in whom a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, and SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX has been detected.

Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited a pathogenic variant. Early detection of tumors can facilitate surgical removal, decrease related morbidity, and potentially result in removal prior to malignant transformation or metastasis [Young et al 2002]:

In families with a previously identified pathogenic variant, relatives who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant are spared the cost and anxiety associated with regular clinical, biochemical, and imaging studies.

Family members who have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be informed of their heightened risks for paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas and encouraged to undergo biochemical and imaging studies as described in Surveillance.

Note: Identification of the pathogenic variant (or the absence thereof) in an affected individual is essential for interpretation of negative molecular genetic test results in an at-risk asymptomatic relative.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no published consensus management guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary PGL/PCC during pregnancy. A high index of suspicion for these tumors in pregnant women is indicated, since there are other more common causes of hypertension during pregnancy (e.g., pre-eclampsia). Secretory PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present at any time during pregnancy (whereas pre-eclampsia is more common in the second or third trimester) and are typically not associated with weight gain, edema, proteinuria or thrombocytopenia. Individuals with PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present with palpitations, sweating pallor, orthostatic hypotension, and glucosuria, and the hypertension may be episodic.

A 24-hour urine collection for fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines should be used as a first-line test, as there is little experience with the use of plasma fractionated metanephrines during pregnancy. MRI without gadolinium administration should be the first-line test used to localize the tumor, since CT will expose the fetus to radiation. Radioisotope imaging studies should be deferred until after pregnancy in non-lactating mothers for similar reasons.

Surgery is the definitive treatment for these tumors, with appropriate alpha-adrenergic, and if needed, subsequent beta-adrenergic blockade to prevent a hypertensive crisis. Phenoxybenzamine is the alpha blocker of choice in both pregnant and non-pregnant individuals with catecholamine-secreting tumors [Reisch et al 2006]. For intra-abdominal PGL/PCC, a laparoscopic surgical approach is ideal if the tumor size allows. After 24 weeks gestation, surgery may need to be delayed until fetal maturity is reached (~34 weeks) because of problems with tumor accessibility. An open surgical approach combined with elective C-section may need to be performed in these situations. A good outcome has only been described with vaginal delivery in select cases [Junglee et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Attempts to inhibit or regulate the effects of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) activation, for example by enhancing prolyl hydroxylase activity, are being investigated and could provide the basis for useful therapy in the hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes [Lee et al 2005, Selak et al 2005]:

One compound, R59949, enhances prolyl hydroxylase activity, preventing HIF1α accumulation in cell lines under both normal and hypoxic conditions [Temes et al 2005].

Other drugs that cause downregulation of HIF include mTOR inhibitors, HSP90 inhibitors, HDAC inhibitors, thioredoxin-1 inhibitors, and some microtubule inhibitors.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor inhibitors (e.g., SU11248 and BAY43-9006) could potentially be useful in treating hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes [Kaelin 2005]. Other substances currently under investigation include tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as pazopanib and sunitinib.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with peroxisome biogenesis disorders, Zellweger syndrome spectrum (PBD, ZSS), evaluations of the following are recommended:

Feeding

Hearing

Vision (comprehensive ophthalmologic assessment)

Note: Electroretinogram (ERG) and visual field testing are useful in the diagnosis of retinal dystrophy.

Liver function

Neurologic function (possible MRI of the brain and EEG)

Development

Possible endocrine evaluation of adrenal function as adrenal insufficiency may occur during periods of stress

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment focuses on symptomatic therapy.

Feeding and nutrition. Supplying adequate calorie intake for affected children often entails the placement of a gastrostomy tube to allow simpler home management. No specific metabolic diet is recommended. With many children having some degree of malabsorption, elemental formulas may be better tolerated.

Hearing. Hearing aids should be used in children found to have hearing impairment. (See also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview for discussion of management issues.)

Vision. Cataract removal in early infancy to preserve vision is appropriate. Glasses should be used as needed to correct refractive errors.

Liver. Supplementation of vitamin K and other fat-soluble vitamins is recommended.

Liver dysfunction may lead to varices that respond to sclerosing therapies.

Primary bile acid therapy may improve liver function by reducing the accumulation of cholestanoic acids [Setchell et al 1992].

Neurologic function. Early intervention services should be provided.

Seizures are present in approximately one third of affected individuals. Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) may be used. No type of AED is contraindicated. Seizures may be difficult to control despite use of appropriate medication.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No curative therapy is presently available for PBD, ZSS.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Longer-surviving affected individuals should be monitored for hyperoxaluria, which can lead to stone formation and renal failure.

Surveillance

Hearing should be evaluated annually.

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation is indicated. (Although electroretinogram is useful in the diagnosis of a retinal dystrophy, it is not useful in follow up; visual field testing is much more helpful.)

Coagulation factors and other synthetic liver functions should be monitored. Persons with overt hepatic dysfunction require more routine monitoring.

The use of routine neuroimaging is uncertain. Individuals with peroxisomal disorders may develop a progressive leukodystrophy. No effective therapy exists, but identification of white matter changes may explain changes in cognitive and/or motor ability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoidance of cow's milk and related products reduces exposure to phytanic acid.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The use of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) has been suggested as a treatment for PBD, ZSS. This compound, which is important in brain and retinal function, is low in PBD, ZSS.

Martinez [2001] and Noguer & Martinez [2010] have reported that DHA ethyl ester supplements restore DHA levels and improve liver function and visual function in some study participants, especially in those treated in the first six months of life.

Paker et al [2010] performed a double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 48 children with PBD, ZSS who were supplemented daily with 100 mg/kg of DHA. Over a one-year period this study found no benefit from DHA supplementation in the two outcome measures used: growth and visual function.

Although no clinical trial has been performed, anecdotal evidence suggests that all patients with PBD, ZSS who are treated with DHA benefit from primary bile acid supplementation [Setchell et al 1992].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

A diet low in phytanic acid has been proposed, based mainly on the weak analogy with adult Refsum disease, in which accumulation of phytanic acid is pathogenic and treatment involves restricted dietary intake of phytanic acid. Its effectiveness in PBD, ZSS has never been proven. All standard infant formulas are already low in phytanic acid.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with TSEN54-related pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH), neurologic evaluation, assessment of feeding and respiratory function, and clinical genetics consultation are recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

PCH2. Recommendations are based on PCH2A caused by TSEN54 pathogenic variant c.919G>T (p.Ala307Ser). All other subtypes are very rare.

No specific therapy is available. Treatment is symptomatic. The main problems to manage:

Irritability, often related to chorea (involuntary movements), which is refractory to treatment

Swallowing problems due to bucco-pharyngeal incoordination, managed with nutritional support by gastrostomy

Central visual impairment

Epilepsy, which is amenable to standard treatments

Physiotherapy can be helpful.

Episodic or long-term institutional care may be needed to relieve the parents.

PCH4 and PCH5. No specific therapy is available.

Respiratory support is usually given for a limited time. Weaning from respiratory support may be possible for only short periods.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

During prolonged periods of high fever, electrolytes, creatine kinase concentration, hydration status, and urine production should be monitored and sufficient fluid should be given to prevent dehydration to avoid rhabdomyolysis.

Surveillance

In patients with PCH2 monitoring of respiratory function may be necessary to detect sleep apnea.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although hyperthermic episodes have been documented in individuals with PCH2, no special risk appears to be associated with generalized anesthesia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy of a fetus with PCH2 carries no special risk to the mother. No treatment for the condition is available. In the last trimester cerebellar development lags, which can be followed by measuring transverse cerebellar diameter. Birth is usually normal and uncomplicated; problems usually arise shortly after birth with irritability and impaired swallowing, often necessitating gavage feeding.

Pregnancy of a fetus with PCH4 may lead to polyhydramnios due to impaired fetal swallowing. Fetal akinesia often causes congenital contractures. Intrauterine clonus may be perceived by the mother through the uterine wall. Clonus persists after birth and is usually severe. Absence of respiratory movement necessitates mechanical support at birth.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pachyonychia congenita, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough clinical examination to assess each affected area. These will vary based on the specific gene involved (see Table 2) and may need to be repeated once genetic testing is completed in order to fully understand the phenotype of the affected individual.

Medical history to determine what features actually are troubling the patient

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Preliminary treatment guidelines have been published [Goldberg et al 2014] (full text) and continue to be refined.

The current treatment modalities primarily center on symptomatic relief of pain, hygienic grooming practices including paring of hyperkeratotic areas, treatment of secondary infection when indicated, and use of various walking aids, including wheelchairs, crutches and canes.

Palmoplantar keratoderma. Frequent grooming of the feet is essential and includes paring down the hyperkeratotic areas. However, trimming too aggressively can greatly increase pain. Some find it helpful to soak the feet prior to the paring. The surface of the skin and the instruments used should be clean to avoid infection. Blisters should be punctured with a sterile needle, the fluid drained, and the blister roof left in place until it dries and is shed away.

Special orthotics or insoles, wicking socks, ventilated footwear or cushioned footwear can help to lessen the pain although pain varies from day to day and at times can be intense even at rest.

Maintaining ideal body weight can be a factor in reducing the hyperkeratosis and pain. Limiting walking or standing can help to reduce trauma and slightly diminish the resulting blisters, callus, and pain.

Topical therapies to remove the hyperkeratosis:

Emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products are frequently used. Note: Creams and lotions containing keratolyics such as urea, lactic acid, salicylic acid, or propylene glycol have little effect, with some reporting negative side effects. Occlusive ointments are often poorly tolerated.

Oral retinoids, while reducing the keratoderma, do not affect the underlying blistering and fragility of the skin and sometimes increase the pain. Careful regulation of the dosage is necessary [Gruber et al 2012].

Nail dystrophy. Thickened nails are not typically painful, but become so when infected or traumatized. An effective tool for very thick nails and for children is a guillotine-type pet nail clipper which places no pressure on the nails. Other tools frequently used are razor or surgical blades or sanders such as a Dremel® tool.

If bacterial or fungal infections occur, systemic antibiotics or antifungals are indicated.

Particularly troublesome nails can be successfully removed surgically; however, few patients have had this procedure and in most cases – regardless of the specific pathogenic variant – the nails have re-grown.

Oral leukokeratosis. Good oral hygiene and frequent gentle brushing with a toothbrush can significantly improve the appearance of the thick, white patches on the tongue and oral mucosa; however, if done too vigorously, brushing may also traumatize the mucosa resulting in reactive hyperkeratosis.

Some individuals have reported reduction of the leukokeratosis in response to oral antibiotics, suggesting a possible bacterial contribution; more likely, improvement may be a response to the anti-inflammatory properties of the antibiotics.

Follicular hyperkeratosis. Especially bothersome for children and teens, this finding can be treated with alpha-hydroxy acid creams or lotions or keratolytic emollients; however, these treatments may not be especially effective for PC. The use of emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products is reported to be as effective.

Leukokeratosis with laryngeal involvement. Reported only in children with PC-K6a, respiratory insufficiency can on occasion become life-threatening, requiring emergent surgical intervention to re-establish the airway. The surgical procedures are repeated as necessary to maintain an open airway; however, surgical procedures to the larynx aimed at improving hoarseness should be avoided as they may tend to worsen the condition.

Cysts. Steatocystoma multiplex and other pilosebaceous cysts can be treated by incision with a number 11 blade and subsequent expression of the contents of the cyst (“incision and drainage”). Oral antibiotics may be indicated in the case of secondary infection. A culture should be obtained if infection is a consideration. Intralesional injection of steroid (e.g., triamcinolone) may reduce inflammation of the area if infection is not suspected. If necessary, cysts can be excised.

Failure to thrive. Poor feeding in infancy has been reported to be ameliorated by the use of a soft nipple with an enlarged opening to reduce the sucking required. All cases of ‘failure to thrive’ and poor feeding in infancy have been found to be type PC-K6a.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There are no known effective measures to prevent the primary manifestations of PC. Consistent, regular care of the conditions is necessary. Reduction of trauma, friction, and shear forces to the skin and nails does little to reduce symptoms.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infection of the skin and nails following grooming or trauma is the most common secondary complication seen in PC.

Pre- and post-grooming hygiene and use of clean instruments minimizes this complication.

Antibiotics may be indicated when infection occurs.

A simple ‘bleach bath’ regimen using a mild bleach solution can help prevent infections.

Surveillance

In general, individuals with PC have no known associated systemic diseases or predispositions that require routine surveillance.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Some report that higher temperatures and higher humidity worsen the condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives in a family with PC is not indicated because the phenotype is readily observed from a young age and no interventions can prevent the development of manifestations or reduce their severity.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Increased risk to the fetus during pregnancy has not been reported.

For a pregnant woman with PC, weight gain (increasing stress on the plantar surface) or altered hormonal environment during pregnancy may worsen the painful plantar keratoderma.

Therapies Under Investigation

A study is underway to determine whether any specific procedures make a difference in nail regrowth for PC

In 2014, a Phase 1b clinical trial sponsored by PC Project and TransDerm is underway using topical sirolimus. This 15-patient study is being conducted by Joyce Teng at Stanford University. Background research for this trial was previously published [Hickerson et al 2009].

A study is underway to determine whether any specific procedures make a difference in nail regrowth for PC (2014).

siRNA can selectively block expression of a specific K6a pathogenic variant [Hickerson et al 2008, Leachman et al 2008]. The siRNA trial included treatment of a single individual with a specific KRT6A pathogenic variant in a dose-escalation trial of an siRNA directed against the p.Asn171Lys mutated allele [Leachman et al 2010].

Botulinum toxin has been used in several patients [Swartling & Vahlquist 2006, Swartling et al 2010]. In addition to these published investigations, a number of individuals have been treated. A proposal is now being prepared for a unified study using botulinum toxin on persons with confirmed PC. No further information has been developed on topical botulinum toxin although this approach is of interest.

Several persons have been treated with statins. The results from studies are mixed. Further research is being conducted and additional animal testing is proposed [Zhao et al 2011].

Other therapies currently under investigation include anti-TNF biologics, duloxetine or duloxetine and a tricyclic combination, gabapentin, topical gabapentin, and capsaicin injections.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Pulmonary disease

Respiratory cultures (typically sputum cultures) to define infecting organisms and to direct antimicrobial therapy. Specific cultures for non-tuberculous mycobacteria should be included for older children and adults.

Chest radiographs and/or chest CT to define distribution and severity of airway disease and bronchiectasis

Pulmonary function tests (spirometry) to define severity of obstructive impairment

Pulse oximetry, with overnight saturation studies if borderline

Nasal congestion and/or sinus symptoms. Sinus imaging (sinus x-rays or preferably sinus CT)

Chronic/recurrent ear infections. Formal hearing evaluation (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for hearing evaluations available at different ages.)

Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

At present, no specific therapies can correct ciliary dysfunction. The therapies described in this section are empiric and aimed at treating consequences of dysfunctional cilia and sperm flagella. Little evidence supports use of specific therapeutic modalities in PCD.

Pulmonary disease. Management of individuals with PCD should include aggressive measures to enhance clearance of mucus, prevent respiratory infections, and treat bacterial infections.

Approaches to enhance mucus clearance are similar to those used in the management of cystic fibrosis, including chest percussion and postural drainage, oscillatory vest, and breathing maneuvers to facilitate clearance of distal airways. Because cough is an effective clearance mechanism, patients should be encouraged to cough and engage in activities that promote deep breathing and cough (e.g., vigorous exercise).

Routine immunizations to protect against respiratory pathogens:

Pertussis

Haemophilus influenzae type b

Pneumococcal vaccine

Annual influenza virus vaccine

Prompt institution of antibiotic therapy for bacterial infections of the airways (bronchitis, sinusitis, and otitis media) is essential for preventing irreversible damage. Sputum culture results may be used to direct appropriate choice of antimicrobial therapy. In those individuals in whom symptoms recur within days to weeks after completing a course of antibiotics, extended use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic or even prophylactic antibiotic coverage may be considered. (Consideration of chronic antibiotic therapy must include assessing the risk of selecting for multi-resistant organisms.)

For individuals with localized bronchiectasis, lobectomy has been performed in an attempt to decrease infection of the remaining lung. This approach, however, is controversial; consultants with expertise in PCD should be involved in the decision-making process.

Lung transplantation has been performed in persons with end-stage lung disease.

Nasal congestion and sinus infections. In some persons with extensive sinus disease, sinus surgery can facilitate drainage and relieve symptoms.

Chronic/recurrent ear infection. For chronic otitis media unresponsive to antibiotic therapy, PE tube placement may be helpful; however, some individuals with PCD have had offensive otorrhea following PE tube placement [Hadfield et al 1997].

Speech therapy and hearing aids may be necessary for children with hearing loss and delayed speech.

Male infertility. A couple in which the male has PCD-related infertility has the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection). In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with obstructive azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by in vitro fertilization [Sha et al 2014].

Other options are artificial insemination by donor sperm (AIDS).

Situs abnormalities. Typically, situs abnormalities do not require intervention unless physiologic dysfunction (e.g., congenital heart disease) requiring surgical intervention is present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Appropriate preventive measures:

Routine immunizations (including influenza vaccine and pneumococcal vaccine) to prevent respiratory infections

Education about infection control including attention to hand washing, avoidance of sick contacts, proper cleaning/disinfecting respiratory devices, and early use of antibiotics for respiratory illnesses (directed by prior respiratory cultures)

Surveillance

Follow up by a pulmonologist to monitor lung function and pathogens in sputum cultures as well as to assess pulmonary disease extent/progression is indicated.

For young children with chronic otitis media, routine hearing evaluation is essential, and should be continued until the teenage years, by which time hearing is usually normal [Majithia et al 2005]. Typically, the ear disease improves in later childhood and hearing screening is not necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Cough suppressants should not be used because cough is critical for clearing secretions.

Exposure to respiratory pathogens, tobacco smoke, and other pollutants and irritants that may damage airway mucosa and stimulate mucus secretion should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, a rigorous clinical history and physical examination accompanied by chest imaging and nasal nitric oxide measurements can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For a female with PCD, any pulmonary infections and pulmonary functional status should be rigorously evaluated by an expert in PCD (or cystic fibrosis) to define the risk associated with child bearing.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pyruvate carboxylase (PC) deficiency, the following are recommended:

Blood, urine, and CSF measures of organic and amino acids; brain MRI and MRS analysis

Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist skilled in metabolic and genetic disorders to confirm the diagnosis, guide the treatment, and determine the prognosis

Genetic counseling for the parents regarding the risk of recurrence in future pregnancies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment focuses on providing alternative energy sources, hydration, and correction of the metabolic acidosis during acute decompensation. Stimulating residual PC enzyme activity is an important goal for long-term stable metabolic status. Correction of the biochemical abnormality can reverse some symptoms, but central nervous system damage progresses regardless of treatment [DiMauro & De Vivo 1999].

“Anaplerotic therapy” is based on the concept that an energy deficit in these diseases could be improved by providing alternative substrate for both the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain for enhanced ATP production [Roe & Mochel 2006].

Citrate supplementation reduces the acidosis and provides substrate for the citric acid cycle [Ahmad et al 1999].

Aspartic acid supplementation allows the urea cycle to proceed and reduces the plasma and urine ammonia concentrations but has little effect on the neurologic disturbances as the aspartate does not enter the brain freely [Ahmad et al 1999]. Lowering the body ammonia burden may mitigate the neurologic insult.

Biotin supplementation is given to help optimize the residual PC enzyme activity but is usually of little use.

Triheptanoin, an odd-carbon triglyceride, providing a source for acetyl-CoA and anaplerotic propionyl-CoA, has been tried in one individual with biotin-unresponsive PC deficiency type B with immediate reversal (<48 h) of major hepatic failure and full correction of all biochemical abnormalities [Mochel et al 2005]. Triheptanoin provides C5-ketone bodies that can cross the blood-brain barrier, therefore providing substrates for the brain. Dietary intervention with triheptanoin is the only therapeutic approach that showed improvement of brain metabolism. However, this observation needs to be confirmed in additional patients.

Orthotopic liver transplantation has reversed the biochemical abnormalities in two patients [Nyhan et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Educate parents about the factors that elicit a crisis and the early signs of decompensation.

Carry an informational statement regarding the child's disorder and the appropriate treatment in an emergency setting.

Minimize intercurrent infections as environmental stressors.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with PC deficiency are very brittle metabolically. Intensive medical support is indicated proactively to prevent dehydration, hypotension, hypoglycemia and increasing metabolic acidosis. Hospitalization is indicated for the management of fever, infection, dehydration or trauma. The ketogenic diet is an absolute contraindication, shown to worsen the acidosis into a life-threatening range.

Surveillance

Monitor lactate levels regularly.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Fasting

The ketogenic diet, which aggravates life-threatening metabolic acidosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in a woman with PC deficiency has not been reported. However, women with the benign form (type C) could become pregnant; such a pregnancy should be closely monitored for any metabolic derangements including dehydration and acidosis.

Therapies Under Investigation

Thiamine and lipoic acid could optimize PDHC activity, which could help reduce the plasma and urine pyruvate and lactate concentrations through an alternate route of pyruvate metabolism. Theoretically, this intervention could increase the acetyl-CoA pool and worsen the ketonemia.

Thiamine was tried in an individual with PC deficiency who was found to be responsive.

Two sisters with PC deficiency, severe intellectual disability and motor retardation, and Leigh syndrome improved clinically and biochemically after treatment with thiamine and lipoic acid. The precise molecular diagnosis in these cases is uncertain.

Based on reports from the literature [Nyhan et al 2002, Mochel et al 2005], it has been suggested that a combination of orthotopic liver transplantation and anaplerotic diet be used in order to obtain both (i) long-term metabolic stability and (ii) improvement/correction of brain energy metabolism, myelination, and neurotransmission.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, the following are appropriate:

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

In the majority of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, once seizures come under control with the addition of daily supplements of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations), all antiepileptic drugs can be withdrawn, and seizure control will continue with daily pyridoxine monotherapy in pharmacologic doses.

Special education programs should be offered.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The effective treatment of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy requires lifelong pharmacologic supplements of pyridoxine; the rarity of the disorder has precluded controlled studies to evaluate the optimal dose.

The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for pyridoxine is 0.5 mg for infants and 2 mg for adults. In general, individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have excellent seizure control when treated with 50-100 mg of pyridoxine per day. Seizures in some individuals are controlled on much smaller doses and others require somewhat higher doses [Basura et al 2009, Stockler et al 2011].

Affected individuals may have exacerbations of clinical seizures and/or encephalopathy during an acute illness, such as gastroenteritis or a febrile respiratory infection. To prevent such an exacerbation in these circumstances, the daily dose of pyridoxine may be doubled for several days until the acute illness resolves.

Studies have indicated that higher doses may enhance intellectual development; it has been suggested that a dose of 15-30 mg/kg/day may be optimal [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011] and that the dosage should not exceed 500 mg/day [Stockler et al 2011].

Such therapy is required for life; affected individuals are metabolically dependent on the vitamin, rather than pyridoxine deficient. Compliance with pyridoxine supplementation is critical, as status epilepticus may develop within days of pyridoxine discontinuation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The overuse of pyridoxine must be avoided, as a reversible sensory neuropathy (ganglionopathy) caused by pyridoxine neurotoxicity can develop. While primarily reported in adults who have received "megavitamin therapy" with pyridoxine, sensory neuropathy has been reported in two persons with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy [McLachlan & Brown 1995, Rankin et al 2007], one of whom was an adolescent who developed a secondary cause of epilepsy and received a pyridoxine dose of 2 g/day [McLachlan & Brown 1995].

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be followed for the development of clinical signs of a sensory neuropathy, including regular assessments of joint-position sense, ankle jerks, gait, and station [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011].

Regular assessments of intellectual function should be offered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Overuse of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Secondary Complications) is to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Empiric treatment of the affected individual’s newborn sib with pyridoxine supplementation should be offered until testing has been completed.

If the ALDH7A1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing is appropriate.

If the pathogenic variants are not known, the following is recommended:

If a younger sib of a proband presents with encephalopathy or a seizure, pyridoxine should be administered acutely (ideally under EEG monitoring) for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.

α-AASA is a sensitive biomarker for pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy while pipecolic acid is an indirect and less sensitive biomarker. If elevated plasma biomarker concentrations have been demonstrated in the proband, a similar elevation in a younger sib would support a diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.

Note: It would be unlikely for the proband's older sibs who have not experienced seizures to be pyridoxine dependent.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

As recurrence risk for couples who have a child with this disorder is 25%, there is justification to treat the mother empirically with supplemental pyridoxine at a dose of 50-100 mg/day throughout the last half of her subsequent pregnancies and to treat the newborn with supplemental pyridoxine to prevent seizures and reduce the risk of neurodevelopmental disability [Baxter & Aicardi 1999, Bok et al 2010a]. It is important to emphasize, however, that at least one severe phenotype has been described in a family in which prenatal treatment of an at-risk sib did not result in an improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Rankin et al 2007].

Molecular genetic testing of ALDH7A1 can be performed prenatally or after birth; if both pathogenic variants are present, pyridoxine treatment should be continued during pregnancy (if prenatal testing is pursued and reveals the fetus to be affected) and after birth; if not, treatment can be withdrawn.

Therapies Under Investigation

As ALDH7A1 encodes the enzyme α-aminoadipic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (antiquitin), which is involved in cerebral lysine catabolism, it has been proposed that persons with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy may benefit from a lysine-restricted diet. A small number of individuals have been treated in this fashion; improvements in development and behavior along with decreased biomarker levels have been described [Stockler et al 2011, van Karnebeek et al 2012]. A protocol for controlled therapeutic trials of lysine restriction in pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy has recently been proposed [van Karnebeek et al 2014].

L-arginine competitively inhibits lysine transport and can therefore reduce lysine levels. Some individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have difficulty tolerating a lysine-restricted medical diet; in such cases L-arginine supplementation has been offered as an alternative method of lowering lysine levels [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014]. The effectiveness of treating pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy with “triple therapy” (a combination of pyridoxine supplementation, lysine restriction, and L-arginine supplementation) has also been studied [Coughlin et al 2015, Mahajnah et al 2016], with promising results in a small number of treated individuals.

A cellular proof of concept for antisense therapy of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy has been reported [Pérez et al 2013]. Specifically, the silent nucleotide change c.75C>T, a novel splicing variant creating a new donor splice site in exon 1, was rescued in a lymphoblast cell line via antisense therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features (ADPEAF), the following evaluations are recommended:

A clinical history from the individual and witnesses to establish seizure types and their frequencies, and symptoms associated with each seizure type

Routine interictal EEG

Routine clinical imaging to rule out structural abnormalities

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

ADPEAF is a benign syndrome in the great majority of individuals. No clinical trials of different antiepileptic medications have been carried out, but most individuals have been readily able to achieve seizure control with medications used routinely in clinical practice (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and measures to minimize risk in the event of seizure onset (e.g., avoidance of unattended swimming).

If the LGI1 or RELN pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, interview of relatives at risk may identify symptoms possibly related to seizures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with Pendred syndrome (PDS)/DFNB4, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of auditory acuity (ABR emission testing, pure tone audiometry)

Thin-cut CT of the temporal bones to identify structural abnormalities

Vestibular function studies

Thyroid ultrasonography and thyroid function tests (T3, T4, and TSH)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Hearing habilitation (hearing aids as early as possible)

Consideration of cochlear implantation in individuals with severe to profound deafness

Educational programs designed for individuals with hearing impairment

Treatment of abnormal thyroid function (if present) using thyroid hormone replacement therapy

Surveillance

Surveillance includes:

Semiannual or annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual or annual examination by an endocrinologist familiar with PDS

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months if hearing loss is progressive

Since goiter is more common than hypothyroidism, volumetric baseline measurement of the thyroid, obtained by ultrasonography with periodic (every 2-3 years) reassessment [Choi et al 2011b]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Based on anecdotal reports that increased intracranial pressure in individuals with dilation of the vestibular aqueduct (DVA) can trigger a decline in hearing, some physicians recommend avoiding activities like weightlifting and contact sports.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk relatives should be evaluated for hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, and thyroid abnormality in the same manner as an affected individual at initial diagnosis.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing of sibs is indicated shortly after birth so that appropriate and early support and management can be provided to the child and family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Perrault syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics consultation

Endocrinology assessment in women: serum estrogen and gonadotropin (LH and FSH) concentrations. In women with relatively intact ovarian function, serum anti-müllerian hormone concentrations may provide evidence of incipient ovarian failure [De Vos et al 2010].

Pelvic imaging in women by ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging to define the presence of ovaries and antral follicle count

Audiologic assessment in men and women to define the degree and frequency range of hearing impairment by audiometry and physiologic tests (as summarized in Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Neurologic assessment to determine if ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, and/or learning disability is present

Treatment of Manifestations

Hearing loss should be assessed and treated by a multidisciplinary team including an audiologist and otolaryngologist. Possible interventions include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss. Provision should be made for any special educational needs.

Early intervention in young children with profound hearing loss improves cognitive and language development.

Ovarian insufficiency. In adolescents presenting with primary amenorrhea, induction of puberty with incremental doses of estrogen should be undertaken in collaboration with a pediatric endocrinologist. In those in whom puberty is complete, cyclic estrogen and progesterone is administered to mimic the menstrual cycle and to trigger withdrawal bleeds. Estrogen can be administered orally or topically.

Estrogen has a long-term protective effect on bone metabolism and reduces the risk for early-onset osteoporosis. Treatment should last until at least age 50 years to reduce risks of cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis, provided there are no contraindications to estrogen replacement.

Assisted reproduction through in vitro fertilization using donor eggs is a consideration for women with Perrault syndrome. Before considering pregnancy, uterine size should be assessed.

For women at risk for ovarian insufficiency, oocyte cryopreservation can be considered if ovarian function is sufficiently well preserved to allow for successful harvesting of oocytes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

In consultation with a reproductive endocrinologist, estrogen replacement treatment should be combined with progesterone to reduce the risk for endometrial cancer.

Surveillance

During induction of puberty, clinical assessment of pubertal staging and adjustment of estrogen dose takes place every three months.

For adults on maintenance estrogen replacement therapy, assessment of withdrawal bleed pattern and overall well-being should be undertaken on an annual basis and assessment of bone density approximately every five years.

Routine audiologic assessment is appropriate in individuals who have hearing impairment or are at risk for Perrault syndrome, as hearing loss is often progressive in nature. Audiologic surveillance is not required in individuals with profound hearing loss.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

For individuals with hearing loss:

Avoid ototoxic medication such as aminoglycosides if alternatives are available.

Avoid exposure to loud noise, which may contribute to deterioration in hearing.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from treatment and preventive measures (e.g., early intervention in young children with profound hearing loss, estrogen replacement to facilitate pubertal development, and potential oocyte cryopreservation if primary ovarian insufficiency is considered). See Treatment of Manifestations.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, screening of siblings should be arranged to include audiologic assessment in males and females and baseline serum measurements of LH and FSH in females.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Perry syndrome the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation of motor function

Sleep study and evaluation by a pulmonologist or sleep disorders consultant for ventilation support if required

Psychiatric evaluation and (if needed) neuropsychological examination

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Parkinsonism. Dopaminergic therapy (particularly carbidopa/levodopa) should be considered in all individuals with significant parkinsonism. Response to levodopa is usually absent, erratic, or transient in Perry syndrome [Tsuboi et al 2002, Wider & Wszolek 2008]. However, large doses of carbidopa/levodopa (>2g) have been used successfully to reduce rigidity, tremor, and other symptoms in two individuals, one from the new British kindred [Newsway et al 2010] and one from the original Canadian family [J Stoessl, personal communication].

Hypoventilation. Ventilation support (invasive or noninvasive) may prolong life expectancy and have a significant impact on quality of life. Several persons without evidence of daytime central hypoventilation or respiratory troubles died suddenly at night most likely as a result of nocturnal hypoventilation. Therefore, ventilation support may be needed only during sleep [Wider & Wszolek, personal observation]. A bilateral diaphragmatic pacemaker may help combat respiratory insufficiency [Pretelt et al 2014].

Depression. Psychiatric manifestations may require antidepressants and psychiatric follow up to help reduce risk of suicide.

Weight loss. Careful weight follow up is indicated and high caloric intake should be considered if weight loss is present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Adequate caloric intake must be ensured to prevent weight loss.

Surveillance

Routine evaluation of weight and calorie intake, respiratory function (particularly at night or during sleep), motor function, and mood/personality changes is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Use of central respiratory depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, alcohol, narcotics) should be minimized.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Peters plus syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Complete ophthalmologic assessment including ocular ultrasonography for characterization of the eye anomaly and an assessment for associated ocular defects

Growth hormone stimulation testing to address the possibility of a treatable cause of growth delay in those affected individuals in whom increased height would improve quality of life

For neonates or infants, referral to an infant development program for appropriate developmental assessment

Echocardiography for congenital heart malformations

Abdominal ultrasound examination for renal anomalies

Cranial imaging with head ultrasound examination or CT scan/MRI for hydrocephalus and/or structural brain abnormalities if neurologic symptoms are present

Thyroid function testing in all infants who have not undergone newborn screening for congenital hypothyroidism

Hearing assessment in a child with cleft palate or speech delay

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Eye. Potential preservation of vision in the affected eye(s) often requires surgery. For severe bilateral corneal opacification consideration of corneal transplantation (penetrating keratoplasty) is suggested before age three to six months to prevent amblyopia; in mild cases simple separation of iridocorneal adhesions may suffice [Traboulsi 2006]. A retrospective review of long-term outcome following penetrating keratoplasty before age 18 months in type I Peters' anomaly revealed a visual acuity of 20/400 or better in two thirds of treated persons, and no individuals with phthisis bulbi or visual acuity reduced to light perception only [Zaidman et al 2007]. However, a much poorer outcome with visual acuity in the better eye being ≤0.05 in half of the patients with Peters anomaly has been reported [Reichl et al 2017]. No results of similar studies in a large series of individuals with Peters plus syndrome are available.

Management of amblyopia by a pediatric ophthalmologist is recommended for optimal visual outcome.

Congenital glaucoma in association with Peters' anomaly is more difficult to treat than primary infantile glaucoma. Surgery and medical management result in adequate intraocular pressure in only 32%, and associated ophthalmologic issues such as amblyopia or postoperative complications contribute to poor visual results in long-term outcome studies [Yang et al 2004].

Development. Children diagnosed as neonates or infants should be referred to an infant development program for appropriate developmental interventions.

Other. Additional management is symptomatic and expectant.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Assessment by a pediatric ophthalmologist every three months or as indicated to monitor for glaucoma and amblyopia

Regular developmental assessments

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Agents that increase risk of glaucoma (e.g., corticosteroids) are to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with

familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical history

Chest radiograph

High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the chest

Pulmonary function studies

Evaluation by a pulmonologist, preferably one with experience in IPF

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of the individual with familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF) is

similar to that for interstitial idiopathic pneumonia (IIP) and depends on the

type of IIP diagnosed for each individual within the family [American

Thoracic Society 2000, American Thoracic

Society & European Respiratory Society 2002].

Lung transplantation may be a consideration in selected individuals with FPF. In

general, those who are unresponsive to therapy, have significant functional

impairment, and have no other major illnesses that would preclude

transplantation are good candidates. Five-year survival rates post transplant in

IPF have been estimated at 50%-56% [Raghu et al 2011].

Non-pharmologic treatments:

Oxygen therapy may improve exercise tolerance in patients with

hypoxemia.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is a recommended option for patients who would

benefit.

Pharmacologic interventions have not generally been shown to alter the course of

IPF. Treatments have been categorized into classes such as corticosteroids,

immunosuppressive/cytotoxic agents, and antifibrotic agents. However, at least

two antifibrotic pharmacologic interventions recently approved may be an option

for patients with FPF to slow the decline of lung function. See Therapies Under

Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are recommended:

Prevention and prompt treatment of acute exacerbations

Treatment of coexisting comorbidities if appropriate including:

Pulmonary hypertension

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

Pulmonary embolism

Lung cancer

Coronary artery disease

Respiratory infections

Pneumothorax

Aspiration

Surveillance

The frequency of follow-up evaluations for persons with FPF depends largely on

the patient's individual diagnosis and status. Surveillance would follow the

guidelines for IPF [Raghu et

al 2011] or the specific type of IIP. Those who are stable may be

evaluated every three to six months, while others may need more frequent follow

up.

Pulmonary function studies including the following to serially monitor

disease course [Raghu

et al 2011]:

Forced vital capacity (FVC)

Diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)

The six-minute walk test (6-MWT) distance and oxyhemoglobin

saturation change at baseline

Monitoring for progression of disease by HRCT of the chest

Oxygen saturation by resting pulse oximetry

Serologic monitoring for connective tissue disease (CTD) in patients

suspected of an underlying possibility for CTD-related ILD

Monitoring for any side effects known from pharmacologic treatments

Symptom control

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for developing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

(IPF) and was shown to be an independent risk factor in families with FPF [Steele et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as

possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic

testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, simple screening

tests have been found to be sensitive for establishing the diagnosis in

relatives at risk [Watters et al 1986, Hartley et al 1994] and

prognosis of pulmonary fibrosis [Watters et al 1986, Schwartz et al

1994a, Schwartz et al 1994b].

It is recommended that every five years, asymptomatic

first-degree relatives (of individuals with FPF) older than age

50 years undergo pulmonary function tests, obtain an HRCT scan

of the chest to detect early abnormalities, and complete a

standardized questionnaire to assess the presence of respiratory

symptoms.

Family members are considered to have a positive screening

evaluation (i.e., to possibly have pulmonary fibrosis) if they

have at least class 2 dyspnea (breathlessness when hurrying on a

level surface or walking up a slight hill), a DLCO

below 80% of predicted, or presence of at least ILO category 1

findings on chest x-ray [International Labour Office 2011]. Family members

who have a positive screen require further evaluation (see Diagnosis).

A study of asymptomatic at-risk family members in a FPF cohort by Kropski et al

[2015] identified more than 25% of subjects with subtle

radiologic and histopathologic abnormalities suggestive of possible

early interstitial lung disease. It is unknown if these findings would

become symptomatic FPF in the subjects.

See Genetic

Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for

genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several therapies remain under investigation for the treatment of IPF. Agents

targeted to fibroblast proliferation, pulmonary hypertension, anti-inflammatory,

anticoagulation, and various chemokine and monoclonal antibodies among other

targets remain under investigation as potential treatments. Two antifibrotic

agents recently approved by the FDA for use in IPF as of October 2014 include

pirfenidone [King et al

2014] and nintedanib [Richeldi et al 2014]; the former has

been available in Japan and Europe for several years as a therapy for IPF.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information

on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary familial congenital polycythemia (PFCP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full blood counts with evaluation of white blood cells and of platelets, if not performed at the time of diagnosis

Cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement.

Recording of symptoms of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity:

Hyperviscosity syndrome symptoms:

Headache

Dizziness

Altered mentation, sense of distance

Visual disturbances

Tinnitus

Paraesthesia

Low performance

Fatigue, lassitude

Myalgia, muscle weakness

Hyperviscosity syndrome severity:

Grade 1. Mild; does not interfere with normal activities

Grade 2. Moderate; interferes with some activities

Grade 3. Marked to severe; interferes with most or all activities

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No management guidelines have been published.

The majority of individuals with PFCP require no regular treatment.

In some individuals with PFCP, antihypertensive treatment and phlebotomies are initiated either:

When symptoms of the hyperviscosity syndrome are evident;

OR

At routine intervals to maintain the hematocrit at an almost normal level.

While low-dose aspirin can be considered for the prevention of thromboembolic events, no evidence of efficacy exists. Of note, at least one individual (a male age 40 yrs) died from myocardial infarction despite regularly performed phlebotomies [Prchal & Sokol 1996].

Hyperviscosity symptoms (see

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Grade 1. Consider aspirin treatment.

Grade 2. Consider aspirin treatment. In the presence of persistent symptoms perform phlebotomy. In the event of recurrent episodes consider regular phlebotomy to maintain the hematocrit in the age-respective normal range.

Grade 3. Consider regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment.

Thromboembolic events

Provide acute treatment according to established practice for the event.

Evaluate for other thrombophilic risk factors.

Start regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment in all patients.

Consider life-long anticoagulation (e.g., heparins, warfarin) when other severe additional risk factors are present or thromboembolic events have recurred.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Always maintain good hydration.

Avoid activities that potentially increase blood viscosity (e.g., mountain climbing, scuba diving, smoking).

For those at increased risk for thromboembolic events: take precautions in higher-risk situations such as long-distance airline flights.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of occasionally increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement.

Regular life-long follow up with investigation of any suspicious clinical events such as thromboembolic complications and symptoms that could be related to hyperviscosity

Regular life-long follow up to record manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid:

Dehydration;

Any activity that would potentially increase blood viscosity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those with PFCP who would benefit from education regarding agents and circumstances to avoid and inappropriate treatments. Evaluations can include the following:

If the EPOR pathogenic variant in the family is known. Molecular genetic testing

If no pathogenic variant has been identified in the family. Blood count and serum EPO concentration if hemoglobin and hematocrit are increased

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No information is available on the management of pregnancy in a woman with PFCP.

Although the only survey of pregnancy in women with congenital erythrocytosis did not include any women with an EPOR pathogenic variant, data showed that when treated with low-dose aspirin and phlebotomy to reduce the hematocrit to a suitable level, women with erythrocytosis can have normal pregnancies and give birth to healthy children [McMullin et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1), the following evaluations are recommended based on the guidelines and suggestions of Hoppe & Langman [2003], two recent reviews by the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium, OxalEurope [Cochat et al 2012] (see Table 4), and a recent review by Hoppe [2012].

The following are recommended in all cases:

Molecular genetic testing to determine the AGXT genotype if not already performed

Clinical genetics consultation

The further extent of the initial evaluation of patients with PH1 should depend on their baseline renal function at the time of diagnosis and the evaluations performed as part of the diagnostic work up.

For those with preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2):

Renal ultrasound examination and fundoscopic eye examination to identify the presence/extent of oxalate deposition

Baseline urinalysis (spot and 24 hour collection)

For those with a GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2. In addition to the above evaluations: measurement of plasma oxalate

For those with a GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or in whom there is a rapid deterioration in function. In addition to the above evaluations:

Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required

Thyroid function testing

Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block

Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera allows evaluation of calcification in such organs

Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate

History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition

Treatment of Manifestations

Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation

The general therapies for nephrolithiasis benefit all individuals with PH1. Early diagnosis and initiation of conservative therapy are critical in preserving adequate renal function for as long as possible [Fargue et al 2009].

The following recommendations are universally embraced, and those listed here can all be found in the following recent reviews [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013].

Drinking large volumes of fluid (2-3 L/m2/24 hours) at regular intervals over the entire day/night prevents calcium oxalate supersaturation and is effective for all genotypes. Note that small children may require gastrostomy or nasogastric tube insertion for both feeds and fluid supplementation. Extreme care should be taken during any illness that could lead to hypovolemia or decreased oral fluid intake; patients should be advised to seek early medical attention.

Alkalinzation of urine (pH 6.2-6.8) to inhibit calcium oxalate crystallization can be targeted using oral potassium citrate at a dose of 0.1-0.15 mg/kg or 0.3-0.5 mmol/kg per day in 3-4 divided doses so long as the GFR is preserved. When the GFR is reduced or concerns about potassium levels ensue, alkalinization can be achieved with sodium citrate.

Moderate doses of pyrophosphate-containing solutions may also inhibit crystal formation, and may be dosed as 20-30 mg/kg per day of phosphate.

Drugs such as thiazides can decrease urinary calcium excretion and may inhibit stone formation, in particular in patients with PH3.

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D is to be avoided as both may promote stone formation.

Supplementation of dietary calcium (300 mg) or provision of supplemental calcium (300-500 mg) at each meal significantly has been shown to decrease urinary calcium oxalate without altering calcium excretion [Penniston & Nakada 2009]. While promising, this strategy remains unproven in individuals with PH1.

Dietary restriction of oxalate as such is not supported as being an effective therapy for patients with PH1, although the principle of careful food choices (avoid high oxalate food and drink) would seem reasonable.

Treatment of Kidney Stones

The stone type most prevalent in PH1 is calcium oxalate monohydrate or whewellite [Daudon et al 2008].

Patients must be counseled regarding the different success rates among the following three surgical modalities:

Shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) is a viable first option, but only if patients are willing to accept a lower success rate and higher rate of subsequent endoscopic surgery.

For larger, bulky stone burdens (>15 mm), percutaneous nephrolithotomy should be considered as first-line therapy.

Ureteroscopy holds a very good record for success of stone clearance with minimal complication rates and may be supplanting SWL as first-line therapy at many centers.

SWL. While SWL is often the first choice for treatment of kidney stones given its minimally invasive nature and requirement for only sedative anesthesia, its value has been questioned as the first-line treatment for stones in children with PH1 and PH2 as calcium oxalate monohydrate stones are among the hardest stones, and are thus more likely to be resistant to extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) [Williams et al 2003].

A retrospective review of 36 individuals with PH who were treated with SWL between 1987 and 2009 in Birmingham, UK revealed that those who were treated with SWL required more subsequent treatments to render them stone free [Al-Abadi & Hulton 2013]. Whereas SWL was effective in 43%, repeat SWL was required in 61%. Stones in the lower pole of the kidney or parenchymal stones did not respond as well to SWL as stones in other locations. There is good evidence that any given stone(s) should not be treated with more than two SWL sessions, particularly if no change is observed with treatment [Pace et al 2000].

Ureteroscopy. Of note, in the endourology literature the trend is toward endoscopic treatment (ureteroscopy) over SWL for all stone types because of its higher success rate, but with the recognition of a potentially higher complication rate and longer hospital stay [Aboumarzouk et al 2012, Matlaga et al 2012].

Percutaneous nephrolithotomy and ureteroscopy. In the cohort of Al-Abadi & Hulton [2013], percutaneous nephrolithotomy or ureteroscopy both resulted in better stone-free rates and lower retreatment rates. While the two latter modalities are more effective at rendering the patient stone free, they have higher rates of potential complications than SWL. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is still the best modality for large, bulky stone burdens.

Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis

AGT is a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme. Approximately 10%-30% of individuals with PH1 respond to treatment with pyridoxine (vitamin B6, precursor to PLP as defined by a greater than 30% reduction in plasma oxalate concentration or normalization of urinary oxalate excretion after a minimum of three months of maximal therapy [Watts et al 1985, Leumann & Hoppe 2001]. Of this group, only 40% show normalization and the other 60% a partial reduction in the concentration of plasma and urine oxalate [Toussaint 1998].

Monico et al [2005b] showed that the presence of the p.Gly170Arg pathogenic variant was associated with pyridoxine responsiveness — homozygotes showing normalization (urine oxalate concentration <0.5-0.7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) and compound heterozygotes demonstrating a partial reduction in plasma oxalate concentration by at least 30% of prior documented levels. The same result was seen in patients with at least one p.Phe152Ile pathogenic allele.

At present, two different approaches are used to titrate the pyridoxine dose:

A stepwise increase from initial low levels (1-2 mg/kg/day) [Bobrowski & Langman 2008]

Initial high doses to maximize oxalate removal, with subsequent reduction to establish the minimal effective dose

With either approach, doses of pyridoxine in the range of 5 mg/kg/day appear adequate in the treatment of those likely to respond, with no additional benefit expected at doses higher than 10 mg/kg/day [Monico et al 2005b, Bobrowski & Langman 2008, Hoppe et al 2009]. In adults, a dose of 500 mg is felt to remain below the toxic range. Paresthesias, a known complication of large doses of pyridoxine [Toussaint 1998], have only developed in one individual on a dose of 2.1 mg/kg/day and resolved following discontinuation of the drug.

Pyridoxal phosphate levels may be followed in individuals to ensure that adequate absorption is occurring [Harambat et al 2011].

Individuals responsive to pyridoxine should continue this therapy to decrease the burden of oxalate on the kidney, even when on hemodialysis or following successful kidney transplantation.

Note: It is recommended that all patients with PH1, even those diagnosed in ESRD and on dialysis, receive a minimum three-month trial of pyridoxine at the time of initial diagnosis [Milliner 2005].

Dialysis

The issues related to the removal of oxalate and current modalities of dialysis are quite complex. Interested readers are directed to two papers outlining the specific details of extracorporeal removal of oxalate [Cochat et al 2012, Plumb et al 2013].

In brief, despite the small size of the oxalate molecule (90 daltons), the rate of oxalate production in persons with PH1-related ESRD (4-7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) vastly outstrips the ability to remove it via conventional dialysis in adults (1-2 mmol/1.73 m2/day) or children (3-4 mmol/1.73 m2/day). The sequestration of oxalate in tissue compartments outside the vascular space makes it difficult to effectively remove it from the body. Current guidelines suggest that the intent of dialysis is to reduce and maintain the plasma oxalate level as long as possible below 30-45 µmol/L (the calcium/oxalate supersaturation threshold at which tissue deposition occurs).

While more aggressive strategies using high flux dialyzers, daily hemodialysis (HD), combined HD and peritoneal dialysis (PD), hemodialfiltration, and even charcoal perfusion have all been reported [reviewed in detail by Plumb et al 2013], the end result is that while plasma removal rates of oxalate can be achieved in the range of greater than 60%, the total body store of oxalate rebounds (in general) to a level of 80% of the predialysis levels within 24 hours of the last HD run.

A case report of one patient treated with aggressive HD (8-10 hrs, 7 nights/wk) does suggest that this level of intense dialysis allows for maintenance of the pre-dialysis oxalate levels at or just below the tissue saturation point (30-45 µmol/L), but further studies are needed before these data can be confirmed [Plumb et al 2013].

Despite the limitations of dialysis, Cochat et al [2010] have suggested six situations in which dialysis may be indicated:

When PH1 is not yet diagnosed in an individual requiring dialysis for other reasons

In a small child/infant with oxalosis awaiting liver/kidney transplantation

As a strategy to deplete body oxalate burden preceding or after liver transplantation

As an adjunct therapy to decrease oxalate burden in the presence of delayed or poor renal function after liver/kidney transplantation

In older individuals if liver/kidney transplantation is not deemed an option

In countries with no access to organ transplantation [Cochat et al 2006]

Organ Transplantation

As neither maintenance hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), nor a combination of the two clears oxalate quickly enough to prevent systemic oxalosis in an individual with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) lower than 25-30 mL/min/1.73 m2 [Thamilselvan & Khan 1998], organ transplantation is an acceptable option for disease therapy or perhaps cure [Marangella et al 2001]. Much discussion has occurred regarding the best transplantation strategy for an individual with PH1.

The following recommendations and suggested approaches to this issue are all well summarized in three current reviews of PH1 [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013]. Specific percentages and outcome numbers can be extracted from these papers.

The reader is strongly encouraged to review (and consider as current best practice level recommendations) the recently published suggestions on organ transplant of non-pyridoxine sensitive patients with PH1 from the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium [Cochat et al 2012]. These guidelines (see Table 7) also take into consideration the patient’s age (infantile form), residual GFR, and evidence of systemic oxalate deposition in extrarenal organs.

Table 7. 

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

Transplantation (Tx) Options:

Simultaneous liver - kidney

Sequential liver - kidney

Isolated kidney

Isolated liver

Hemodialysis (HD) Strategy:

Perioperative ± postoperative based on POx & GFR

Standard HD after liver Tx aiming at POx <20 µmol/L

Preoperative & perioperative

Sometimes perioperative

CKD Category / Residual GFR

CKD Category 3 (30<GFR<59)

No

No

No

Option in carefully selected patients

CKD Category 4 (15<GFR<29)

Yes

Option

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

CKD Category 5 (GFR <15)

Yes

Yes

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

Infantile form (ESRD <2 yrs)

Yes

Yes

No

No

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

The three organ transplantation strategies that have been considered and implemented in the past are:

Isolated kidney transplantation (restores oxalate excretion to "normal");

"Preemptive" liver transplantation before end-stage renal disease (restores AGT enzyme activity, decreases ongoing oxalate synthesis); or

Combined liver-kidney transplantation, either concurrent or sequential (reduces oxalate synthesis and increases oxalate excretion).

In almost all other situations, the current recommendations are for dual liver/kidney transplant in patients with PH1. In the majority of these situations, the only three issues to be considered are:

Order of transplant (liver/kidney and sequential vs concurrent);

Timing of transplant (at what level of renal dysfunction to consider liver transplant); and

Use of deceased vs. living donors for either or both organs.

Certainly the overall survival numbers for any version of dual transplant greatly outstrip those seen from historic results for isolated kidney transplant: adult five-year survival numbers for kidney vs dual transplant are 45% vs 67% [Bergstralh et al 2010]; those for children are 14% vs 76% [Harambat et al 2012].

Isolated liver transplant as such may be a consideration with respect to a patient with significant residual renal function (e.g., GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or above), with the presumption that decline in renal function will be arrested and only a single organ transplant required. However, in such scenarios the concerns regarding risk of liver transplant morbidity and mortality in the face of an uncertain rate of decline in renal function often delay the decision to proceed to a point at which it is clear that dual transplantation will still be required.

In general it is believed that simultaneous liver/kidney transplant is the most logical for any patient, adult or child, with CKD Category 4 or below, given the need for renal function to excrete the body burden of oxalate. That decision, however, may be mitigated by concerns for patients with CKD Category 5 or on dialysis, as they often face severe oxalate burden that can overwhelm a new renal graft following transplant and lead to graft failure caused by oxalate stones/deposition. The choice in such patients, and often in small children/infants where anatomy may preclude a simultaneous approach, is to proceed with a sequential liver transplant followed at an indeterminate time later by a single kidney transplant.

Most of the published literature still reports the majority of organs used as being from deceased donors; however, living/living related donation of a split liver graft if the recipient is small enough and/or living donor kidney is certainly a viable alternative in some situations. Note: The appropriateness of using a parent or sib who is heterozygous for a AGXT pathogenic variant as a donor remains unclear in the literature.

Finally, the importance of establishing the diagnosis of PH1 before transplantation is illustrated by two recent reports of individuals with undiagnosed late-onset PH1 who received isolated kidney transplants and subsequently experienced unexpected rapid recurrence of stones and systemic oxalosis. In both cases a diagnosis of PH1 was made post transplant [Kim et al 2005, Madiwale et al 2008].

It is also important to note that in all forms of transplantation, in particular isolated kidney, the individual must:

Be monitored closely and even dialyzed following surgery to prevent further calcium oxalate deposition in the kidney graft from mobilization of the body burden of oxalate;

Continue pyridoxine supplementation to promote excretion of the total body store of oxalate if responsiveness has been documented prior to transplantation [Marangella 1999].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Recommendations can all be found in Treatment of Manifestations, specifically in the sub-sections on Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation and Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications may arise as a result of systemic oxalosis. Table 4 lists the broad range of tissues and organs that suffer consequences of oxalosis.

Regular dental care and ophthalmologic follow up should be part of patient management.

Surveillance

According to the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium (OxalEurope) [Cochat et al 2012] individuals with:

Preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2) likely require only the following to evaluate/ensure treatment efficacy:

Regular renal ultrasound examinations and fundoscopic eye examinations to identify the extent of any oxalate deposition

Ongoing urinalysis (spot and 24-hour collections)

GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 should have the above evaluations as well as regular (not defined) measurements of plasma oxalate.

GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or a rapid deterioration in function should have the above evaluations as well as the following testing (performed prior to initiation of dialysis if possible, and repeated as needed):

Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required

Thyroid function testing

Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block

Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera for evaluation of calcification in such organs

Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate

History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition

Further testing and surveillance of other organ involvement can be inferred from the list in Table 4 – noting that at GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 the ongoing deposition of tissue oxalate (oxalosis) will, of course, predispose all patients to multi-organ involvement, and this will worsen/accelerate as the patient enters ESRD/ initiates dialysis.

Note: Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Intravascular volume depletion. The importance of maintaining dilute urine cannot be overemphasized.

Foods high in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, and starfruit in particular)

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D, as both may promote stone formation

Loop diuretics to maintain dilute urine, as they can lead to hypercalciuria and increase the production of calcium oxalate stones

One infant with PH1 developed hepatitis after exposure to the anesthetic sevoflurane; this was felt to be an idiosyncratic reaction [Reich et al 2004]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Consideration should be given to testing asymptomatic at-risk family members in order to plan early treatment, monitoring, and preventive intervention [Cochat et al 2012]. If the AGXT pathogenic variants in the family are known, the affected/carrier status of at-risk family members can be confirmed by molecular genetic testing. The benefits of early initiation of conservative measures cannot be ignored [Chand & Kaskel 2009, Fargue et al 2009, Martín et al 2011].

Asymptomatic individuals:

Can be monitored periodically for renal function and urinary oxalate;

Should maintain adequate hydration and avoid high-oxalate foods.

In addition:

Potassium citrate administration may also be considered as an aid to reducing calcium oxalate excretion [Leumann & Hoppe 2001].

For those with the pathogenic variant p.Gly170Arg or p.Phe152Ile, pyridoxine should be supplemented.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy does not appear to be an important risk factor for the development of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the majority of women with PH1 [Norby & Milliner 2004]; however, women in whom renal function deteriorated during the pregnancy and remained abnormal post-delivery have been reported [Cimino et al 2005].

Of particular note, pregnant women with PH1 warrant close monitoring during pregnancy by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis after delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several novel therapies are under investigation.

Oxalate-degrading bacteria. Approaches involving oral administration of bacteria such as Oxalobacter formigenes (O. formigenes) or lactic acid bacteria to degrade oxalate [Sidhu et al 2001] and reduce the amount of oxalate available for intestinal absorption [Campieri et al 2001, Lieske et al 2005a, Azcarate-Peril et al 2006] are being investigated. Unfortunately this bacteria currently remains off the Qualified Presumption of Safety and Generally Recognized as Safe lists as maintained by the FDA, limiting the use in humans.

O. formigenes shows the most promise as a potential therapy for the hyperoxalurias. Although it is a normal component of the intestinal flora, many individuals do not maintain colonization. O. formigenes is also thought to stimulate secretion of endogenous oxalate into the intestine for its own metabolic use [Hatch et al 2006, Hatch & Freel 2008]. A human strain of O. formigenes (HC-1) has been shown to promote oxalate secretion into the intestine of a mouse model of primary hyperoxaluria [Hatch & Freel 2013] in which there was more secretion of oxalate via the distal ileum, cecum, and distal colon into the luminal side and, thus, into the feces. Administration of the HC-1 strain reduced the amount of oxalate excreted via the kidney and has potential as a probiotic.

A controlled diet was compared to two probiotic preparations to evaluate urinary oxalate levels and calcium oxalate supersaturation in individuals with hyperoxaluria and calcium oxalate stones of unknown etiology [Lieske et al 2010]: (1) the probiotic Oxadrop contains Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. brevis, Streptococcus thermophilus, and Bifidobacterium infantis; (2) AKSB, a formulation designed by the Mayo Clinic, contains Enterococcus faecium, Saccharomyces cerevisiae subspecies boulardi, LEVUCELL SB (yeast), S. cerevisiae, and fructooligosaccharide. When administered to stone formers, neither formulation reduced the amount of urinary oxalate excreted by affected individuals or the urinary calcium-oxalate supersaturation levels. However, an oxalate-restricted diet alone for one week significantly reduced the calcium oxalate supersaturation and the urinary levels of oxalate.

A probiotic, VSL#3 (Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA), which contains freeze-dried live lactic acid bacteria made up of Streptococcus thermophilus, Bifidobacterium breve, B. longum, B. infantis, Lactobactillus acidophlus, L. plantarum, L. paracasei, and L. delbrueckii subspecies bulgaricus was administered to 13 healthy volunteers who were then challenged to an oral load of 80 mg oxalate [Okombo & Liebman 2010]. Four of the subjects who started with higher baseline oxalate levels showed the largest reduction in urinary oxalate levels compared to the other subjects. The authors suggest that individuals who are hyperabsorbers of oxalate may benefit most from the probiotic VSL#3. This study must be validated in individuals with PH1.

Similar studies have been performed in mice genetically altered to mimic PH1. AGXT-deficient mice were both hyperoxaluric and hyperoxalemic [Hatch et al 2011]. In AGXT-deficient mice colonized with O. formigenes, urinary and plasma levels of oxalate decreased by 50%.

Advances have been made to circumvent the colonization of O. formigenes by expressing bacterial oxalyl-CoA decarboxylase and formyl-CoA transferase in human embryo kidney (HEK) 293 cells [Ye et al 2007]. Further experiments have shown that the enzymes are expressed in the cytosol of cells and transfected cells were able to degrade oxalate to some degree. Although still in the experimental stages, the transfer of genes encoding oxalate-degrading enzymes may be a potential candidate for gene therapy of hyperoxalurias.

Other bacterial species.

Giardina et al [2014] looked at a number of other bacteria with potential for oxalate degradation in the gut. These in vitro studies demonstrated (in addition to O. formigenes) four probiotic strains which appeared promising: Lactobacillus plantarum, L. acidophilus, Bifidobacgerium breve, and B. longum.

Finally, in a different approach, a crystalline-stabilized oxalate-degrading enzyme has been used successfully in a mouse model system and may avoid the colonization issue [Grujic et al 2009].

Hepatocyte transplantation. Repopulation of the liver of an individual with PH1 with normal or genetically corrected hepatocytes is less invasive than liver transplantation. However, host cells must be ablated as they would continue to produce oxalate and the donor hepatocytes would then require a growth advantage to achieve repopulation. The effectiveness of this approach has been demonstrated in a mouse model of PH1 [Guha et al 2005, Jiang et al 2008]. Koul et al [2005] transfected AGXT (genetically engineered for selective peroxisomal delivery) into cultured human hepatocytes by amplifying the cDNA and using liposomal transfection techniques. They demonstrated high efficiency of transfection and appropriate intracellular localization to peroxisomes [Koul et al 2005].

Recently, liver cell transplantation was performed ‘successfully’ in a 15-month old girl with PH1 as a bridge to an older age/larger size to allow for orthotopic liver transplant [Beck et al 2012]. The exact protocol is outlined in the paper; the child tolerated both the cellular infusions and the immunosuppression. Initially no significant change was seen in plasma oxalate levels post infusion; however, the plasma oxalate levels slowly decreased over the next two weeks from a mean of 105 to a lower mean of 70, and eventually fell to approximately 35 µmol/L at day 29. Long-term follow up (2-11 months) demonstrated persistently elevated (mean 80 µmol/L) – albeit improved over baseline – levels of plasma oxalate. Of note, clinically the patient improved from week two onward, despite the fact that donor chimerism was not demonstrated during the protocol biopsy at five months or at the time of liver harvest prior to the eventual orthotopic liver transplant.

Gene therapy.

Salido et al [2011] have demonstrated successful replacement of AGT enzyme activity in the livers of a knockout mouse model of PH1 utilizing a somatic gene transfer via two adeno-associated viral vectors. That they were able to do so in the absence of either hepatic toxicity or immunogenicity for at least the first 50 days is very encouraging.

Pyridoxamine. This approach aims to reduce oxalate by targeting precursors in the metabolic pathway and preventing their eventual metabolism to oxalate. Pyridoxamine, a drug touted as therapy for human diabetic nephropathy, is used to trap glycoaldehyde and glyoxylate. Animal studies have shown 50% reduction of urinary oxalate excretion [Chetyrkin et al 2005, Scheinman et al 2005]; current evidence from preclinical and phase II trials in humans appears to demonstrate a favorable toxicity profile of pyridoxamine.

Chemical chaperones. These small molecules facilitate folding of new proteins offering protection from cellular quality-control degradative processes. Stabilization of missense AGT may permit the protein to achieve a folded state with some degree of enzymatic activity [Danpure 2005a, Danpure 2005b]. In PH1 specifically, this type of effect has been demonstrated in vitro for both mistargeting and aggregation/accelerated degradation polymorphism-pathogenic variant combinations [Lumb et al 2003, Coulter-Mackie & Lian 2008, Hopper et al 2008]. Chemical chaperones may have general stabilizing functions or they may be designed to target specific pathogenic variants. Pyridoxine, commonly used in treatment of PH1, has been shown in vitro to act as a chemical chaperone increasing expression and correcting peroxisomal targeting, particularly for the three common AGXT alleles encoding protein variants p.Gly170Arg, p.Phe152Ile,or p.Ile244Thr [Fargue et al 2013a, Fargue et al 2013b, Cellini et al 2014]. Pathogenic missense variants – in which the mode of action is not through loss of stability – are not suitable candidates for this pharmacogenetic approach; nor are insertions, deletions, nonsense variants, or splice junction changes, which usually do not produce a protein product.

Manipulation of the metabolic pathway. The concept of substrate depletion is aimed at reducing the amount of available glyoxylate, the immediate precursor of oxalate, thereby reducing the oxalate concentration [Coulter-Mackie 2006]. An Agxt knockout mouse model has been developed to explore the effects of substrate depletion and to clarify the various adjustments in the metabolic pathway that result from absence of AGT [Hernández-Fernaud & Salido 2010, Knight et al 2012]. A model system developed in CHO cells uses stable transfection with all combinations of recombinant genes that encode glycolate oxidase, glyoxylate reductase, and AGT, allowing investigation of the interaction of these enzymes and the effects of deficiencies of one or more [Behnam et al 2006]. Another study examined the effect on urinary oxalate of dietary hydroxyproline from collagen, which enters the pathway farther upstream. Results suggested that hydroxyproline metabolism may be a significant contributor to glyoxylate and oxalate [Knight et al 2006].

A study of eight recombinant cytosolic aminotransferases suggested that phosphoserine aminotransferase and alanine transaminase were able to transaminate glyoxylate to glycine efficiently. These reactions may compete with conversion of glyoxylate to oxalate [Donini et al 2009].

Severe dietary restriction of either oxalate [Hatch & Freel 1995] or glycine, a glyoxylate precursor, is of little utility in decreasing the accumulation of oxalate in individuals with PH1 [Danpure 2001].

Trapping glycine in the liver utilizing benzoate or inhibiting the conversion of glycine to glyoxylate is of little or no clinical utility [Danpure 2001].

Auxiliary liver transplant. A previously heretical approach to organ transplant, auxiliary liver transplant has been proposed and demonstrated to ‘be effective’ in two published cases [Onaca et al 2005, Elias et al 2013] and to potentially provide effective oxalate clearance for some patients with PH1. This approach is not universally accepted as such, however [Trotter & Milliner 2014], and the basic principle behind the need to remove the native liver in addition to ‘replacing liver mass with a transplanted organ’ (namely the ongoing and overwhelming production of oxalate from the abnormal liver cells) would seem to suggest that the addition of a small piece of normal liver and its normal AGT enzymatic function would not be enough to provide sufficient metabolic clearance of oxalate being produced by the remaining PH1 liver tissue.

Onaca et al [2005] and Elias et al [2013] have each reported at least one patient with PH1 in whom this approach appeared to protect against oxalosis – without necessitating a high-risk full liver transplant.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 2 (PH2), the following evaluations are recommended [Leumann & Hoppe 2001]:

Assessment of renal function

If moderate to advanced ESRD is present, assessment of systemic oxalate deposition in tissue and bone:

Bone x-rays to look for radiodense metaphyseal bands

Ophthalmic examination of the retina to look for oxalate crystals

Evaluation of cardiac function by echocardiography

Treatment of Manifestations

Reduction of calcium oxalate supersaturation. As with PH1, conservative therapy is applied with the aim of minimizing oxalate-related renal injury and preserving renal function. Treatment of persons with preserved renal function, reviewed by Leumann & Hoppe [2001], essentially aims to improve oxalate solubility as follows:

Adequate fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 surface area/day)

Urinary inhibitors of calcium oxalate crystallization:

Orthophosphate treatment (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001] (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day)

Potassium citrate (0.1-0.15 g/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001]

Magnesium supplements (200-300 mg/day in divided doses) [Watts 1994]

Dialysis. Because the plasma oxalate concentration begins to rise when the renal clearance is less than 40 mL/min/1.73 m2, early initiation of dialysis or preemptive kidney-only transplantation is preferred. For patients in ESRD, intensive (daily) dialysis is required to maximize oxalate removal. As in PH1, the longer the individual with PH2 is on dialysis the more likely systemic oxalate deposition will occur.

Organ transplantation. Kidney transplantation alone has been used in PH2 with varying success. Careful management in the postoperative period, with attention to brisk urine output and use of calcium oxalate urinary inhibitors, minimizes the risk of allograft loss as a result of oxalate deposition.

To date, liver-kidney transplantation has not been used in PH2; however, as there is more enzyme present in the liver than in other tissues [Cregeen et al 2003], this strategy may have some merit.

Other. Pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine are used as a treatment in PH1 because of its role as cofactor for the defective enzyme. Its role in PH2 is unproven, but doses in the range of that found in typical multivitamin tablets have been used in an attempt to boost transaminases (including alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase) with glyoxylate metabolizing activity.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The main preventative treatment is to maintain adequate hydration status and to enhance calcium oxalate solubility with exogenous citrate and neutral phosphates as described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Frequency of testing depends on the center; however, as a guide, the following are recommended:

Quarterly. Assessment of renal function, blood pressure, and hematocrit

Six monthly to annually. Renal imaging (ultrasound or CT examination) to assess renal stone burden*

Annually. Examination for involvement of the skin, bone, eye, or thyroid*

For pregnant women with PH2, close monitoring by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis during pregnancy or after delivery

*Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Excessive ascorbate (i.e., vitamin C; >1000 mg/day)

Foods rich in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, spinach, and starfruit in particular)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In order to delay disease onset in asymptomatic relatives, it is prudent to screen at-risk family members before symptoms occur by measuring urinary oxalate excretion or by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Molecular genetic testing tends to be more reliable as urine oxalate output can be variable in childhood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Treatment with Oxalobacter formigenes is currently undergoing clinical trials in patients with hyperoxaluria and may provide an additional form of treatment for PH1 and PH2 [Hoppe et al 2006] by inducing oxalate excretion into the gut [Hatch & Freel 2003].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 3 (PH3), the following evaluations are recommended:

Kidney imaging for assessment of number and location of stones and presence of nephrocalcinosis

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration to assess the degree of oxalate overproduction

Baseline 24-hour collection with measurement of oxalate, calcium, citrate, pH, urine volume, and other components of a supersaturation profile to identify specific risk factors for stones – information that is valuable in guiding treatment

Assessment of kidney function by serum creatinine and eGFR

If chronic kidney disease (CKD) is present, evaluation for signs of systemic oxalosis by physical examination (livedo reticularis or non-healing ulcers of the skin), echocardiography (oxalate cardiomyopathy), electrocardiogram (conduction disturbances), complete blood count (erythropoietin-resistant anemia), bone films (sclerosis, pathologic fractures due to oxalate osteodystrophy), and retinal examination (retinal oxalate deposits)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Reduction of urine supersaturation of calcium oxalate in order to reduce stone formation and formation of calcium oxalate crystals that can be injurious to the kidney:

Maintainance of high oral fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 BSA)

Oral administration of an inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystallization. Most patients are treated with one of these agents, which include potassium and sodium citrate [Leumann & Hoppe 2001], orthophosphate [Milliner et al 1994], or magnesium [Watts 1994]. Note: Simultaneous administration of citrate and phosphate should be done with caution due to the potential for increasing calcium phosphate supersaturation.

Avoidance of supersaturation of calcium oxalate in the blood. Although there is little experience with chronic kidney disease in PH3, a decline in GFR to less than approximately 40 mL/min/1.73m2 would be expected to result in increased plasma oxalate and the potential for systemic oxalosis (as in other forms of PH). If plasma oxalate exceeds 35-50 μmol/L dialysis or transplantation is needed to reduce the risk of multiorgan complications of calcium oxalate deposition.

Prevention of stone complications through regular monitoring (see Surveillance) and prompt attention to the following, any of which can damage kidney function:

Alleviate obstruction of the urinary tract by a stone promptly through stent placement and/or stone removal.

Maintain continuous fluid intake and urine flow before, during, and for several days after stone removal procedures.

Treat urinary tract infections promptly and thoroughly, as bacteria may cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Avoidance of acute kidney injury by avoiding intravascular volume contraction at all times. This may necessitate intravenous fluids during severe gastroenteritis or other circumstances in which oral fluid intake cannot be maintained.

Avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess. Since the source of the excess oxalate in PH3 is metabolic overproduction, little is gained by strict low oxalate diets, which in young children may compromise nutrition. Simple avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Attention to ongoing care, including adherence to high fluid intake and medication schedule, is essential to good outcomes.

For patients who are stable and doing well* the following are recommended annually:

Clinical assessment of stone-related symptoms including pain, frequency of passage of stones or gravel in the urine, and urinary tract infection

Assessment of kidney function (serum creatinine and eGFR) and electrolytes

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, particularly in those with any impairment of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

24 hour urine oxalate and supersaturation study. During follow up, changes in the urine supersaturation can be used to monitor the effectiveness of therapy by confirming that the crystallization potential has decreased.

Renal ultrasound examination or other imaging to monitor for stone formation

*Very young patients, those with complex stone problems, and those with reduced kidney function need closer management with more frequent assessments.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Intravascular volume contraction (Note: Liberal use of intravenous fluids is indicated whenever oral fluid intake is inadequate.)

Delays in treatment of acute stone episodes

Nephrotoxic agents

Marked dietary oxalate excess

High-dose ascorbic acid

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the HOGA1 pathogenic variants found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment and preventive measures.

Urine oxalate should be measured in all sibs who are affected (i.e., have biallelic HOGA1 pathogenic variants) or who are carriers (i.e., heterozygous for one HOGA1 pathogenic variant)

Any sib with elevated urine oxalate/creatinine ratio or elevated oxalate excretion rate corrected for 1.73 m2 BSA should undergo kidney ultrasound examination, measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, a baseline 24-hour urine collection with a supersaturation profile, and measurement of serum creatinine concentration (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis).

See Genetic Counselling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There have been no studies of pregnancy in women with PH3. However, most women with PH1 or PH2 who had good kidney function during pregnancy have done well and have delivered healthy infants [Norby & Milliner 2004].

Adequate fluid intake should be maintained throughout the pregnancy. Circumstances that compromise fluid intake, such as hyperemesis gravidarum, should prompt early initiation of IV fluid to maintain adequate hydration.

Stones that become symptomatic during pregnancy may require routine (but specialized) techniques for management.

In patients with stones, urinary tract infections should be treated promptly and thoroughly due to the potential for bacteria to cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Therapies Under Investigation

Humans cannot degrade oxalate; however, certain bacteria use oxalate as an energy source. Preliminary studies suggest that oral administration of O. formigenes could reduce oxalate excretion in individuals with PH. Two previous double blind studies were inconclusive [Hoppe et al 2006]. A third clinical trial is under way in Europe, with results expected in 2015.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII), the following evaluations are recommended, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation:

Serum electrolyte analysis

Noninvasive blood pressure measurement

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Electrolyte and blood pressure abnormalities of PHAII are often corrected with thiazide diuretics. Metabolic abnormalities and hypertension generally improve within one week.

Different thiazide diuretics exist, with different dosing regimens. In general dosing is titrated to normalization of blood pressure. It is possible that dosing may need to be increased over time or that additional anti-hypertensives may be required to adequately control blood pressure.

There are no established guidelines regarding age at which treatment should begin for individuals with PHAII, but affected children who have hypertension are generally treated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Control of blood pressure is important to reduce the risk for cardiovascular and renal disease and stroke.

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes routine electrolyte and blood pressure measurements, monitored in the same manner as for any person treated with a thiazide diuretic.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Untreated individuals with PHAII should avoid excessive intake of foods high in salt and potassium as these may exacerbate hypertension and hyperkalemia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment. Evaluations can include:

Measurement of serum potassium concentration and blood pressure;

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family is known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

During the pregnancy of a woman with PHAII, electrolytes and blood pressure should be monitored regularly and blood pressure medication adjusted as needed.

Some antihypertensive medications (including thiazide diuretics) have been associated with adverse fetal outcome, especially when taken during the first trimester of pregnancy. The best time to discuss the risk to the fetus associated with a maternal medication is prior to conception. Women with PHAII who become pregnant should be referred to an obstetrics group with expertise in high risk pregnancies.

To access further information on medication use in pregnancy, visit www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Assessment for cortisol deficiency. This must be performed urgently in individuals who have no family history of PHS and in individuals who have family members with PHS and cortisol deficiency. Of note, adrenal crisis can be lethal in infants who have not undergone proper evaluation and treatment for adrenal insufficiency.

Consultation by an endocrinologist, including evaluation of growth hormone secretion, FSH and LH secretion, and serum concentration of thyroid hormone in early infancy after evaluation for and treatment of ACTH deficiency

Cranial MRI to establish the location and extent of hamartoma

Neurologic examination to exclude signs of intracranial hypertension, which is not typical of hypothalamic hamartomas

Visualization of the epiglottis by laryngoscopy; urgent evaluation by an otolaryngologist for laryngotracheal cleft when signs or symptoms of aspiration are present; elective evaluation by an otolaryngologist in asymptomatic individuals for the purpose of establishing the diagnosis or establishing the extent of anomalies

Limb radiographs to distinguish postaxial polydactyly from central polydactyly

Evaluation by a hand surgeon to assess the timing and surgical approach to correct the polydactyly. Note that the surgical correction of mesoaxial polydactyly is typically more complex than for postaxial polydactyly and should be undertaken by an expert surgeon.

Renal ultrasonography to evaluate for renal anomalies

Surgical consultation for imperforate anus or anal stenosis if present

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Endocrine abnormalities are treated as in the general population, with treatment for cortisol deficiency being the most urgent.

Anal atresia or stenosis should be treated in standard fashion.

Management of epiglottic abnormalities depends on the type of abnormality and extent of respiratory compromise and is the same as in the general population. Bifid epiglottis is commonly asymptomatic and most do not require treatment, unless accompanied by clear evidence of obstruction or associated with other anomalies, such as tracheal stenosis.

Seizures are treated symptomatically. Seizures associated with PHS are commonly responsive to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), whereas seizures associated with nonsyndromic hypothalamic hamartomas are more commonly refractory to AEDs.

Repair of polydactyly should be undertaken on an elective basis.

If developmental delays are detected, intervention and/or special education are indicated.

Occupational therapy for manual dexterity of the hands may be necessary as some individuals with mesoaxial polydactyly have digital malalignment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Only under the most unusual circumstances should a hypothalamic hamartoma be removed or even biopsied because the complications of surgery and the need for lifelong hormone supplements postoperatively generally outweigh the benefits.

Use of stimulants for attention deficit disorder should be considered carefully in persons with a CNS lesion that predisposes to seizures (e.g., hypothalamic hamartoma).

Surveillance

During childhood:

Annual medical evaluations to assess growth and monitor for signs of precocious puberty

Annual screening for developmental delay or learning disorders

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

As noted in Prevention of Secondary Complications, some stimulants (commonly used for attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders) may exacerbate seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical examination for polydactyly, laryngoscopy for bifid epiglottis, or MRI for hypothalamic hamartoma can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

The first-degree relative of a proband is considered affected if hypothalamic hamartoma or central or postaxial polydactyly are present in the relative. (Postaxial polydactyly type B can be used as a diagnostic criterion for first-degree relatives only in persons who are not of central African descent.)

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy management of a woman affected with PHS should be attuned to guidelines for the specific manifestations of the disorder. For example, the management of pregnant women with gelastic epilepsy who need to take anticonvulsants is challenging. As there are no guidelines specific to PHS, the author recommends following general guidelines for anticonvulsants in pregnancy [Borthen & Gilhus 2012].

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from antiepileptic medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication to treat a maternal seizure disorder during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

The management of fertility and pregnancy (which is uncommon in individuals with hypopituitarism) in individuals with hypopituitarism caused by PHS is similarly challenging and again, it is recommended that general guidelines be followed [Kübler et al 2009].

See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete medical history and family history

Physical examination with particular attention to skin, mucous membranes, thyroid, breasts

In children: consideration of neurodevelopmental evaluation

Urinalysis with cytospin

Baseline thyroid ultrasound examination* (on identification of a PTEN pathogenic variant)

For women age ≥30 years at diagnosis*:

Breast screening (at minimum mammogram; MRI may also be incorporated)

Transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial biopsy

For men and women age ≥35 years at diagnosis*: colonoscopy

For men and women age ≥40 years at diagnosis*: renal imaging (CT or MRI preferred)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

* For individuals with a family history of a particular cancer type at an early age, screening may be considered five to ten years prior to the youngest diagnosis in the family.

Treatment of Manifestations

The mucocutaneous manifestations of Cowden syndrome are rarely life threatening:

If asymptomatic, observation alone is prudent.

Cutaneous lesions should be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms (e.g., pain, deformity, increased scarring) are significant.When symptomatic, topical agents (e.g., 5-fluorouracil), curettage, cryosurgery, or laser ablation may provide only temporary relief [Hildenbrand et al 2001]. Surgical excision is sometimes complicated by cheloid formation and recurrence (often rapid) of the lesions [Eng, unpublished data].

Treatment for the benign and malignant manifestations of PHTS is the same as for their sporadic counterparts.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Some women at increased risk for breast cancer consider prophylactic mastectomy, especially if breast tissue is dense or if repeated breast biopsies have been necessary. Prophylactic mastectomy reduces the risk of breast cancer by 90% in women at high risk [Hartmann et al 1999]. Note: The recommendation of prophylactic mastectomy is a generalization for women at increased risk for breast cancer from a variety of causes, not just from PHTS.

No direct evidence supports the routine use of agents such as tamoxifen or raloxifene in individuals with PHTS to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer. Physicians should discuss the limitations of the evidence and the risks and benefits of chemoprophylaxis with each individual. In addition, the clinician must discuss the increased risk of endometrial cancer associated with tamoxifen use in a population already at increased risk for endometrial cancer.

Surveillance

The most serious consequences of PHTS relate to the increased risk of cancers including breast, thyroid, endometrial, and to a lesser extent, renal. In this regard, the most important aspect of management of any individual with a PTEN pathogenic variant is increased cancer surveillance to detect any tumors at the earliest, most treatable stages. Current suggested screening by age follows:

Cowden Syndrome

Pediatric (age <18 years)

Yearly thyroid ultrasound examination** (on identification of a PTEN pathogenic variant)

Yearly skin check with physical examination

Adult

Yearly thyroid ultrasound** and dermatologic evaluation

Women beginning at age 30 years:

Monthly breast self-examination**

Yearly breast screening (at minimum mammogram); MRI may also be incorporated.**

Yearly transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial biopsy**

For men and women:

Colonoscopy beginning at age 35 years**; frequency dependent on degree of polyposis identified

Biennial renal imaging (CT or MRI preferred) beginning at age 40 years**

** For those with a family history of a particular cancer type at an early age screening may be initiated five to ten years prior to the youngest diagnosis in the family. For example, in a woman whose mother developed breast cancer at age 30 years breast surveillance may begin at age 25-30 years.

Note: Although the NCCN Guidelines removed endometrial surveillance after 2007 (without expert PHTS input), it is prudent to ensure the minimal surveillance for endometrial cancer as detailed if family history is positive for endometrial cancer.

Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome

Screening recommendations have not been established for BRRS. Given recent molecular epidemiologic studies, however, individuals with BRRS and a germline PTEN pathogenic variant should undergo the same surveillance as individuals with CS.

Individuals with BRRS should also be monitored for complications related to gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis, which can be more severe than in CS.

Proteus Syndrome/Proteus-Like Syndrome

Although the observation of germline PTEN pathogenic variants in a minority of individuals who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome is relatively new, clinicians should consider instituting the CS surveillance recommendations for individuals with these disorders who have germline PTEN pathogenic variants.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because of the propensity for rapid tissue regrowth and the propensity to form keloid tissue, it is recommended that cutaneous lesions be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms (e.g., pain, deformity) are significant.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When a PTEN pathogenic variant has been identified in a proband, testing of asymptomatic at-risk relatives can identify those who have the family-specific pathogenic variant and, therefore, have PHTS. These individuals are in need of initial evaluation and ongoing surveillance.

Molecular testing is appropriate for at-risk individuals younger than age 18 years, given the possible early disease presentation in individuals with BRRS and Proteus syndrome. In individuals with PHTS, the earliest documented breast cancer and thyroid cancer are at age 17 years and before age nine years, respectively.

Relatives who have not inherited the PTEN pathogenic variant found in an affected relative do not have PHTS or its associated cancer risks.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Although mTOR inhibitors show promise for treatment of malignancies in individuals who have a germline PTEN pathogenic variant, use should be limited to clinical trials. A clinical trial specifically directed at PHTS recently concluded; results have not been published at the time of this GeneReview update.

An mTOR inhibitor trial will open shortly for pediatric, adolescent, and young adult patients with germline PTEN pathogenic variants and autism spectrum disorder.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth, the following evaluations are recommended:

A thorough history to identify key features of PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth

A physical examination including a thorough skin, cardiac, abdominal, and musculoskeletal evaluation, as well as a detailed neurologic assessment

Investigations to detect abnormalities before they result in significant morbidity/mortality:

Baseline brain and spinal cord imaging, especially in children with hemimegalencephaly (HMEG) and MCAP syndrome for early detection of cortical dysplasia, ventriculomegaly, and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia.

A cardiovascular assessment including a baseline echocardiogram and electrocardiogram to evaluate for cardiovascular malformations and rhythm abnormalities

A baseline renal ultrasound to evaluate for structural renal abnormalities

Surgical and orthopedic referrals for individuals suspected of having CLOVES syndrome or fibroadipose hyperplasia, and individuals with MCAP syndrome with focal somatic overgrowth or leg-length discrepancy

Treatment of Manifestations

Patients with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Referral to the appropriate specialist(s) is recommended for the following findings:

Significant or lipomatous segmental overgrowth: referral to a surgeon and/or thoracic surgeon (when lipomatous overgrowth involves the trunk)

Leg-length discrepancy secondary to segmental somatic overgrowth

Cardiac abnormalities (i.e., structural cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias)

Renal abnormalities

Intellectual disability and/or difficulties with learning, behavior, or speech, or motor difficulties

Speech, swallowing, and feeding difficulties

Neurologic and neurosurgical manifestations

MCAP syndrome. Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of raised intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data are lacking to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management. In recent years, favorable outcomes have been observed with ventriculostomy of the third ventricle (rather than insertion of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt), suggesting that the neurosurgical management of hydrocephalus in MCAP syndrome is evolving.

HMEG. Individuals are at risk for severe early-onset epilepsy, focal neurologic signs such as hemiparesis, and severe intellectual disability. Epilepsy and intellectual disability may be improved by hemispherectomy [Di Rocco et al 2006, Kwan et al 2008].

Individuals with HMEG and MCAP syndrome with polymicrogyria (PMG) are at increased risk for epilepsy; thus, long-term neurologic follow up is warranted, and many require long-term antiepileptic treatment [Mirzaa et al 2012].

Somatic overgrowth, vascular, lymphatic and musculoskeletal manifestations. CLOVES syndrome and fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH) are associated with severe focal overgrowth, vascular malformations, and orthopedic complications with significant morbidities. Prompt diagnosis (by MR/CT and angiography) is warranted. Most individuals undergo (often several) debulking or orthopedic procedures with significant ensuing complications (see Surveillance).

The following are the main treatment considerations in CLOVES syndrome:

The characteristic truncal lipomatous mass infiltrates surrounding tissues and often requires surgical excision. Severe scoliosis, large truncal mass, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems of the feet and hands, and central phlebectasia/thromboembolism are examples of significant morbidities that need active or prophylactic medical intervention.

Paraspinal and intraspinal extension have significant risk for compression of the cord, thecal sac, and nerve roots, with resultant major neurologic deficits, warranting prompt diagnosis and multidisciplinary care [Alomari 2009a].

Given the risk for thromboembolism in CLOVES syndrome, appropriate prophylactic measures including anticoagulation and caval filtration, particularly in the perioperative period, are recommended. Central and thoracic phlebectasia in individuals with CLOVES syndrome should be considered an indication for placement of a superior vena cava (SVC) filter.

FH is associated with severe progressive overgrowth of fibrous and adipose tissues. While the severity and natural history varied among reported individuals, thorough surgical and orthopedic evaluations are warranted. Most individuals (8/10) underwent extensive debulking or orthopedic procedures.

Surveillance

MCAP syndrome. Provisional surveillance guidelines include regular follow up, no less than every six months until age six years, and at least yearly thereafter. At each visit, the following are recommended with appropriate testing for any positive finding:

A medical history with attention to:

Childhood cancer

Breathing or sleep problems

Seizures or other undefined spells, headaches, or new or worsening neurologic symptoms

A detailed neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI. Based on limited retrospective data available, the risk for hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, or both with low brain stem or high spinal cord compression, appears to be highest in the first two years. Brain MRI is provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Renal ultrasound. Until additional data are available, screening for Wilms tumor following guidelines developed for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be considered (i.e., renal ultrasound examination every 3 months until age 8 years).

CLOVES syndrome

Given the associated morbidities including severe scoliosis, infiltrative lipomatous overgrowth, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems, central phlebectasias and thromboembolism, individuals with CLOVES syndrome require surveillance tailored to their specific needs with particular attention to surgical care [Sapp et al 2007, Alomari 2011, Alomari et al 2011].

Commonly occurring postoperative complications of surgical excision of the truncal lipomatous mass include recurrence, hypervascularity, and infiltrative growth. Therefore, diligent surgical care and monitoring are recommended.

Fibroadipose hyperplasia. Data regarding the natural history of fibroadipose hyperplasia are limited. However, given the extensive degree of somatic overgrowth in most individuals, the same surveillance guidelines for CLOVES are tentatively recommended for individuals with FH [Lindhurst et al 2012].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment for presence/severity of atypical signs using the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) rating scale [Goetz et al 2008]

Evaluation of the degree of response to treatment and its potential complications

Assessment for cognitive or behavioral problems

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, the treatment of PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease and no specific guidelines or recommendations have been developed.

Individuals with PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease have a mild form of Parkinson disease that responds well to levodopa and to other dopaminergic agonists.

Response is usually significant and is sustained for low doses of levodopa even after long disease duration. The response may be even better in PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease than in idiopathic Parkinson disease [Valente & Ferraris 2010].

The major problem is the early occurrence of severe levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and fluctuations. Fluctuations can be reduced by the combination of dopamine therapies with low doses of levodopa.

The use of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in PINK1 type Parkinson disease has been described [Moro et al 2008, Johansen et al 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No measures that eliminate disease manifestations in a symptomatic person or prevent them from appearing in an asymptomatic person have been identified.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa dosage should not exceed the level required for satisfactory clinical response. Dopamine agonists should be employed if not contraindicated to possibly delay the onset of motor fluctuations, as affected individuals often require several decades of treatment.

Surveillance

Neurologic follow up every three to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Owing to the absence of preventive treatment or measures, presymptomatic genetic diagnosis is not medically justified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no reports specifically addressing pregnancy management in women with PINK1 type Parkinson disease. However, in general, pregnancy may either exacerbate or improve symptoms of Parkinson disease [Shulman et al 2000, Scott & Chowdhury 2005]. L-dopa crosses the placenta and (theoretically) may have an adverse effect on fetal development, as some animal models have shown that high doses of L-dopa administered during pregnancy may induce stillbirth and birth defects including skeletal malformations [Scott & Chowdhury 2005]. However, based on more than 30 cases recorded in the literature levodopa treatment during human pregnancy has not resulted in adverse fetal outcome [Scott & Chowdhury 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment to determine the types of services and educational strategies needed. In school-aged children this information is important for the child’s individual education program (IEP).

Assessment for the use of nonverbal communication devices and strategies (given that most patients do not develop useful speech)

Child behavior specialist to aid with behavioral concerns

Pulmonary consultation if history of respiratory pattern abnormality is identified on directed questioning. Polysomnography may be indicated if there is a history of episodic apnea especially when associated with cyanosis (typically alternating with episodes of hyperventilation).

Child neurology evaluation if there are concerns about seizure episodes

Ophthalmology evaluation to evaluate for myopia, astigmatism, and/or strabismus

Gastroenterology evaluation to establish treatment regimen for chronic constipation

Musculoskeletal evaluation to evaluate ambulatory skills and need for special mobility equipment and/or orthotics to aid in foot position

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Developmental. Early infant developmental services (physical, occupational, speech therapies):

Infant feeding assessment to address early hypotonia as needed

Special education services to address delays with focus on life skills

Behavioral modification for self-injurious behavior or anxiety

Pulmonary. Some reports indicate that antiepileptic medications control seizures while leaving the unusual respiratory patterns unchanged Peippo et al [2006] and others have noted some decrease in the frequency of the episodes with the use of anticonvulsants [Takano et al 2010]. Improvement of an abnormal respiratory pattern after treatment with sodium valproate has been reported in a person with PTHS with frequent apneic episodes associated with hypoxemia [Maini et al 2012]. A recent study in two patients with PTHS demonstrated that daily treatment with acetazolamide resulted in decreased frequency and duration of hyperventilatory and apneic episodes and improved oxygen saturation [Verhulst et al 2012].

Neurologic. Treatment of epilepsy appropriate to type of seizure and individualized to the patient

Ophthalmologic. Eyeglasses or surgery as needed for amblyopia

Gastrointestinal. In most patients, regular use of high-fiber diet and/or laxative regimen to address constipation

Musculoskeletal: Orthotics for abnormal foot position to aid in ambulation. Orthopedic treatment of scoliosis as indicated.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Ongoing developmental assessments to tailor educational services to an individual’s strengths

Regular follow up with an ophthalmologist to monitor for high myopia and strabismus

Periodic reevaluation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with PTHS

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and need for clinical follow up in an individual diagnosed with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), the following initial evaluations are recommended:

Upper endoscopy plus small bowel examination (MR enterography or wireless capsule endoscopy) beginning at age eight years or when symptoms occur

Colonoscopy beginning at age eight years

In women, gynecologic and breast examinations and (after age 18 years) MRI

In men, testicular examination and testicular ultrasound examination, if clinically indicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Polyps. Once the burden of gastrointestinal polyps has been established by endoscopy and imaging studies, prophylactic polypectomy of polyps >1cm is performed. This strategy has two goals:

To decrease the sequelae of large polyps including bleeding, anemia, obstruction, and intussusception

To reduce the risk for cancer by the malignant transformation of PJS-type polyps

The luminal polyp-related complications arise in childhood whereas cancer in PJS is typically seen in adulthood. Some evidence indicates that routine endoscopy and intraoperative enteroscopy with polypectomy decreases the frequency of emerging laparotomy and bowel loss [Pennazio & Rossini 2000, Edwards et al 2003, Oncel et al 2004]. From St. Mark’s PJS registry of 51 affected individuals who underwent surveillance endoscopies, none had emergency surgical interventions and no GI luminal cancers were diagnosed [Latchford et al 2011]. In surveillance endoscopies in affected individuals by age 18 years, 17/28 had large gastroduodenal or colonic polyps (>1 cm). These studies demonstrate that endoscopic surveillance and polypectomy in PJS is safe.

Distal small-bowel polyps that are beyond the reach of conventional endoscopy have been difficult to manage. Until recently, barium contrast upper-gastrointestinal series with a small-bowel follow through has been recommended. However, recent advances allow better diagnosis and eradication of small-bowel polyps, oftentimes without laparotomy and with a decrease in the radiation burden related to frequent surveillance:

Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) allows for better visualization of the small-bowel polyps than barium x-rays and is recommended as a first-line surveillance procedure. In children, the capsule can be deployed in the duodenum after upper endoscopy [Parsi & Burke 2004, Burke et al 2005, Mata et al 2005, Schulmann et al 2005]. See Note.

Magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) is a reliable procedure for the detection of larger small-bowel polyps with similar sensitivity to VCE and avoids the radiation exposure of CT enterography [Caspari et al 2004, Gupta et al 2010]. CT and MR enteroclysis are alternative procedures but are less well tolerated. See Note.

Balloon-assisted enteroscopy can remove distal small-bowel polyps with or without laparotomy [Ohmiya et al 2005, Ross et al 2006, Gao et al 2010]. Safety in those with PJS has been demonstrated in a few studies. Balloon-assisted enteroscopy and polypectomy should decrease the need for intraoperative enteroscopy or enterotomy, and should be reserved for affected individuals with many large and distal small-bowel polyps.

Note: (1) VCE was preferred by individuals and detected more large polyps than MRE [Urquhart et al 2014]. (2) In three individuals in a study by Gupta et al [2010], MRE detected polyps >15 mm that were not detected by VCE.

Intussusception should be treated in a standard manner.

Malignancies should be treated in a standard manner. Conservative management of gonadal tumors in males and females is appropriate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Although not specifically studied in PJS, prophylactic mastectomy may be considered to manage the increased risk for breast cancer based on the family history or other clinical factors. Prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy to prevent gynecologic malignancy in women may be considered. In some disorders with a high risk for malignancy (e.g., HNPCC), evidence supports this strategy [Schmeler et al 2006].

Surveillance

The surveillance program for the multiple organs at risk for cancer is outlined in Table 4. Note: The effect of such surveillance on morbidity and mortality has not been evaluated in controlled trials.

From birth, an annual history and physical examination with attention to testicular examination and routine blood work is recommended. A boy age 13 years with PJS was recently described as developing an unusually early presentation of small-bowel adenocarcinoma, thus supporting screening in childhood as illustrated in Table 4 [Wangler et al 2013].

Table 4. 

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Site

Procedure

Age at Initial Screening (yrs)

Interval

Stomach

Upper endoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Small intestine

Capsule endoscopy or MRE 2

8, 18 3

3 years

Large intestine

Colonoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Breast

Breast self-examination

18

Monthly

Clinical breast exam

6 months

Breast MRI or digital mammography 4, 5, 6

25

1 year

Ovary, cervix, uterus

Transvaginal ultrasound & serum CA 125;pelvic exam w/pap smear 6

18-20

1 year

Pancreas

MRI-MRCP or endoscopic ultrasound

30

1-2 years

Testes

Testicular exam; ultrasound if symptomatic or abnormality on exam

Birth to teenage years

1 year

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

1. 

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

2. 

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

3. 

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

4. 

Digital mammography if MRI not available

5. 

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

6. 

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

Digital mammography if MRI not available

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No agents that increase the risk for polyp development or for cancers have been described.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing for the known pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant to at-risk relatives. Morbidity and mortality can be reduced in those individuals identified to have the family-specific variant by means of:

Early diagnosis and treatment;

Surveillance as outlined in Surveillance.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, it is appropriate to offer:

Clinical diagnostic evaluations to identify those family members who will benefit from early treatment;

Surveillance as outlined in Surveillance to all first-degree relatives whether or not they meet diagnostic criteria.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Several animal models of PJS have been generated using STK11 knockout mice [Karuman et al 2001, Bardeesy et al 2002, Miyoshi et al 2002, Nakau et al 2002, Wei et al 2005]. Gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis in STK11+/– mice mimics human PJS polyps with the unique smooth muscle arborization. In these animal models, upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in polyp tissue was noted [Rossi et al 2002]. Overexpression of COX-2 in human PJS hamartomas and PJS-associated cancers has also been detected [McGarrity et al 2003, Wei et al 2003]. COX-2 inhibition in mice using celecoxib suppresses polyp growth [Udd et al 2004]. Polyp burden in STK11 (Lkb1) heterozygous (+/–) knockout mice was reduced by 86% among mice who had developed polyps and were then treated with 1500-ppm celecoxib.

Selective COX-2 inhibitors have been approved for the prevention of colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis [Lynch 2010]; to date, however, no clinical trials in the US are studying efficacy of COX-2 inhibitors in reducing polyp formation in individuals with PJS. Increased cardiovascular and cerebrovascular adverse events with selective COX-2 inhibitors limit their use.

Observation of hyperactivation of mTOR in hereditary harmartoma syndrome and a variety of cancers suggests that mTOR inhibitors may be useful in the management of PJS [van Veelen et al 2011]. Wei et al [2008] and Wei et al [2009] reported significant reduction in tumor burden in STK11+/– mice treated with rapamycin compared with that in mice without rapamycin treatment. Treatment begun before the onset of polyposis resulted in more dramatic reduction than treatment begun after onset. In another study in STK11+/– mice oral rapamycin intake was associated with a significant reduction in microvessel growth in polyps as well as in tumor burden [Robinson et al 2009].

In addition, in two small trials in persons with tuberous sclerosis complex, treatment with rapamycin induced regression of the astrocytomas [Franz et al 2006] and reduced facial angiofibroma [Hofbauer et al 2008]. Whether rapamycin would decrease polyp growth in PJS has not been documented in human studies. The mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, caused partial regression of a pancreatic cancer in an individual with PJS. Induction of apoptosis in colon polyps was also noted [Klümpen et al 2011].

These findings suggest that mTOR inhibitors are an option to investigate for management of polyposis in PJS.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), the following are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Neurologic examination for dystonia, rigidity, choreoathetosis, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech

Ophthalmologic assessment for evidence of retinopathy

Screening developmental assessment, with referral for more formal testing if delay is indicated

Assessment for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

A consensus clinical management guideline for PKAN is available to provide management information at a detailed level [Hogarth et al 2017]. Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms.

Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be profoundly debilitating and distressing to the affected individual and caregivers. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following:

Intramuscular botulinum toxin

Oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, and clonazepam: the first-line drugs most commonly effective in PKAN

Second-line drugs including clonidine, gabapentin, tetrabenazine, and pregabalin

Intrathecal and intraventricular baclofen

Deep brain stimulation, used clinically with increasing frequency and some evidence for initial benefit, although it may not be sustained as disease progresses [Lim et al 2012, Garcia-Ruiz et al 2015, Hogarth et al 2017]

Ablative pallidotomy or thalmotomy. These ablative procedures have mainly been replaced by DBS, but in certain individuals may still be useful [Dwarakanath et al 2014].

Urgent medical treatment (often hospitalization) for status dystonicus (dystonic storm), which is a common occurrence. The PKAN consensus guideline provides detailed information about approach and management of dystonic storms [Hogarth et al 2017].

Physical and occupational therapy as indicated, particularly for those who are only mildly symptomatic. Therapies to maintain normal joint mobility for as long as possible may be useful.

Referral for adaptive aids as needed (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities)

Speech therapy and/or assistive communication devices for PKAN-related dysarthria and speech delay

Other manifestations

Treatment and interventions for retinopathy as per ophthalmology

Referral to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the blind (if retinopathy is present), and special education

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Recurrent tongue biting from severe orobuccolingual dystonia is a specific challenge that is difficult to manage in PKAN. Customized bite-lock orthodontic appliances can be made and cemented in place to prevent tongue lacerations. Every effort should be made to avoid full dental extraction.

Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally due to dysphagia or respiratory complications, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated.

In later stages of classic disease, tracheostomy may also be indicated.

Surveillance

As the disease progresses, episodes of extreme distress may last for days or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain. These may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, mouth lacerations, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a nonambulatory individual with marked stress on long bones from dystonia places individuals with PKAN at especially high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.

The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Oral assessment for consequences of trauma

Assessment of ambulation, environmental adaptations, speech abilities, and communication needs to help affected individuals to maintain independence

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments to assure adequate nutrition

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Anecdotal reports of three sibs with atypical PKAN treated with alpha-tocopherol and idebenone indicated worsening of symptoms, with subsequent improvement once these compounds were stopped [JP Harpey, personal communication].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Related Genetic Counseling Issues.

Therapies Under Investigation

Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as data on deferiprone (Ferriprox®) have accumulated in several populations of affected individuals. Unlike earlier drugs, deferiprone crosses the blood-brain barrier and removes intracellular iron. One small Phase II pilot trial has been performed to assess deferiprone in the PKAN population. Deferiprone was tolerated well in the nine affected individuals who completed the study, and there was a statistically significant reduction of iron in the pallida by MRI evaluation. However, there was no change in their clinical status. The authors suggested that a longer trial period may be necessary to produce clinical amelioration [Zorzi et al 2011]. An international randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of deferiprone was recently completed and the data are currently being analyzed (clinicaltrials.gov).

Additional therapies. Multiple compounds are currently in development for PKAN and anticipated to go to clinical trial. Clinicians should check ClinicalTrials.gov regularly and maintain contact with PKAN investigators.

Other

Pantothenate. The existence of residual enzyme activity in some individuals with PKAN raises the possibility of treatment using high-dose pantothenate, the PANK2 enzyme substrate. Pantothenate has no known toxicity in humans; high oral doses of pantothenic acid or calcium pantothenate (≤10 g/day for several weeks) do not appear to be toxic to humans. The efficacy of pantothenate supplementation in ameliorating symptoms is currently unknown; some individuals with an atypical disease course have anecdotally reported improvement in their symptoms (dysarthria, gait imbalance, sense of well-being) when taking pantothenate.

Docosahexanoic acid (DHA). Based on the role of coenzyme A in the synthesis and degradation of fatty acids, the importance of DHA as a major component of rod photoreceptor disc membranes, and the observation of retinal degeneration in a large portion of individuals with PKAN, DHA may have a role in preventing this complication, although no studies have yet been performed. The compound may be provided as an oral nutritional supplement in the form of omega-3 fats (fish oil) and is without known toxicity.

Other treatments

Therapies that may have a role in other forms of NBIA but generally do not help individuals with PKAN include levodopa/carbidopa and bromocriptine.

Treatment of PKAN with phosphopantothenate, the product of pantothenate kinase, is complicated by the lack of available compound as well as any information about its safety or toxicity in humans or animals. Furthermore, it is unlikely that phosphopantothenate would be readily transported across cell membranes, making the success of this hypothetical treatment doubtful.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Renal ultrasound examination (particularly when CT or MRI of the abdomen is unavailable) can be helpful to determine the severity of disease. Ultrasound can provide an estimate of size and distribution of cysts and of overall kidney size, but CT or MRI is more sensitive and allows for better quantification of the disease severity (see following).

CT or MRI of the abdomen with and without contrast enhancement to help determine the extent of cystic disease in the kidneys and liver, as well as to estimate the prognosis. CT, but not MRI, can detect stones and parenchymal calcifications. CT or MR angiography (MRA) can be used when visualization of the renal arteries is necessary. MRI can be used when administration of iodinated contrast material is contraindicated.

Standardized blood pressure screening per the recommendations of the American Heart Association to detect early stages of hypertension. When "white coat" hypertension (i.e., blood pressure that is elevated when measured in the clinic, but normal when measured outside of the clinic) is suspected, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is appropriate.

Measurement of blood lipid concentrations because hyperlipidemia is a correctable risk factor for progressive renal disease, including ADPKD

Urine studies to detect the presence of microalbuminuria or proteinuria, which in the presence of severe renal cystic disease indicates an increased likelihood of disease progression and mandates strict control of the blood pressure

Echocardiography in persons with heart murmurs or systolic clicks possibly resulting from valvular heart disease, mitral valve prolapse, or congenital cardiac abnormalities

Echocardiography or cardiac MRI to screen persons at high risk because of a family history of thoracic aortic dissections

Head MRA or CT angiography to screen persons at high risk because of a family history of intracranial aneurysms. Note: Screening for intracranial aneurysms in individuals without a family history of intracranial aneurysms is not recommended [Irazabal et al 2011].

Treatment of Manifestations

Current therapy for ADPKD is directed toward reducing morbidity and mortality from the renal and extrarenal complications of the disease.

Hypertension. The antihypertensive agent(s) of choice in ADPKD have not been clearly established. However, because of the role of the renin angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of hypertension in ADPKD, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists may be superior to other agents in individuals with preserved renal function. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers increase renal blood flow, have a low side-effect profile, and may reduce vascular smooth muscle proliferation and development of atherosclerosis:

The administration of ACE inhibitors, but not the administration of calcium channel blockers, has been shown to reduce microalbuminuria in individuals with ADPKD [Ecder & Schrier 2001].

In an historic, non-randomized study, the administration of ACE inhibitors without diuretics was found to result in a lower rate of decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and less proteinuria than the administration of a diuretic without an ACE inhibitor for similar control of blood pressure [Ecder & Schrier 2001].

Another study found no renal protective effect of an ACE inhibitor over a β-blocker [van Dijk et al 2003]; another study found that although more rigorous blood pressure control did not preserve renal function, it did lead to a greater decrease in left ventricular mass [Schrier et al 2002].

A long-term follow-up of the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study showed that individuals with ADPKD randomized to a low blood pressure target (mean arterial pressure [MAP] <92 mmHg) experienced significantly less ESRD and combined ESRD/death than those randomized to the usual blood pressure target (MAP <107 mmHg) [Sarnak et al 2005].

The recent HALT PKD trial did not show a benefit of the addition of an angiotensin II-receptor blocker (ARB) to an ACE inhibitor in terms of preserving renal function [Torres et al 2014]. In the same trial, a lower blood pressure target (95-110/60-75 mm Hg) compared to the standard target (120-130/70-80 mm Hg) in younger affected individuals with preserved renal function was associated with a slower increase in kidney volume but no overall change in the decline in renal function, as measured by eGFR.

Flank pain. After excluding causes of flank pain that may require intervention, such as infection, stone, or tumor, an initial conservative approach to pain management is best:

Nonopioid agents are preferred and care should be taken to avoid long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesic and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Tricyclic antidepressants are helpful, as in all chronic pain syndromes, and are well tolerated.

Narcotic analgesics should be reserved for the management of acute episodes, as chronic use can lead to physical and psychological dependence.

Splanchnic nerve blockade with local anesthetics or steroids can result in pain relief beyond the duration of the local anesthetic.

When conservative measures fail, therapy can be directed toward cyst decompression with cyst aspiration and sclerosis:

Cyst aspiration, under ultrasound or CT guidance, is a relatively simple procedure carried out routinely by interventional radiologists. Complications from aspiration of centrally located cysts are more common, and the morbidity of the procedure is proportional to the number of cysts treated. Cyst aspiration can help to establish causality between a cyst and the presence of pain, but seldom provides long-lasting relief because of fluid reaccumulation.

Sclerosing agents, such as 95% ethanol or acidic solutions of minocycline, are commonly used to prevent the reaccumulation of cyst fluid. Good results have been obtained with 95% ethanol, achieving a success rate of 90% in benign renal cysts. Minor complications include: microhematuria, localized pain, transient fever, and systemic absorption of the alcohol. More serious complications such as pneumothorax, perirenal hematoma, arteriovenous fistula, urinoma, and infection are rare.

In individuals with many cysts contributing to pain, laparoscopic or surgical cyst fenestration through lumbotomy or flank incision, renal denervation, and (in those who have reached ESRD) nephrectomy may be of benefit:

Surgical decompression was effective in 80% to 90% of individuals for one year; 62% to 77% had sustained pain relief for longer than two years. Surgical intervention neither accelerates the decline in renal function nor preserves remaining renal function.

Laparoscopic fenestration has been shown to be as effective as open surgical fenestration in short-term follow-up for individuals with limited disease and has a shorter, less complicated recovery period than open surgery.

Renal denervation via a thoracoscopic approach was successful in one affected individual [Chapuis et al 2004]. Recently, percutaneous transluminal catheter-based denervation was shown to be effective for the treatment of kidney pain in single case reports [Shetty et al 2013, Casteleijn et al 2014 ].

Laparoscopic and retroperitonoscopic nephrectomy and arterial embolization have been used to treat symptomatic polycystic kidneys in individuals with ADPKD who have ESRD [Ubara et al 1999, Dunn et al 2000].

Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy may be preferable to standard laparoscopic nephrectomy because of shorter operating time and lower morbidity [Lee & Clayman 2004].

Cyst hemorrhage and gross hematuria. Episodes of cyst hemorrhage or of gross hematuria are usually self-limited and respond well to conservative management with bed rest, analgesics, and adequate hydration to prevent development of obstructing clots.

Rarely, episodes of bleeding are severe with extensive subcapsular or retroperitoneal hematoma, significant drop in hematocrit, and hemodynamic instability. In such cases, individuals require hospitalization, transfusion, and investigation by CT or angiography. In cases of unusually severe or persistent hemorrhage, segmental arterial embolization can be successful. If not, surgery may be required to control bleeding.

Gross hematuria persisting more than one week or developing for the first time in an individual older than age 50 years requires thorough investigation.

Nephrolithiasis. Small uric acid stones can be missed on nephrotomography and are best detected by CT. CT should be obtained before and after the administration of contrast material to confirm the localization within the collecting system and to differentiate calculi from parenchymal calcifications. Dual absorption CT now facilitates the differentiation of uric acid stones from calcium-containing stones.

Excretory urography detects precaliceal tubular ectasia in 15% of individuals with ADPKD.

The treatment of nephrolithiasis in individuals with ADPKD is the same as that for individuals without ADPKD:

High fluid intake and potassium citrate are the treatment of choice in uric acid lithiasis, hypocitric calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, and distal acidification defects.

Medical dissolution of uric acid stones can usually be achieved by a program of high fluid intake, urine alkalinization (to maintain a pH of 6-6.5), and administration of allopurinol.

Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy and percutaneous nephrostolithotomy can be successful in individuals with ADPKD without excessive complications [Umbreit et al 2010].

Cyst infection. If cyst infection is suspected, diagnostic imaging should be undertaken to assist in the diagnosis:

CT and MRI are sensitive for detecting complicated cysts and provide anatomic definition, but the findings are not specific for infection.

Nuclear imaging, especially indium-labeled white cell scanning, is useful, but false negative and false positive results are possible.

18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scanning is the most sensitive method to detect an infected cyst, but it is expensive, not readily available and may not be reimbursed by insurance companies [Sallée et al 2009].

In the appropriate clinical setting of fever, flank pain, and suggestive diagnostic imaging, cyst aspiration under ultrasound or CT guidance should be undertaken to culture the organism and assist in selection of antimicrobial therapy, particularly if blood and urine cultures are negative [Torres et al 2007a].

Cyst infection is often difficult to treat. It has a high treatment failure rate despite prolonged therapy with an antibiotic to which the organism is susceptible. Treatment failure results from the inability of certain antibiotics to penetrate the cyst epithelium successfully and achieve therapeutic concentrations within the cyst. The epithelium that lines gradient cysts has functional and ultrastructural characteristics of the distal tubule epithelium. Penetration is via tight junctions, allowing only lipid-soluble agent access. Non-gradient cysts, which are more common, allow solute access via diffusion. However, kinetic studies indicate that water-soluble agents penetrate non-gradient cysts slowly and irregularly, resulting in unreliable drug concentrations within the cysts. Lipophilic agents have been shown to penetrate both gradient and non-gradient cysts equally and reliably and have a pKa that allows for favorable electrochemical gradients into acidic cyst fluids.

Therapeutic agents of choice include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones. Clindamycin, vancomycin, and metronidazole are also able to penetrate cysts well. Chloramphenicol has shown therapeutic efficacy in otherwise refractory disease.

If fever persists after one to two weeks of appropriate antimicrobial therapy, percutaneous or surgical drainage of infected cysts should be undertaken. If fever recurs after discontinuation of antibiotics, complicating features such as obstruction, perinephric abscess, or stones should be considered and treated appropriately. If complicating features are not identified, the course of previously effective therapy should be extended; several months may be required to completely eradicate the infection.

Malignancy. The diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in a polycystic kidney requires a high index of suspicion. MRI with gadolinium enhancement is particularly helpful to detect atypical solid or cystic masses, tumor thrombi, and regional lymphadenopathy.

The diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma in a polycystic kidney is equally challenging and usually requires retrograde pyelography or ureteroscopy.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD). Therapeutic interventions aimed at slowing the progression of ESRD in ADPKD include control of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, dietary protein restriction, control of acidosis, and prevention of hyperphosphatemia.

Animal data support the role of dietary protein restriction and careful control of hypertension in slowing the rate of renal failure in PKD [Qian et al 2001]. However, the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) trial showed no beneficial effect on renal function of strict (compared with standard) blood pressure control and only a slight (borderline significant) beneficial effect of a very low protein diet. Because these interventions were introduced at a late state of the disease (GFR 13-55 mL/min per 1.73 m2), the results do not exclude a beneficial effect of interventions introduced at an earlier stage of the disease.

Actuarial data indicate that individuals with ADPKD do better on dialysis than individuals with ESRD from other causes. Females appear to do better than males. The reason for this improved outcome is unclear but may relate to better-maintained hemoglobin levels through higher endogenous erythropoietin production. Rarely, hemodialysis can be complicated by intradialytic hypotension if the inferior vena cava is compressed by a medially located renal cyst. Despite renal size, peritoneal dialysis can usually be performed in individuals with ADPKD; although these individuals are at increased risk for inguinal and umbilical hernias, which require surgical repair.

There is no difference in patient or graft survival between individuals with ADPKD and those with ESRD caused by other conditions. Living donor transplantation for ADPKD, which requires exclusion of ADPKD in the donor (see Testing Strategy), has increased in the last two decades. Nephrectomy of the native kidneys is reserved for affected individuals with a history of infected cysts, frequent bleeding, severe hypertension, or massive renal enlargement. There is no consensus on the optimal timing of nephrectomy; whether nephrectomy is performed before, at, or following transplantation depends to some extent on the indication for the nephrectomy and other patient-specific considerations [Lucas et al 2010, Kirkman et al 2011]. Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy is increasingly being used [Lee & Clayman 2004]. Complications after transplantation are no greater than in the general population. Complications directly related to ADPKD are rare. One study has suggested an increased risk for thromboembolic complications [Jacquet et al 2011]. Whether individuals with ADPKD are at increased risk for new-onset diabetes mellitus after transplantation (NODAT) is questionable [Ruderman et al 2012].

Polycystic liver disease. Most individuals with polycystic liver disease have no symptoms and require no treatment.

The treatment of symptomatic disease includes the avoidance of estrogens and caffeine and the use of H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors for symptomatic relief.

Severe symptoms may require percutaneous aspiration and sclerosis, laparoscopic fenestration, combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration, liver transplantation, or selective hepatic artery embolization. Any of these interventions should be tailored to the individual [Torres 2007, Drenth et al 2010].

Cyst aspiration and sclerosis with alcohol or minocyline is the treatment of choice for symptoms caused by one or a small number of dominant cysts. Before instillation of the sclerosing agent, a contrast medium is injected into the cyst to evaluate for communication with the bile ducts. The success rate of this procedure (70% after a single treatment and an additional 20% after repeated treatment) is inversely correlated with the size of the cyst(s).

Laparoscopic fenestration of hepatic cysts, a less commonly performed procedure, is complicated by transient ascites in 40% of individuals; and the results are often short-lived. Thus, laparoscopic cyst fenestration is indicated only for the treatment of disproportionally large cysts as an alternative to percutaneous sclerosis.

Neither percutaneous sclerosis nor laparoscopic fenestration is helpful in individuals with large polycystic livers with many small- and medium-sized cysts. In most individuals, part of the liver is spared, allowing treatment by combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration. Because the surgery and recovery can be difficult, with complications such as transient ascites and bile leaks and a perioperative mortality of 2.5%, it should be performed only in specialized centers [Schnelldorfer et al 2009]. The surgery has good long-term results in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease and is often preferable to liver transplantation, which is reserved for those individuals for whom liver resection is not feasible or for those individuals in whom liver function is impaired.

Because individuals with severe polycystic liver disease have mostly normal liver function, their MELD (model for end-stage liver disease) scores are low, placing them at a disadvantage for organ allocation. For highly selected individuals in this group, caval sparing hepatectomy and subsequent living donor liver transplantation could provide a potential alternative [Mekeel et al 2008].

Selective hepatic artery embolization can be considered for highly symptomatic patients who are not surgical candidates [Takei et al 2007].

Ruptured or symptomatic intracranial aneurysm. The mainstay of therapy is surgical clipping of the ruptured aneurysm at its neck.

Asymptomatic aneurysms

Those aneurysms measuring 5.0 mm or smaller in diameter and diagnosed by presymptomatic screening can be observed and followed initially at yearly intervals. If the size increases, surgery is indicated.

The management of aneurysms 6.0-9.0 mm in size remains controversial.

Surgical intervention is usually indicated for aneurysms larger than 10.0 mm in diameter.

For individuals with high surgical risk or with technically difficult-to-manage lesions, endovascular treatment with detachable platinum coils may be indicated. Endovascular treatment seems to be associated with fewer complications than clipping, but the long-term efficacy of this method is as yet unproven [Pirson et al 2002].

Aortic dissection. When the aortic root diameter reaches 55 mm to 60 mm, replacement of the aorta is indicated.

Surveillance

Early detection of hypertension. Children with a family history of ADPKD should have their blood pressure (BP) monitored by a practitioner with experience in measurement of BP in children [Chapman et al 2015]. Screening from age five years onward, with an interval of three years in cases in which no hypertension is found, seems prudent. The diagnosis of hypertension is made when systolic or diastolic BP is ≥95th percentile for age, height, and sex, in accordance with prevailing pediatric guidelines

Renal cell carcinoma. There is currently insufficient evidence for recommending screening in asymptomatic individuals with ADPKD.

Intracranial aneurysms. Widespread screening is usually not recommended since most intracranial aneurysms found by screening asymptomatic individuals are small, have a low risk of rupture, and require no treatment [Gibbs et al 2004, Irazabal et al 2011, Chapman et al 2015], although dissenting opinions have been published [Rozenfeld et al 2014].

Indications for screening in affected individuals with a good life expectancy include a family history of intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage, previous rupture of an aneurysm, preparation for elective surgery with potential hemodynamic instability, high-risk occupations such as airplane pilots, and significant anxiety on the part of the individual despite adequate risk information.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice for presymptomatic screening because it is noninvasive and does not require intravenous contrast material. Because only one of 76 individuals with an initial negative study had a new intracranial aneurysm after a mean follow-up of 9.8 years, rescreening after an interval of ten years has been suggested as a reasonable approach [Schrier et al 2004].

Aortic dissection. Until more information becomes available, it is reasonable to screen first-degree adult relatives of individuals with thoracic aortic dissection using either echocardiography or MRI. If aortic root dilatation is found, yearly follow-up and strict blood pressure control with beta blockers should be recommended.

Cardiac valvular abnormalities. Screening echocardiography is not recommended unless a murmur is detected or there are other cardiovascular signs or symptoms [Chapman et al 2015].

Colon diverticulosis. Routine screening for diverticulosis is not recommended, but physicians should be aware of a possible increased occurrence of diverticulosis or diverticulitis in individuals with ADPKD who have reached ESRD [Chapman et al 2015].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesics and NSAIDs

Caffeine in large amounts because it interferes with the breakdown of cAMP and hence may promote renal cyst growth

Use of estrogens and possibly progestogens in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease [Alvaro et al 2006, Glaser et al 2008]

Smoking

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The initial evaluation of at-risk relatives over age 18 years should be imaging with abdominal ultrasound examination, CT, or MRI. When the findings on imaging are equivocal or if the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing may be appropriate.

Presymptomatic diagnosis:

Allows those found to be affected to become better educated about the disease;

Permits early detection and treatment of complications and associated disorders;

Reassures those found to be unaffected.

A molecular diagnosis provides information for family planning choices, including PGD.

Note: (1) Appropriate counseling prior to imaging or molecular testing, including a discussion of the possible impact on insurability and employability, is most important. (2) At present, there is no indication for testing of asymptomatic children. This may change in the future, if and when effective therapies are developed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The literature on pregnancy and PKD is limited.

Pregnant women with ADPKD should be monitored closely for the development of hypertension and urinary tract infections.

Pregnant women who develop hypertension during pregnancy or who have impaired renal function are at increased risk and should be monitored closely for the development of preeclampsia, intrauterine fetal growth restriction, and oligohydramnios.

A second-trimester prenatal sonographic examination is indicated if either parent has ADPKD to assess fetal kidney size and echogenicity, presence of fetal kidney cysts, and amniotic fluid volume [Vora et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

Significant advances in the understanding of the genetics of ADPKD and the mechanisms of cyst growth have revealed likely targets for therapeutic intervention.

Vasopressin V2 receptor antagonists. Of particular interest are recent studies that have shown that modulation of cAMP levels by targeting the vasopressin V2 receptor can dramatically inhibit cyst development in animal models of nephronophthisis, ARPKD, and ADPKD [Gattone et al 2003, Torres et al 2004, Wang et al 2005, Wang et al 2008]. A phase II open-label clinical trial [Higashihara et al 2011] and a phase III global, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with a vasopressin V2 receptor antagonist (tolvaptan) were completed [Torres 2008, Torres et al 2011b, Torres et al 2012]. The phase III trial, which extended over three years, included 1445 affected individuals with preserved renal function but large kidney volumes. The increase in kidney volume in the treated group was 2.8% per year compared to 5.5% in the untreated group. Use of tolvaptan was also associated with a slower decline in kidney function. There were fewer kidney related adverse events in the treated group but more aquaresis, and elevations in liver enzyme levels occurred in some affected individuals on tolvptan. Tolvaptan was approved for clinical use in persons with ADPKD and rapidly enlarging kidneys in Japan in 2014 and in Canada in 2015; it has not been approved for use in the US or Europe at the time of this update.

Somatostatin analogs. Octreotide, a long-acting form of somatostatin, has been shown to slow the enlargement of polycystic kidneys and livers in an animal model of PKD [Masyuk et al 2007] and of polycystic kidneys and liver in a small randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study [Ruggenenti et al 2005, Caroli et al 2010]. Two randomized, placebo controlled trials of octreotide and lanreotide for polycystic kidney and liver disease have shown that the administration of these somatostatin analogs causes a moderate but significant reduction in liver volume and decreases the growth velocity of polycystic kidneys compared to placebo [van Keimpema et al 2009, Hogan et al 2010]. Recently, a randomized, three-year, single-blind, placebo-controlled trial of octreotide long-acting release (LAR) in 75 affected individuals (38 of whom received octreotide-LAR and 37 of whom received placebo) was completed in Italy [Caroli et al 2013]. The numeric increase in kidney and liver size was significantly smaller in the treated group after one year; after three years, the size of the organs was smaller in the treated group versus the untreated group, but the difference was no longer statistically significant for either organ. Larger and longer randomized studies are needed to determine whether these drugs can be administered safely to persons with ADPKD and/or polycystic liver disease and whether they are efficacious. Studies of tolvaptan and the somatostatin analog pasireotide in a Pkd1 mouse model showed an additive effect of the combined treatment [Hopp et al 2015].

mTOR inhibitors modulate the enlargement of polycystic kidneys in animal models of PKD. Their effectiveness, however, depends on the blood levels that can be achieved in different models. They are consistently effective in mouse models but not rat models because mice tolerate higher doses and blood levels compared to rats [Shillingford et al 2010, Spirli et al 2010, Zafar et al 2010]. mTOR inhibitors are effective in a paradigm in which cysts develop from the proximal tubules [Tao et al 2005, Shillingford et al 2006, Wahl et al 2006], but not in one in which cysts derive from the distal nephron and collecting duct [Renken et al 2011], as is the case in human ADPKD.

The results of clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors for ADPKD have been mostly disappointing.

A randomized, open-label, placebo controlled study of 100 affected individuals with an estimated creatinine clearance of >70 mL/min and a mean kidney volume of 907 mL (treated group) and 1003 mL (placebo group) showed no significant effect of treatment with sirolimus for 18 months on either kidney volume or GFR [Serra et al 2010], possibly because intended dosage was limited by toxicity of the drug and blood levels achieved may not have been enough to inhibit mTOR activity in the kidney [Canaud et al 2010].

A randomized, crossover study of 15 individuals with ADPKD who had an eGFR ≥40 mL/min/1.73 m2 demonstrated that treatment with sirolimus for six months was associated with a smaller increase in total kidney volume compared to placebo [Perico et al 2010].

A randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study of everolimus (another mTOR inhibitor) in 431 affected individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of >30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and a mean kidney volume of 2028 mL (treated group) and 1911 mL (placebo group) demonstrated that the administration of everolimus for 24 months was associated with a slower rate of increase in total kidney volume and a faster rate of decline in eGFR [Walz et al 2010]. Limitations of this study include the advanced stage of renal insufficiency in many study individuals (6.2% with an eGFR at enrollment below the inclusion limit of 30 mL/min) and the high dropout rate among study participants, particularly in the study group (33%).

An open-label pilot study of 30 adults with ADPKD randomly assigned to low-dose or standard-dose rapamycin or to standard care showed a significant increase in GFR measured by iothalamate clearance in the low dose rapamycin compared with the standard care group, without a significant effect on kidney volume or eGFR after 12 months [Braun et al 2014].

These clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors [Perico et al 2010, Serra et al 2010, Walz et al 2010

Braun et al 2014] have been accompanied by significant drug toxicity.

Antagonists of the epidermal growth factor receptor [Sweeney et al 2000] and other agents targeting cell proliferation or fluid secretion have been effective in animal models of polycystic kidney disease, but are not yet in clinical trials [Torres et al 2007c]. A clinical trial of the Src inhibitor bosutinib is underway.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Respiratory status, including physical examination, pulse oximetry, and chest radiographs (as indicated)

Tests of renal function, including serum concentrations of BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C, which allows a more accurate estimation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) [Gunay-Aygun et al 2010a]

Serum electrolyte concentrations to identify electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hyponatremia, hyperkalemia)

Urinalysis to assess for the urinary concentration and proteinuria. Clinical assessment of intravascular volume status for possible volume depletion or overload.

Note: White blood cells are commonly present in the urine of children with ARPKD and may not represent infection. If there is a clinical suspicion of urinary tract infection, a urine culture should be obtained before initiating treatment.

Renal ultrasonography (consider high-resolution technology when available)

Measurement of blood pressure. If elevated, home blood pressure monitoring can be helpful in distinguishing fixed hypertension from “white coat” hypertension (i.e., high blood pressure that occurs during medical examinations).

Assessment of feeding, weight gain, and linear growth with formal nutrition consultation as appropriate

Measurement of liver transaminases, serum bile acids, hepatic synthetic function (e.g., by assessing serum albumin concentration, 25-OH vitamin D levels, vitamin E levels and coagulation studies), fat-soluble vitamin levels, complete blood counts, physical examination for hepatomegaly/splenomegaly, and abdominal ultrasonography to assess the clinical extent of liver involvement

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

(See recent comprehensive reviews including Sweeney & Avner [2011], Telega et al [2013], Guay-Woodford et al [2014], Sweeney & Avner [2014], and Sweeney et al [2016] for detailed management strategies.)

Initial management of affected infants centers on stabilization of respiratory function.

Respiratory

Mechanical ventilation may be necessary to treat pulmonary hypoplasia (characterized by inability to oxygenate despite jet or oscillating ventilation with 100% oxygen) or hypoventilation from massively enlarged kidneys (characterized by increased pCO2 despite adequate oxygenation). It may also be required in the first 48-72 hours postnatally to determine whether pulmonary hypoplasia or reversible pulmonary disease is present.

When massively enlarged kidneys prevent diaphragmatic excursion and/or cause severe feeding intolerance, some have advocated unilateral or bilateral nephrectomy [Shukla et al 2004].

Experience suggests that unilateral nephrectomy may be of limited value, since the contralateral kidney often shows marked enlargement following unilateral nephrectomy [Author, unpublished observations]

Bilateral nephrectomy with placement of a peritoneal dialysis catheter followed by a short period of hemodialysis often allows the peritoneum to heal in preparation for chronic peritoneal dialysis [Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney et al 2016]. The timing of these procedures, as well as potential coordination with a preemptive living donor transplantation, will be dictated by factors such as the age, size, and clinical status of the patient as well as living donor availability.

Renal

Neonates with oliguria or anuria may require peritoneal dialysis within the first days of life.

Hyponatremia is common and should be treated depending on the individual's volume status.

Early recognition and treatment of dehydration is critical. Supplemental feedings or fluid therapy via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes may be required.

Hypertension generally responds well to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor inhibitors (ARBs), which are the treatments of choice. In many cases, hypertension may be severe enough to require multiple antihypertensive medications.

Affected children with significant chronic kidney disease should be treated with all modalities of modern pediatric end-stage renal disease (ESRD) therapy, including dialysis and kidney transplantation.

Anemia in children with Stage III or higher chronic kidney disease may require treatment with iron supplementation and erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESAs).

Liver. Treatment of biliary dysfunction focuses on: (1) malabsorption of nutrients and fat-soluble vitamins; and (2) the risk for ascending cholangitis.

Administration of synthetic bile acids

The presence of poor serum levels of fat-soluble vitamins (K, D, E, A) or poor weight gain despite adequate caloric supplementation may indicate the need for bile acid supplementation.

Clinical suspicion of bile acid deficiency may be verified by measurement of serum bile acids.

Administration of synthetic bile acids is indicated if there is evidence of significant intrahepatic ductal dilation (Caroli syndrome), which can be appreciated by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).

Bacterial cholangitis, often an underdiagnosed complication in those with hepatic involvement, may present as recurrent bacteremia with enteric pathogens without typical clinical features of cholangitis. Persistent fevers, particularly with right upper-quadrant pain, should be evaluated and treated aggressively.

Alkaline phosphatase and γGTP may be elevated during episodes of acute ascending cholangitis and may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis [Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016].

Esophageal varices should be treated with endoscopic banding or sclerotherapy as indicated.

Portosystemic shunting may be necessary to treat progressive portal hypertension; however, Tsimaratos et al [2000] reported recurrent hepatic encephalopathy and death following portocaval shunting in two individuals with ARPKD who had ESRD.

In severe instances of intractable portal hypertension, or severe dual renal and hepatobiliary disease, hepatic or dual renal-hepatic transplantation has become a viable option [Telega et al 2013, Chandar et al 2015].

Dual-organ transplantation. Successful simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation in individuals with ARPKD has been reported in a small case series [Harps et al 2011, Chapal et al 2012, Brinkert et al 2013, Telega et al 2013].

Previously, only a small percent of individuals with ARPKD, particularly those diagnosed later in life, have required liver transplantation. However, with improved survival and advances in renal replacement therapy, it is likely that the number of individuals with ARPKD requiring liver transplantation may increase.

An algorithm for evaluating the risk benefit of dual organ transplant in individuals with ARPKD who have both severe kidney and liver disease has been proposed to assist clinicians in the decision-making process [Telega et al 2013]. See Table 2 (pdf) and Figure 1.

Feeding and growth

Feeding intolerance and growth failure, even in the absence of renal insufficiency, can be significant, especially in young infants. Aggressive nutritional support, which may include supplemental feedings via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes, is often required to optimize weight gain and growth [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Hartung & Guay-Woodford 2014, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Children with growth failure may benefit from treatment with growth hormone [Lilova et al 2003]. The optimal age for starting growth hormone therapy depends on the growth velocity of the child; studies suggest that treatment is beneficial in children with chronic kidney disease who are age two years or younger [Seikaly et al 2007, Schaeffer 2016].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol or Actigall®) is a bile acid that can be used to increase the amount and flow of bile and/or to reduce the development of gallstones in individuals with ARPKD who have significant hepatobiliary disease.

With severe portal hypertension and splenic dysfunction, immunization against encapsulated bacteria (pneumococcus; H. influenza type B; meningococcus) is indicated.

Updated guidelines advise that palivizumab (Synagis®) be administered to at-risk children younger than age 24 months who have chronic lung disease and/or a history of prematurity [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2009].

Although the role of chronic antibiotic prophylaxis in all children with ARPKD remains controversial, prophylaxis with antibiotics is recommended for persons with ARPKD who are at high risk of developing ascending cholangitis, including those who have experienced an episode of ascending cholangitis in the past.

Surveillance

The following should be monitored regularly, depending on disease course and complications:

Blood pressure monitored at periodic physician's visits as well as home blood pressure monitoring if indicated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Renal function in those with chronic kidney disease Stage III or less; close monitoring for the complications of CKD should be undertaken by the treating nephrologist according to standard practices outlined in the KDOQI Guidelines.

Electrolyte balance, monitored by obtaining serum concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride. Mineral balance, monitored by assessing calcium and phosphorous. If the calcium level is low, magnesium concentration should be evaluated [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Hydration status

Nutritional status, with growth plotted on standard growth charts and nutrition consultation as indicated

Hepatoportal duct involvement, by physical examination and complete blood counts, in addition to serum albumin levels, PT/PTT, and 25-OH vitamin D, vitamin E levels, and fat-soluble vitamin levels

If hepatomegaly is present and/or splenomegaly develops, additional monitoring including periodic ultrasonography or MRI. With hepatosplenomegaly, referral to a pediatric hepatologist is suggested for evaluation and periodic monitoring by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect esophageal varices [Telega et al 2013].

Consideration of MR cholangiography, a more sensitive measurement for biliary ectasia, at baseline and then as indicated [Shneider & Magid 2005, Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016]

Agents to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

For affected individuals with hypertension, sympathomimetic agents

In general, unless the clinical situation warrants their use, known nephrotoxic agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and aminoglycosides

Potentially hepatotoxic agents (e.g., acetaminophen doses >30 mg/kg/day, herbal supplements, and alcohol) should be minimized.

Work in cell and animal models suggests that caffeine, theophylline-like agents, and calcium channel blockers may exacerbate renal cyst formation and growth. However, this has not been rigorously studied in individuals with ARPKD or ADPKD.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

High-resolution renal and hepatic ultrasonographic evaluation and monitoring of systemic blood pressure if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Recent studies in two animal models of ARPKD suggest that tesevatinib (TSV), a unique multikinase inhibitor, markedly slows the progression of both renal cystic disease and hepatobiliary disease [Sweeney et al, in press]. These data, in addition to safety data generated by Phase I-II multicenter clinical trial of TSV (also called KD-019) in ADPKD (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01559363) have led to an initial Phase I-II multicenter clinical trial of TSV in infants and children with ARPKD planned for late fall of 2016 or early 2017.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI to rule out secondary causes of PKD

EEG to rule out seizures as a cause of the dyskinesias

Clinical genetics consultation and testing for pathogenic variants in PRRT2

Treatment of Manifestations

Attack frequency is reduced or prevented by the anticonvulsants phenytoin or carbamezepine, typically at lower doses than are used to treat epilepsy [Demirkiran & Jankovic 1995, McGrath & Dure 2003].

Other anticonvulsants proven to be effective include oxcarbazepine [Tsao 2004], ethosuximide [Guerrini et al 2002], lamotrigine [Pereira et al 2000], and gabapentin [Chudnow et al 1997].

Surveillance

Individuals with PKD can be monitored every one to two years, particularly with respect to medication needs and doses.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women who are on anticonvulsants therapy for PKD are recommended to take folic acid 5 mg/day. Because of the risk of teratogenic effects related to anticonvulsants, women with mild symptoms related to PKD may wish to consider discontinuing anticonvulsant therapy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical biochemical genetics consultation, if not already done, and evaluation by a metabolic dietician able to begin a low Phe, age-appropriate diet

Blood phenylalanine concentration and estimation of phenylalanine tolerance [Kayaalp et al 1997, Guldberg et al 1998]. Because the PAH genotype may not always predict phenotype (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations), the individual's diet should be tailored to the estimated phenylalanine tolerance irrespective of genotype.

For individuals diagnosed outside the newborn period, formal developmental, behavioral, neuropsychological, and mental health evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for affected individuals of all ages can be difficult and is enhanced with the teaching and support of an experienced healthcare team consisting of physicians, nutritionists, genetic counselors, social workers, nurses, and psychologists. See ACMG Management Guidelines for PKU.

Treatment of Classic PKU

Restriction of dietary phenylalanine. The generally accepted goal of treatment for individuals with PAH deficiency is normalization of the concentrations of Phe (phenylalanine) and Tyr (tyrosine) in the blood and thus prevention of the cognitive deficits that are attributable to this disorder [Burgard et al 1999].

Genetic Metabolic Dieticians International (GMDI) has PKU Nutrition Management Guidelines that are continually updated.

Any provider managing the diet of an individual with PAH deficiency should use these resources and work closely with a dietician knowledgeable in the care and management of a person with this diagnosis.

Singh et al [2014] provide the following dietary recommendations:

Maintain blood Phe between 120 and 360 μmol/L throughout the life span.

Monitor blood Phe most frequently during times of increased anabolism: infancy, childhood, and pregnancy. The NIH recommends measurement of blood phenylalanine levels on a weekly basis for the first year of life, on a biweekly basis until age 13 years, and on a monthly basis thereafter [Camp et al 2014]. Care must be taken to avoid long periods of low blood Phe concentration, which is also harmful to brain development and function.

Monitor blood Phe consistently, preferably two to three hours after eating.

Evaluate individual nutritional needs, ability to adhere to recommendations, and access to treatment options when choosing appropriate interventions (medical food, modified low-protein food, large neutral amino acids [LNAAs], and sapropterin) to achieve blood PHE in the target range.

Include breast milk [Vockley et al 2014] and/or infant formula as sources of Phe in the diet of an infant with PAH deficiency.

Recommend that medical food be consumed throughout the day for optimal metabolic control.

Track Phe intake by any of several methods, including counting milligrams or exchanges of PHE or grams of protein.

Maintain blood Tyr in the normal range.

Maintain other nutrients and micronutrients at RDA levels, including calcium, vitamin D, iron, and B vitamins. Due to the protein-restricted dietary components, micronutrients found in animal products must be carefully monitored and supplemented, as needed.

Provide counseling and education specific to the needs of the individual with PAH deficiency (and/or his/her caregivers) to help maintain appropriate blood Phe throughout the life span.

Sapropterin (Kuvan®). BH4 responsiveness, as determined by a 30% decrease in Phe plasma levels on plasma amino acid analysis, is determined based on response to a pharmacologic dose of BH4 (10-20 mg/kg per day):

All affected individuals except those with two trans pathogenic null variants should ideally undergo a trial with sapropterin supplementation. The trial needs to be conducted when Phe levels have been stable and dietary intake can remain unchanged, so that any change in Phe level is the result of the medication; for some affected individuals it is a challenge to conduct a trial of therapy. The most common dose given is 20 mg/kg per day. Lower trial doses may lead to false negative responsiveness results [Vockley et al 2014].

Affected individuals who are responsive should continue this medication with compensatory dietary Phe liberalization, as needed, to maintain a safe Phe level between 120 and 360 μmol/L.

The majority of individuals with mild or moderate PKU may be responsive to sapropterin while up to 10% of individuals with classic PKU show a response [Bernegger & Blau 2002, Pérez-Dueñas et al 2004, Zurflüh et al 2006]. Reviewed in Ho & Christodoulou [2014].

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of sapropterin.

Large neutral amino acids (LNAA) transporters. LNAA may decrease the plasma Phe concentration in affected adolescents and adults; however, it should not be used in women of child-bearing age (see Pregnancy Management).

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of LNAA

Treatment for Non-Classic Hyperphenylalaninemia

While debate continues, many experts believe that dietary treatment is unnecessary for many of the individuals in this class.

Individuals with Phe levels >600 μmol/L (10 mg/dL) are treated by most centers, in recognition of the finding of head MRI changes and neuropsychological findings in at least some affected individuals.

Treatment in individuals with Phe levels consistently <600 μmol/L but >360 μmol/L remains controversial [Weglage et al 2001, Hanley 2011, van Spronsen 2011].

Thirty-one individuals with PAH deficiency who were never treated and whose plasma Phe concentrations did not exceed 600 µmol/L had normal cognitive neuropsychological development.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH (PKU) state: “…treatment of infants with sustained blood Phe levels >360 µmol/L is recommended following appropriate review of the controversy with patients.”

If the Phe levels remain between 120 and 360 µmol/L, treatment is not recommended; however, children should be followed for plasma Phe levels closely during the first two years of life, then on an annual or biennial basis [Vockley et al 2014].

Care should be taken so that women of childbearing age in this group receive proper counseling about the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal plasma Phe concentration (i.e., ‘maternal HPA/PKU’) on the developing fetus [Weglage et al 2001] (see Pregnancy Management).

Other

Neuropsychiatric testing may be considered to identify learning differences. Referral to appropriate developmental services is indicated to optimize developmental outcome.

Bone health assessment. Current literature regarding the utility of DEXA scans is controversial; however, bone health should be considered in the overall health of an affected individual [Coakley et al 2016].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Plasma Phe and Tyr concentrations in individuals with classic PKU must be monitored regularly [National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel 2001] (see Treatment of Manifestations).

In infants, frequent in-clinic visits are recommended until Phe levels are stabilized, followed by weekly blood level monitoring of Phe and tyrosine levels until age one with closer monitoring during periods of rapid growth or diet transitions. In addition, plasma amino acid levels should be regularly monitored to foster optimal growth during the first year of life.

Between ages one and 12 years, biweekly to monthly sampling may be adequate.

In adolescents and adults who are stable and well controlled, blood level monitoring can be monthly.

Nutritional assessment should include growth evaluation and assessment of micronutrient intake and needs.

Some clinics perform monitoring of plasma amino acids, transthyretin, complete blood count, ferritin, and 25-OH vitamin D every six months in infants and annually thereafter even if growth is appropriate and analysis of the diet shows adequate intake.

If there is evidence for suboptimal dietary intake or over-reliance on nutritionally incomplete medical foods, evaluation of plasma amino acids (full panel), transthyretin, albumin, complete blood count, ferritin, 25-OH vitamin D, electrolytes, renal function, liver function, albumin, vitamin B12, red blood cell essential fatty acids, trace minerals (zinc, copper, selenium), vitamin A, and folic acid should be considered [Singh et al 2014, Vockley et al 2014].

Assessment of developmental milestones and overall developmental progress should take place at every visit.

Screening for mental illness should be considered at every visit and performed at regular intervals by primary care providers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aspartame, an artificial sweetener in widespread use, contains phenylalanine. Persons with PKU should either avoid products containing aspartame or calculate intake of Phe and adapt diet components accordingly.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment. Note: Because phenotypic variability may be significant, previously undiagnosed and even apparently asymptomatic sibs of an affected individual may also be affected [Vockley et al 2014].

Evaluations can include:

Measurement of blood concentration of phenylalanine and newborn screening in newborn sibs of an individual with PKU if prenatal testing was not done;

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Blood concentration of phenylalanine and tyrosine to clarify the disease status of older at-risk sibs if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with PAH Deficiency

Women with PAH deficiency who have received appropriate treatment throughout childhood and adolescence have normal physical and essentially normal intellectual and behavioral development. However, if the woman has elevated plasma Phe concentrations during pregnancy, the fetus is at high risk for malformations and intellectual disability, since phenylalanine is a potent teratogen (see Clinical Characteristics) [Rouse & Azen 2004, Prick et al 2012].

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology Committee Opinion on the Management of Women with Phenylketonuria, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH deficiency [Vockley et al 2014], and Singh et al [2014] suggest the following management of an affected woman prior to and during pregnancy.

Preconception

Genetic counseling regarding the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal Phe concentration on the developing fetus and recurrence risks for PAH deficiency in the fetus

Achievement and maintenance of the maternal Phe concentration at less than 360 µmol/L for three months prior to conception

Assessment of early osteopenia risk

Discontinuation of LNAA treatment

During pregnancy

Co-monitor in conjunction with practitioners from an experienced metabolic center.

Maternal Phe concentration of 120-360 µmol/L during pregnancy is recommended. In unplanned pregnancies, rapid re-initiation of a Phe-restricted diet should be advised based on current knowledge of the fetal risks.

Despite limited data, sapropterin supplementation may be appropriate in addition to dietary therapy.

Monitor dietary intake of pregnant women with PAH deficiency to ensure nutrient adequacy with proper proportion of protein, fat, and carbohydrates.

Evaluate for fetal anomalies by high resolution ultrasound and fetal echocardiogram.

Post partum

Provide coordinated care in the post-partum period

Breast feeding may be pursued if the infant does not have PAH deficiency.

Therapies Under Investigation

Although the treatment of PKU with phenylalanine-restricted diets has been hugely successful, the poor palatability of the diet results in poor compliance in adolescence and adulthood. A number of attempts to find other treatment modalities for PKU are ongoing.

Enzyme substitution. Under investigation is the administration of the enzyme phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), a plant-derived enzyme that converts phenylalanine to trans-cinnamic acid and ammonia. The version currently under investigation is the PEGylation (conjugation with polyethylene glycol) of PAL, since it has been found to decrease the immune response to PAL [Gámez et al 2005, Sarkissian & Gámez 2005]. Clinical trials with this protected form of injectable enzyme are currently underway. The results of the Phase I trial showed effectiveness by reducing blood Phe by 54% in the participants receiving the highest dose. The Phe level nadir was at six days and response lasted 21 days. Adverse reactions included rash, antibody accumulation to both PAL and the PEGylation component, and injection site reaction [Longo et al 2014].

Cell-directed therapies. Liver repopulation with PAH-expressing cells is being investigated. Hepatocyte transplantation has been successful in animal models and in humans for other liver-based inborn errors of metabolism, such as glycogen storage disorders and urea cycle defects. Research continues to identify the best ways to allow for transferred hepatocytes to have cell growth advantage over native hepatocytes (reviewed in Strisciuglio & Concolino [2014]).

Gene therapies. Liver-directed gene therapy does not result in a permanent correction of PAH activity in animal models. Delivery to muscle was successful in increasing conversion of Phe to Tyr in mice [Reviewed in Strisciuglio & Concolino 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PLOSL, the following evaluations are appropriate:

Radiographs of the bones of wrists, hands, ankles, and feet to determine the extent of osseous manifestations of the disease

Brain CT and/or MRI to determine the extent of CNS manifestations

Neurologic and neuropsychological examination to establish the extent of neurologic impairment and cognitive disturbance

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Only symptomatic treatment is available.

Relief of pain after curettage and iliac bone grafting of painful lesions in the talus has been reported [Arıkan et al 2014]. Supportive orthopedic devices may be of value in individual cases. The fractures have been reported to heal well [Paloneva et al 2001].

Epileptic seizures may worsen the individual's condition. Consequently, adequate antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are important.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease is known.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendency are often associated with the progression of the disease [Ilonen et al 2012]. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder [Hakola 1990b].

Surveillance

The interval of surveillance for bone lesions and neurologic and psychiatric manifestations must be determined individually.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Calcium substitution alone has been shown to be ineffective in preventing the development of the osseous manifestations. The effect of bisphosphonates has not been studied.

It has been speculated that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could slow the progression of PLOSL; however, clinical trials have not been performed.

A single individual with PLOSL improved temporarily when taking donepezil [D Hemelsoet, personal observation]. Clinical trials in a series of individuals with PLOSL have not been reported.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PLP1-related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent and severity of respiratory and feeding difficulties, weakness, hypotonia, spasticity, scoliosis, ataxia, visual impairment, cognitive impairment, contractures, joint dislocations, and ambulation

In infants and children, developmental assessment to determine capabilities and needs for cognitive, physical, and other symptomatic therapies

Brain MRI (more helpful age ≥9 months) to determine severity of myelination abnormalities; in older children and adults, magnetic resonance spectroscopy to ascertain axonal dysfunction

Assessment of peripheral nerve function using NCV to presumptively identify individuals with the PLP1 null syndrome; probably reliable only after age four years

Family history to identify other affected or at-risk individuals

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary team comprising specialists in neurology, physical medicine, orthopedics, pulmonary medicine, and gastroenterology is optimal for care.

Early attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection, especially in the most severely affected individuals, is important. Those with severe dysphagia may require feeding by gastrostomy.

Seizures are usually restricted to individuals with the most severe (connatal) syndrome and although they may not always be associated with electroencephalographic evidence for epileptiform waveforms, they generally respond to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as carbamazepine.

Spasticity management may include physical therapy and exercises, including regular stretching exercises. Antispasticity medications such as baclofen (including intrathecal administration), diazepam, and tizanidine may be helpful, especially in combination with physical therapy, exercise, orthotics, and other assistive devices. In advanced cases, surgery to release joint contractures may be required.

Severe scoliosis may result in pulmonary compromise as well as discomfort, especially with position changes, and necessitate corrective surgery to preserve pulmonary function. Proper seating, especially wheelchair, and physical therapy may reduce or prevent the need for surgery.

Specialized schooling arrangements are typically necessary for children with PLP1-related disorders. Developmental assessments can accurately assess a child's capabilities, which may be greater than is apparent because of severe motor deficits. Electronic or other communication devices may facilitate communication especially in children with visual and auditory impairment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Proper wheelchair seating and physical therapy may help prevent scoliosis. Speech and swallowing evaluations can help prevent or reduce aspiration and identify patients who may need a feeding tube for safer and/or adequate nutrition and hydration.

Surveillance

Semiannual to annual neurologic and physical medicine evaluation is indicated to monitor developmental progress during childhood and to monitor and treat spasticity and orthopedic complications as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No specific agents or exposures are known to accelerate the long-term disease course.

Elevated body temperature, as with fever, may cause neurologic signs and symptoms to transiently worsen, as occurs in individuals with multiple sclerosis (Uthoff phenomenon).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

CNS stem cells were recently transplanted into brains of individuals with PMD in a US FDA-approved Phase I trial [Gupta et al 2012]. The procedure was well tolerated and myelination was noted in the transplanted regions.

Pharmacologic agents that lower expression of PLP1 should be of theoretic benefit in individuals with extra copies of PLP1, and those with severe single-nucleotide variants. Preclinical studies are underway to test drugs of this type.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No controlled studies, either successful or unsuccessful, have been reported for therapy of PMD or SPG2.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD), the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI to rule out secondary causes of PNKD

EEG to rule out seizures as a cause for the dyskinesias

Treatment of Manifestations

Response to pharmacologic treatment is poor; however, clonazepam or diazepam can be effective.

A child age four years with familial PNKD responded to gabapentin [Chudnow et al 1997].

Szczałuba et al [2009] reported individuals from a family with PNKD who responded favorably to levetiracetam.

Surveillance

No long-term sequelae are associated with PNKD. Monitoring medication requirements and dosage is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol, coffee, tea, excitement, stress, fatigue, and chocolate are all known to precipitate attacks and thus should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women who are on anticonvulsants therapy for PNKD are recommended to take folic acid 5 mg/day. Because of the risk of teratogenic effects related to anticonvulsants, women with mild symptoms related to PNKD may consider discontinuing anticonvulsant therapy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a PNPLA6-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI of the cerebrum (including the pituitary), cerebellum, and spinal cord (including the thoracic cord) to establish the extent of atrophy in the different brain regions and exclude other secondary causes for the clinical features

Nerve conduction studies and EMG to determine the presence and extent of peripheral neuropathy

Neuropsychological investigation, including IQ, attention span, visuospatial abilities, and recall

If not performed at the time of diagnosis, ophthalmologic assessment, including visual acuity, visual field testing, fundoscopy, and optic coherence tomography (OCT) [Synofzik et al 2015]. OCT can detect thinning of the retina, loss of layered retinal architecture, and effacement of the choriocapillaris and choroidal vessels. Autofluorescence photographs and fluorescein angiography provide supplementary diagnostic information by revealing hyper- and hypofluorescent regions of abnormal retinal pigment epithelium and the choriocapillaris.

If not performed at the time of diagnosis, endocrinologic assessment for evidence of hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is detected by decreased rise of gonadotropin levels (LH, FSH) in response to gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH). (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Deficiency for more details about evaluation.)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No disease-modifying drug treatment exists for PNPLA6-related disorders. Given the great phenotypic variability and broad spectrum of the disorders, management of symptoms must be individually tailored.

Ataxia. Management should be directed to providing continuous training in the form of active speech, fine-motor, and gait exercises [Fonteyn et al 2014, Ilg et al 2014, Synofzik & Ilg 2014]:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on active, physically demanding tasks [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010]

Videogame-based whole-body training (“exergames”) with specific videogames aiming to improve coordination and rapid adaptation to changing environments [Ilg et al 2012, Synofzik et al 2013b]

Speech therapy [Sapir et al 2003]

Swallowing therapy

Spasticity. Management should be directed to improving balance, strength, and agility:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on improving muscle strength and gait and reducing spasticity

Assistive walking devices and ankle-foot orthotics

Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., baclofen [oral or intrathecal], tolperison; Botox® injections) and urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin)

Visual impairment. Low vision aids such as magnifiers may facilitate reading for individuals with reduced central acuity.

In the US, publicly funded agencies for the visually impaired at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine) at the time of diagnosis. Thyroid hormone levels should be normalized by replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Growth hormone deficiency. Growth hormone deficiency is treated with hormone replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is treated with hormone replacement therapy, often including gonadotropins, at the expected time of puberty. (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency) for more details about treatment.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily physical therapy is recommended to maintain and improve coordination, muscle strength, and gait; reduce spasticity; and prevent contractures.

Surveillance

Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist, ophthalmologist and, if necessary, endocrinologist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Alcohol

Obesity

Inactive, sedentary lifestyle

Exposure to medications or chemicals that exacerbate neuropathy. See Medications Potentially Toxic to Persons with CMT (or Related) Neuropathy (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Anecdotally, ataxia may sometimes appear for the first time or worsen during pregnancy. Note: While some individuals with ataxia report a worsening of coordination after general anesthesia, no increased risk has been reported specifically with obstetric anesthesia.

Spasticity generally does not change significantly with pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a POLR3-related leukodystrophy, the following are recommended:

Pediatric neurology consultation

Swallowing assessment

Physiotherapy evaluation

Occupational therapy evaluation

Speech and language pathology assessment

Rehabilitation physician (i.e., physiatrist) consultation

Neuropsychology evaluation

Brain MRI, if not performed at the time of diagnosis

Dentistry consultation

Endocrine consultation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Ear-nose-and-throat specialist consultation for hypersalivation and swallowing issues

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individualized care by a multidisciplinary team including a pediatric neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech and language pathologist, neuropsychologist, rehabilitation physician, dentist, endocrinologist, ophthalmologist, ear-nose-and-throat specialist, and primary care physician is recommended.

Manifestations such as ambulation difficulties and seizures are managed in a routine manner.

Special caution needs to be taken when managing dysphagia in this disorder as it is known to be quite variable, even in a single day. This is probably due to the prominent cerebellar involvement, leading to more incoordination of swallowing with fatigue, but also with some unpredictability. Dysphagia management is therefore important. Swallowing difficulties will progress over time and individuals may require gastrostomy to manage nutrition.

Spasticity and dystonia should be monitored and treated to prevent complications and to improve the quality of life.

Hypersalivation is managed with the multidisciplinary team and an otolaryngologist. Treatment must be individualized. Therapies to consider include rehabilitation (e.g., oromotor therapy, behavioral therapy); medical therapy (e.g., anticholinergic medications, botulinum toxin injections); and, in severe cases, surgery (e.g., relocation of the parotid ducts and relocation of the submandibular ducts with or without sublingual gland excision).

Learning difficulties are likely to progress slowly. The cognitive involvement is typically much less severe than the motor involvement. In contrast, activities of daily living are likely to become problematic early on in the disease course as motor difficulties make patients progressively more dependent on assistance from others.

Dental manifestations should be managed, when necessary, by a dentist and/or orthodontist.

Patients should be followed regularly by an endocrinologist. The decision to treat sex and growth hormone deficiency, when present, should be made on an individual basis.

Patients need to be followed regularly by an ophthalmologist. A significant proportion of patients will have progressive myopia over several years, which will become severe before stabilizing.

Surveillance

No general surveillance guidelines have been developed to date; monitoring should be individualized.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Foods that are likely to lead to choking

Medications acting on D2 receptor blockers (e.g., neuroleptics such as haloperidol or risperidone, anti-nauseous medications such as metoclopramide) as these can exacerbate the extrapyramidal features

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with polymicrogyria, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluations by physical therapists, occupational therapists, and other specialists in infancy and the preschool years because of the high risk of intellectual disability and cerebral palsy

Assessment of special educational needs

Speech evaluations for those with perisylvian polymicrogyria

Vision and hearing evaluation as clinically appropriate

EEG in the presence of episodic clinical events of uncertain cause

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment is recommended:

Supportive management, including physical therapy, pharmacologic management, orthotic devices, and surgery for those with spastic motor impairment

Speech therapy for those with language impairment

Occupational therapy for those with language impairment

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures based on the specific epilepsy type

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Education of parents about common seizure presentations

Supportive measures, particularly for individuals with cerebral palsy, which may help to prevent the development of secondary complications such as joint contractures and decubitus ulcers

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

For adrenal insufficiency as a result of ACTH deficiency: 9 am plasma cortisol; plasma ACTH concentration; ACTH stimulation test

For central hypothyroidism: TRH test, serum TSH, total T4

For adolescent-onset growth hormone (GH) deficiency: insulin tolerance test and serum IGF-1 levels

For adolescent-onset hypogonadism: FSH, LH, testosterone and/or estradiol

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The main treatment for POMC deficiency is hormone replacement therapy with glucocorticoids with other hormones as required, as well as skin care in the sun.

Adrenal insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency is treated in the usual manner with hydrocortisone replacement therapy. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Severe obesity. Hyperphagic obesity is recognized in the neonatal period and persists into adolescence and adulthood. At present, there is no recognized effective medical therapy to prevent weight gain; therefore, lifestyle measures should be instigated.

Fair skin. The individual may need appropriate verbal and written sun care advice (avoidance of sun exposure in the middle 4 hours of the day [i.e., 10 am - 2 pm], cover-up clothing, high-factor sunscreen). Discussion about the potential lifelong risk for skin cancer is recommended.

Hypothyroidism. The mild central hypothyroidism reported in POMC deficiency is treated with levothyroxine. Importantly, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been evaluated and adrenal insufficiency (if present) has been treated. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) deficiency. Adolescent-onset GH deficiency (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) is treated with daily subcutaneous GH injections. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Adolescent-onset hypogonadism (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) can be treated with sex hormone replacement. Care by an endocrinologist experienced in treating this disorder is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prompt treatment of ACTH, TSH, GH, LH, and FSH deficiency prevents the consequences of these hormone deficiencies.

Surveillance

From the time of diagnosis, annual monitoring for deficiencies of TSH, GH, LH, and FSH is indicated.

Surveillance of skin for premalignant lesions may be necessary depending on latitude and history of sun exposure. Malignant skin lesions have not specifically been reported to be associated with POMC deficiency, though a theoretic risk is assumed to exist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, prenatal testing can clarify the genetic status of at-risk pregnancies so that glucocorticoid therapy can be initiated as soon as possible after birth in those newborns known to have POMC deficiency.

If POMC deficiency has been previously diagnosed in a family member, and if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known or if prenatal testing has not been performed, it is necessary to evaluate any at-risk newborn (e.g., sibs of a proband) for evidence of adrenal insufficiency and to initiate glucocorticoid therapy as soon as possible if adrenal insufficiency is found.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial porphyria cutanea tarda (F-PCT), the following evaluations and/or testing for all known susceptibility factors are recommended:

Medical history regarding alcohol consumption, tobacco exposure, medication use (estrogens), exposure to hepatotoxins (e.g., hexachlorobenzene)

Evaluation for excess hepatic iron

Targeted analysis for HFE pathogenic variants (see HFE-related familial hemochromatosis)

Evaluation for hepatitis C and/or human immunodeficiency virus infection

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is highly effective; it should only be initiated after the diagnosis is well established. The mainstays of therapy for PCT are reduction of body iron stores and liver iron content and use of low-dose anti-malarial agents (chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine).

Iron reduction. In most centers serial phlebotomy is the preferred mode of reducing body iron stores and liver iron content. Iron chelation therapy (e.g., deferasirox, deferiprone, or desferrioxamine) is less efficient and more costly than therapeutic phlebotomies in reducing iron, but may be considered if the latter is contraindicated [Rocchi et al 1987].

Serum ferritin concentration should be measured before starting phlebotomy treatment. Typically, approximately 450 mL of blood is removed during a therapeutic phlebotomy, usually initially at two-week intervals. Hemoglobin levels (which are generally >10-11 g/dL) are followed as safety (not therapeutic) targets to prevent symptomatic anemia. The therapeutic target is to reduce the serum ferritin concentration to the low-normal range (15-25 ng/mL), which is associated with tissue iron depletion but usually not anemia.

Phlebotomy treatment is also guided by plasma (or serum) porphyrin levels, which are more convenient to measure repeatedly than urine porphyrins, and which decrease more slowly than the serum ferritin concentration. Plasma porphyrin levels usually decline from initial concentrations of 10-25 μg/dL to below the upper limit of normal (~1 μg/dL) within weeks after phlebotomies are completed [Rocchi et al 1986, Ratnaike et al 1988].

Development of new skin lesions generally ceases as plasma porphyrin levels become normal; however, therapy should be continued until the serum ferritin concentration has reached the low end of normal. The chronic skin lesions of PCT are slow to resolve, and some chronic scarring may remain indefinitely.

After a remission has been achieved, continued phlebotomies are generally not needed unless initial evaluation has determined the presence of HFE-related familial hemochromatosis. For persons with the HFE genotypes p.Cys282Tyr / p.Cys282Tyr or p.Cys282Tyr / p.His63Asp, management guidelines for HFE-related familial hemochromatosis should be followed.

Although not essential, adherence to a low-iron diet, especially with restriction of intake of red meat and liver (rich sources of heme iron, which is absorbed better than iron from vegetable sources) is reasonable, especially in those with HFE pathogenic variants. In addition, the ingestion of tea with lunch or dinner further reduces the gastrointestinal absorption of iron.

Note: Treatment of PCT in persons with end-stage renal disease is more difficult since the option for phlebotomy is often limited by anemia. However, in several instances erythropoietin therapy has been shown to correct anemia, mobilize iron, and support phlebotomy [Shieh et al 2000]. Such individuals may also be considered for iron chelation therapy.

Low-dose anti-malarial agents. A low-dose regimen of twice-weekly hydroxychloroquine (100 mg) or chloroquine (125 mg) is also effective and most appropriate when phlebotomy is contraindicated or poorly tolerated [Bruce & Ahmed 1998]. Note: Chloroquine is not recommended in persons with increased serum ferritin concentration [Stölzel et al 2003].

Although the use of low-dose anti-malarial agents is preferred at many centers because they are less costly and more convenient, these agents do not deplete hepatic iron and the mechanism of their action in the treatment of PCT is not fully understood. Combining both treatment modalities (i.e., anti-malarial agent therapy and phlebotomy) may be beneficial if the individual is unable to tolerate full courses of phlebotomy.

Other. Individuals are advised to stop drinking alcohol and smoking and to discontinue further oral estrogen use.

Adequate intake of ascorbic acid and other nutrients may be recommended although this is not considered to be primary therapy.

PCT may also improve after treatment of coexisting hepatitis C. PCT should be treated first in most individuals:

PCT generally causes more symptoms and can be treated more quickly and effectively than hepatitis C.

Some evidence shows that hepatitis C treatment may be more effective after iron reduction [Desai et al 2012, Ryan Caballes et al 2012].

Both interferon and ribavirin (used in the treatment of hepatitis C) commonly cause anemia, which usually precludes phlebotomy for PCT.

Attainment and maintenance of an iron-reduced state decreases the severity and progression of chronic hepatitis C and probably also reduces the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma [Ryan Caballes et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) is advised. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is appropriate.

Surveillance

It is advisable to follow porphyrin levels annually and resume phlebotomies (see Treatment of Manifestations) if porphyrin levels begin to rise in the presence of cutaneous signs. Note: Increase in urinary total porphyrins may also be caused by an increase in coproporphyrin (which is of no relevance with regard to the PCT); thus, when levels are only moderately increased, urinary porphyrin fractionation should be performed.

Because of reports of an association between diabetes mellitus and PCT [Muñoz-Santos et al 2011], annual screening with a fasting glucose level is recommended, particularly in those with hypertension (BP >135/80 mm Hg).

Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) surveillance relies on a combination of serum AFP determinations and hepatic ultrasonography. No guidelines as to the frequency of these tests are currently available due to the rarity of PCT and even rarer occurrence of HCC. Surveillance is usually performed annually; however, in those with advanced chronic hepatitis C and/or alcoholic cirrhosis, hepatologists generally agree that surveillance for HCC should be at least every six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Susceptibility factors (if known) (e.g., iron supplements, alcohol consumption, smoking, oral estrogen use, and hepatotoxins such as hexachlorobenzene)

Exposure to sunlight in symptomatic phase

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing at-risk relatives of an individual with F-PCT to identify those with a UROD pathogenic variant is not expected to alter their management due to the low risk of development of the signs and symptoms of PCT. Nevertheless, if the family-specific UROD pathogenic variant is known, it is reasonable to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives so that those with a UROD pathogenic variant can avoid known susceptibility factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is generally not complicated by F-PCT. Women with active F-PCT should be able to carry pregnancies to term [Aziz Ibrahim & Esen 2004, Tollanes et al 2011].

It is recommended that women with F-PCT be treated prior to the onset of planned pregnancies.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with variegate porphyria (VP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Degree of elevations on plasma and urine porphyrins and urine PBG, if not determined at the time of diagnosis

Effects of VP on the skin, nervous system, liver, and kidneys

Contributions of medications, diet, and concurrent conditions on VP

Treatment of Manifestations

Neurovisceral Symptoms

Most acute neurovisceral attacks require hospital admission; patients with mild attacks (not requiring narcotic analgesics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or muscle weakness) are sometimes treated as outpatients. A rapid, thorough, and multidisciplinary evaluation is optimized by in-patient management.

As with other acute porphyrias, evaluation should include identification of exacerbating drugs and other precipitating factors. Harmful medications include barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Harmful medications should be discontinued.

Seizures, motor neuropathy, and hyponatremia suggest severe disease and should be managed in the ICU with adequate supportive treatment.

Narcotic analgesics are usually required for pain and ondansetron or a related drug for nausea and vomiting. A phenothiazine is also effective for nausea and for psychiatric symptoms (e.g., agitation, hallucinations) [Anderson et al 2005, Harper & Wahlin 2007].

Mild attacks (not requiring narcotics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or motor neuropathy) can be treated with glucose loading, but most attacks should be treated with intravenous hemin [Anderson et al 2005].

Note: ‘Hemin’ refers to the oxidized form of iron protoporphyrin IX, but is also the generic term for heme preparations used as intravenous therapies for acute porphyrias, such as lyophilized hematin (heme hydroxide) and heme arginate. When these hemin preparations are infused intravenously, the heme is bound to circulating albumin as heme albumin. The latter is taken up by hepatocytes and decreases the synthesis of hepatic ALAS1, the rate-controlling enzyme for heme synthesis in the liver.

Patients with acute attack should be carefully monitored for muscle weakness and respiratory impairment that may require ventilatory support.

Hyponatremia should be corrected slowly and seizures treated with medications that do not exacerbate porphyria.

Liver transplantation, which has been effective in persons with AIP with severe repeated acute attacks that respond poorly to medical therapy, is a consideration in VP [Dowman et al 2012].

Cutaneous Symptoms

Porphyrin levels may decrease and photosensitivity improve if exacerbating factors can be identified and removed. Otherwise there is no effective treatment that lowers porphyrin levels. Treatment with hemin may lower porphyrins in the short term only.

Patients should wear protective clothing and avoid exposure to sunlight.

Analgesics may be needed for painful lesions and antibiotics for superimposed infection. Topical steroids are of little or no benefit.

Specific measures effective in the treatment of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) (i.e., phlebotomy and low-dose hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine) are not effective in the management of VP.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Acute attack

Attacks are less likely to occur in the future if exacerbating factors are corrected or avoided.

Recurrent premenstrual attacks of acute porphyrias, including VP, can be prevented with GnRH analogues [Anderson et al 1990].

Weekly or biweekly hemin infusions may prevent frequent noncyclical attacks; however, published experience is lacking.

Photocutaneous. Prevention of the skin manifestations of VP requires protection from sunlight.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Progression of renal disease may be prevented to some degree by controlling hypertension.

Surveillance

Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop especially after age 50 years in patients with acute porphyrias and persistent elevations in porphobilinogen or porphyrins; liver imaging at six-month intervals beginning at age 50 years may detect early lesions [Andant et al 2000, Schneider-Yin et al 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Precipitating factors that should be avoided include: barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Updated lists are maintained at the Web sites of the American Porphyria Foundation and the European Porphyria Network.

Although birth control pills should generally be avoided, low-dose hormonal preparations may be tolerated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk family members can be offered molecular genetic testing for the family-specific PPOX pathogenic variant to identify PPOX heterozygotes for counseling regarding appropriate use of drugs and avoidance of known precipitating factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is usually well tolerated but some women heterozygous for a PPOX pathogenic variant may experience exacerbations.

Badminton & Deybach [2006] published an anecdotal report of successful treatment of several pregnant women experiencing attacks of VP or other acute porphyrias during pregnancy with hemin (in the form of heme arginate) without adverse fetal effect. They emphasize that interruption of pregnancy is almost never indicated for management of acute porphyria.

Experience with heme hydroxide is also limited but suggests no adverse effects during pregnancy [Isenschmid et al 1992]. As noted (see Treatment of Manifestations, Neurovisceral Symptoms, Note), hemin is delivered to tissues as heme albumin when administered as either heme arginate or heme hydroxide, and these preparations are expected to have similar safety profiles.

A fetus heterozygous for a PPOX pathogenic variant has a good prognosis, because most heterozygotes never develop symptoms and treatment for attacks is generally effective.For an individual diagnosed with a DICER1-related disorder, the two considerations for evaluations following initial diagnosis are:

The extent of disease spread (staging) for malignant or potentially malignant DICER1-related disorders;

The presence of other synchronous DICER1-related conditions.

Extent of Disease Spread (Staging)

Pleuropulmonary blastoma types I and IR. No metastatic potential is associated with this type; thus, the only additional evaluation is for synchronous DICER1-related disorders (see Surveillance).

Pleuropulmonary blastoma types II and III

Brain MRI to evaluate for metastatic disease

Radionuclide bone scan to evaluate for metastatic disease, followed by plain radiographs for areas of concern

PET scan for diagnosis of solid or cystic and solid tumors, response to therapy, and follow-up. Note, however, that its use has not been validated in PPB.

Echocardiography as needed to define intracardiac extension of tumor, tumor thrombi, or pericardial effusion

Rarely, spine MRI for a paraspinal or intraspinal extension

In the event of systemic embolization and any suggestion of vascular involvement (facial plethora, vena cava syndrome, cardiac murmur): investigation with vascular ultrasound examination

CT of the abdomen to assess for liver metastases

Note: Bone marrow evaluation is almost never performed, as bone marrow involvement is extremely rare.

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors

Intraoperative staging should be performed according to FIGO staging criteria and should include peritoneal cytology and assessment of preoperative or intraoperative rupture. Care should be taken to avoid rupturing the tumor if possible.

Spread of ovarian stromal tumors to the chest without extensive abdominopelvic disease is unlikely; however, baseline evaluation with chest CT is reasonable given the concern for synchronous conditions.

Ciliary body medulloepithelioma. Staging includes brain MRI to evaluate for direct intracranial extension and metastatic disease.

Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) of the cervix or other sites. Staging includes MRI or CT to evaluate extent of primary tumor and for presence of metastatic disease in lymph nodes, liver, and lungs.

Pituitary blastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology examination.

Pineoblastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and CSF cytology examination.

Evaluations for Synchronous 

One or more of the disorders associated with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant may be present at the time of diagnosis or they may develop later in life. Evaluations to be performed for individuals newly diagnosed with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant are included in Surveillance.

Treatment of Manifestations

Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB)

Surgical management. Treatment for all types is complete surgical resection when feasible. Chemotherapy is recommended in all cases of types II and III PPB utilizing aggressive sarcoma-based regimens; for type I less aggressive regimens can be used based on extent of resection and disease.

Type I PPB is treated with complete surgical removal with or without adjuvant chemotherapy. The long-term survival for this subgroup is over 94%; the only deaths are following progression to type II or III [Messinger et al 2012].

Types II and III PPB are treated with aggressive surgical resection and intensive chemotherapy; survival rates at ten years are 62% for type II and 46% for type III [Williams et al 2012].

Complete resection of PPB is recommended by physicians associated with the International PPB Registry (IPPBR). For cystic and solid or purely solid tumors, primary resection is preferred, but adequate biopsy followed by neoadjuvant chemotherapy and delayed complete resection is acceptable. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible when cysts are extensive.

Primary resection of tumors that are cystic and solid or purely solid should be performed with care so as not to disrupt the tumor or induce tumor spill, similar to the care taken with removal of Wilms tumor. Since solid components of PPB are very friable, piecemeal removal and spill are often inevitable.

If it is evident at the time of surgery that the tumor has spread to the chest wall, pericardium, and/ or diaphragm, removal of all grossly visible tumor is recommended. Sites of unresectable residual disease may be titanium clipped for radiographic localization and possible radiotherapy. Involvement of the diaphragm may require excision of a portion of the diaphragm and use of a Gortex patch.

Delayed resection after chemotherapy is performed for tumors deemed unresectable at the time of diagnosis. Individuals receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy may have marked tumor reduction; however, this response may be transient and tumor can recur rapidly. Chemotherapy alone is insufficient to eradicate solid PPB.

The IPPBR physicians recommend that surgical resection occur no later than after the third cycle of chemotherapy. As with primary surgery, removal of all sites of gross disease should be attempted if possible.

If gross-total resection is not achieved, additional surgery may be required for local control.

Pleural effusions. Drainage of pleural effusions should be approached with caution. Solid tumors often invade the chest wall obliterating the pleural space. Proper placement of needle and catheter can be difficult without radiographic guidance.

Surgery for metastases. Brain parenchyma is the most common metastatic site for PPB. Resection is strongly suggested for intracranial mass lesion(s). Several patients in whom cerebral PPB metastases have been resected have had durable, non-relapse survival [Priest et al 2007].

Therapeutic resection of bone and liver metastases is rarely indicated.

Chemotherapy

Type I PPB. Use of chemotherapy is controversial [Priest et al 2006, Messinger et al 2012].

Types II and III PPB. Aggressive chemotherapy is necessary. Chemotherapy regimens are typically based on other childhood sarcoma regimens with the inclusion of vincristine, actinomycin-D, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, and doxorubicin. Agents that have been used with limited success include etoposide and cisplatin or carboplatin.

The IPPBR is currently conducting the first prospective clinical study of an aggressive multi-agent chemotherapy; specifics are available at the IPPBR Web site (www.ppbregistry.org).

Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is used primarily to treat PPB recurrence or metastasis, or in the setting of local control of residual unresectable tumor [Priest et al 1997, Kamenova et al 2006, Indolfi et al 2007, Williams et al 2012].

Radiation therapy of brain metastasis can result in long-term survival for some patients.

If radiation therapy is chosen, dosage appropriate for high-grade sarcoma (44 Gy or above) should be used [Indolfi et al 2007].

Treatment failure. Survival after failure of primary therapy for types II and III PPB is poor – 35% at two years and 27.5% at five years, respectively [IPPBR, unpublished data]. Modalities used include surgery, attempted repeat complete resection, and radiation therapy. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation have also been used. Intracavitary 32P and cisplatin have also been used on occasion. Because cases are few and chemotherapy regimens used to treat recurrences have varied, data to support specific treatment recommendations in the setting of recurrent disease are limited.

Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Tumors

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (including Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, juvenile granulosa cell tumor, and gynandroblastoma) are rare and few studies have focused on clinical variables, treatment, and prognosis. Treatment regimens are based on those used for ovarian germ cell tumors and data are limited [Schneider et al 2002, Schultz et al 2012].

If imaging or laboratory studies suggest the presence of an ovarian tumor, consultation with specialists in surgery/gynecology and oncology is suggested. Surgical resection with staging procedures is usually the initial treatment. Fertility-sparing surgery is recommended for most girls and young women.

Most patients undergo unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with sampling of peritoneal fluid and cytologic examination of peritoneal washings. Lymph nodes should be carefully examined intraoperatively and removed if they are clinically concerning. Level of differentiation and stage influence outcome and are critical to determining whether adjuvant therapy is necessary. Effort must be made to avoid rupture of the tumor as this would result in an increased stage for some patients. If rupture occurs, the timing of rupture (preoperative vs. intraoperative rupture) must be carefully documented as this may influence the need for adjuvant therapy.

The decision to use adjuvant treatment such as chemotherapy following surgery for SLCT or JGCT is based on histology and stage:

Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. For SLCT stage greater than Ia (including Ic with perioperative or preoperative rupture or poorly differentiated SLCT), adjuvant chemotherapy is sometimes used. Depending on the stage, pathology, and need for fertility preservation, consideration should also be given to additional surgery. When chemotherapy is used, a platinum-based regimen such as cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) or cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI) is often used. Additional regimens more often used in adults may include taxanes or anthracyclines. A Phase II randomized trial is currently open through Gynecology Oncology Group comparing cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin to carboplatin and paclitaxel.Follow-up monitoring for ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors should include attention to tumor markers and imaging. Imaging with either MRI or ultrasound may be preferred over CT as neither involves ionizing radiation; however, the use of MRI in very young children is limited by the need for sedation. If MRI is used, the radiologist should be notified of the clinical concern for ovarian tumor so that appropriate imaging protocols are used.

Juvenile granulosa cell tumor (JGCT). In young children with FIGO Stage Ia JGCT the prognosis is excellent with resection alone. Adjuvant chemotherapy, often given with higher-stage disease, is suggested for stages higher than Ic. The most common regimens in the United States include a platinum analog, generally cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) and in Europe cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI). An individualized approach is needed in the instance of preoperative vs intraoperative tumor rupture. Generally speaking, recurrent JGCT is difficult to treat and the approach is highly individualized. Hyperthermic chemotherapy has been used by some investigators. Although a small number of survivors of advanced or recurrent JGCTs underwent radiation therapy, the use of radiation therapy in the treatment of recurrent ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors is not well defined.

Gynandroblastoma. The malignant potential of gynandroblastoma is not yet clear. Most are found in an early stage, and surgical resection has been curative for the majority of the reported cases.

Other Tumors

Cystic nephroma

Surgery. Treatment consists of surgical resection via partial or full nephrectomy. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible for patients with extensive bilateral cysts.

Chemotherapy. Although the use of chemotherapy has been considered in rare cases with extensive bilateral disease and continued rapid growth, its efficacy has not been studied.

Multinodular goiter (MNG) and thyroid cancer

Observation with or without biopsy. The approach to preoperative investigation is the same for patients with a sporadic nodule with or without a DICER1 pathogenic variant. See guidelines from the American Thyroid Association (purchase required) or the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/Associazione Medici Endocrinologi/European Thyroid Association collaborative (available online).

Ultrasound examination is used to confirm the nodule and to determine the need for fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA). In general, FNA is recommended for nodules measuring ≥1 cm. FNAB of smaller nodules should be considered in patients with a history of previous radiation exposure and/or concerning sonographic features, including (but not limited to) microcalcifications and abnormal lymph nodes. FNA results that show benign-appearing follicular cells (including Hürthle cells and/or lymphocytes) indicate (in most cases) nodular hyperplasia, follicular adenoma, or lymphocytic thyroiditis. Continued follow-up care is appropriate in the presence of a stable nodule(s).

Surgery is appropriate for symptomatic nodules or nodules with significant growth on serial US examination. If the results of the FNA are positive for papillary thyroid carcinoma, total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice in patients who are surgical candidates.

Radioactive iodine (RAI) is the most effective medical treatment for patients found to have distant (lung) metastasis or persistent disease not amenable to repeat surgery.

Ciliary body medulloepithelioma (CBME). The four management options include:

Observation. In one patient age nine years with CBME and PPB, the CBME was monitored in six-month intervals over a two-year period by high-resolution imaging and ocular examination. The histology of the CBME was unknown [Priest et al 2011].

Local resection. Small, well-circumscribed (<3 clock hours) tumors may be treated by local resection with preservation of useful vision. However, many of these tumors will progress. In one series of ten individuals with CBME, six were initially treated with local resection, including two who received application of a radioactive plaque. However, in all six, tumor recurred after a mean of 2.5 years. Four required enucleation, one received local cryotherapy, and one needed exenteration and irradiation [Shields et al 1996].

Enucleation. Most CBME have advanced features at diagnosis (friable appearance, a neoplastic cyclitic membrane or adjacent free-floating cysts) that should prompt enucleation. Long-term survival is common after this definitive therapy. Four of the five individuals reported with CBME and PPB underwent enucleation with follow-up ranging from seven months to 44 years [Priest et al 2011, Laird et al 2013].

Orbital exenteration. Although rarely indicated, exenteration (with consideration of adjunct chemotherapy and radiation) is required for a CBME that extends beyond the globe. Although long-term survival has been observed following exenteration, it is generally associated with a poor prognosis [Broughton & Zimmerman 1978].

Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix may not require hysterectomy since these tumors are usually confined to the cervix and typically do not have deep stromal invasion. Local resection followed by chemotherapy appropriate for ERMS is one management approach. On completion of chemotherapy, biopsies are performed to determine if residual viable tumor is present. The decision for additional treatment is based on the results of the post-chemotherapy biopsies and follow-up imaging studies.

Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH). The extent of this tumor is best determined by appropriate imaging studies and is usually managed by surgical resection. When access to the tumor is adequate one approach is endonasal endoscopy with resection. If complete resection is difficult, these tumors can be effectively debulked in most cases; however, complete extirpation is preferred.

Pituitary blastoma. All six reported patients with pituitary blastoma had surgical resection of the mass by a variety of approaches [Scheithauer et al 2012]; five had subtotal resection and the sixth had a gross total resection. For adjuvant therapy one patient received “polychemotherapy” and another received temozolomide and 5400 cGy radiation therapy. Normalization of endocrine laboratory values, especially ACTH, is expected post-operatively and is a useful marker of disease activity. Some children have required two surgeries to successfully extirpate the tumor.

Pineoblastoma. Immediate management issues may include interventions for obstructive hydrocephalus. MRI of the entire spinal axis is indicated, as is CSF cytology and serum and CSF sampling of germ cell tumor markers (beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein). Open resection, rather than biopsy, is the treatment of choice for pineoblastoma. An aggressive surgical approach is associated with prolonged survival. Following maximal surgical resection, standard adjuvant therapy includes fractionated radiotherapy (to brain and spine) and chemotherapy [Tate et al 2011].

Surveillance

No guidelines regarding initial screening evaluations or surveillance of persons with a germline DICER1 pathogenic variant have been established. Based on data from the International PPB Registry (IPPBR) which includes more than 500 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic DICER1-related disorders, the authors recommend (1) annual physical examination and targeted review of systems, and (2) imaging study type and frequency based on tumor type, patient age, and suspicious clinical findings.

PPB. Baseline chest CT to evaluate for lung cysts or tumors in a patient of any age

Note: The most critical age group for chest CT is children under age three years, the peak risk age for solid PPB. The negative predictive value of a normal chest CT for development of PPB is not known.

CN

Baseline kidney CT or ultrasound examination in a patient diagnosed with PPB

In a patient of any age, especially those younger than age four years, annual abdominal examination and monitoring for abdominal pain, swelling, or hematuriaNote: The negative predictive value of a normal kidney CT or ultrasound examination for development of CN is not known.

Thyroid gland neoplasia

Thyroid physical examination in a patient of any age

If thyroid gland asymmetry and/or a nodule are detected, perform thyroid ultrasound examination to confirm as well as to determine if surveillance or fine needle aspiration biopsy is warranted.

If no nodules are detected, continue annual physical examination and consider repeat thyroid US every three to five years.

Thyroid ultrasound examination if the patient has previously received chemotherapy or as a baseline if chemotherapy is anticipated

Thyroid function testing as indicated based on clinical signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism

Ovarian stromal tumors

Examination of all females of any age for signs and symptoms of precocious puberty or virilization, and masses in the abdomen or pelvis. If any are detected, perform appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluations.

Imaging: abdominal-pelvic US examination, MRI, or CT

Laboratory testing: serum markers AFP, beta-HCG, LDH, inhibin A and B, estradiol, testosterone, CA125, and serum electrolytes including calciumNote: There is no current recommendation for laboratory screening in the absence of a mass or clinical findings of sex hormone excess.

For women and the parents of young girls with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant: education regarding the possible presenting signs and symptoms of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (abdominal distension, precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and signs of virilization [hirsutism, voice changes, acne])

CBME

Evaluation of young children for ciliary body medulloepithelioma including measurement of visual acuity

Visual inspection of the eye and orbit

Botryoid ERMS. In infants, children, and young adults: when signs/symptoms of hematuria or abnormal vaginal bleeding are present, endoscopic evaluation of the bladder or direct visualization of the cervix, respectively

NCMH. In infants, children, adolescents, and adults:

Review of systems including respiratory and feeding difficulties, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, visual disturbances, and otitis media

Nasal endoscopy as warranted by ophthalmologic signs (e.g., ophthalmoplegia, proptosis, ptosis, hypotropia, and enophthalmos) resulting from orbital involvement of the tumor

Pituitary blastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of cortisol excess

Pineoblastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of increased intracranial pressure such as headache, full fontanel, vomiting, and lethargy, or other neurologic defects including upgaze paralysis and nystagmus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the germline DICER1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is reasonable to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives of all ages to clarify their genetic status and to provide recommendations for age-appropriate surveillance and early intervention.

If first-degree relatives are not able to undergo molecular genetic testing, surveillance should be based on clinical changes that would warrant further investigation as detailed above (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although large lung cysts in the fetus can theoretically impair lung development, such an occurrence appears to be uncommon. According to the IPPBR, prenatal ultrasound examination has detected lung cysts in seven cases at 31-35 weeks’ gestational age.

Because large lung cysts can cause respiratory distress in newborns, it is recommended that prenatal identification of lung cysts prompt consultation with specialists in high-risk obstetrics and fetal medicine to monitor the pregnancy and manage the delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

The first prospective treatment trial is now open at many institutions in the United States and Europe. For details on study enrollment and institutional approval, see the IPPBR Web site.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Because pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a diagnosis of exclusion, the necessary evaluations are typically all completed as part of establishing the diagnosis.

A medical genetics consultation is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

See McLaughlin et al [2013], Taichman et al [2014] and Hill et al [2015] for evidenced-based treatment algorithms.

Referral centers specializing in diagnosis and therapy of PAH are available across the US (see Pulmonary Hypertension Association Web site). Consultation is encouraged for all persons suspected of having PAH because of the complexity and continuing evolution of diagnosis and treatment.

Unprecedented approval of medications for PAH by the FDA in the last two decades has led to availability of a dozen therapies which all demonstrate some efficacy, but substantial limitations remain: none of them cures the disease, nor is effective in all patients, nor stops or reverses the underlying pathogenesis (obstruction of the pulmonary arteries).

The most effective among them, continuous IV prostanoids, are the most complicated to administer as they require patient management of a pump for continuous infusion, with a myriad of possible problems, including sepsis related to chronic central venous catheters. Patient preference often dictates the route of medication administration (continuous IV or subcutaneous (subQ), aerosol, oral) or side effects determine which agents are personally acceptable.

Continuous patient monitoring for progression of disease and medication adjustment requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team which communicates seamlessly with multiple specialty pharmacies and insurors.

Medications in use for PAH include the following:

Prostacyclin analogsEpoprostenol (continuous IV)Treprostinil (inhalation, oral, continuous subQ, or IV)Iloprost (inhalation)

Endothelin blockers (oral)BosentanAmbrisenanMacitentan

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (oral)SildenafilTadalafil

Guanylate cyclase stimulator (oral)Riociguat

Calcium channel blockers. A minority of individuals with PAH have a favorable long-term clinical response to oral calcium channel blockers. Such responders may be identified by a positive acute pulmonary vasodilator response (inhaled nitric oxide) assessed during cardiac catheterization. Three retrospective studies suggest that individuals with HPAH are less likely to demonstrate an acute pulmonary vasodilator response or have more severe disease than those with PAH of unknown cause [Elliott et al 2006, Rosenzweig et al 2008, Sztrymf et al 2008].

Adjunctive agents. Fluid retention may be ameliorated by diuretic therapy, hypoxemia may be helped by supplemental oxygen, and anticoagulation therapy may prevent superimposed thrombosis, especially common for indwelling catheters needed to deliver continuous infusion of a prostanoid.

Lung transplantation is an effective treatment for selected patients with PAH, but has many limitations, among them insufficient availability of donor lungs and limited long-term survival after lung transplantation for most recipients because of chronic graft rejection. Mean survival after lung transplantation is about five years.

Lung transplantation is appropriate only for patients whose lives are threatened by lung disease. Although the many effective PAH medications can improve symptoms, they do not reverse the underlying pulmonary vascular disease and it is debated how much they prolong overall survival [Humbert 2010, Macchia et al 2010]. The time span of months usually needed to assess the benefit of the many different medications or combinations of medications can delay the decision about timing of lung transplantation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Fluid balance. Fluid retention is a common complication and requires vigilant management and interaction with health care team.

Patients should weigh daily and chart their weights, and be instructed about what threshold to call for change in therapy.

Exercise regimen. A regular exercise regimen is desirable, and is tailored to the patient depending on their stage of disease. Exercise is valuable for restoration and maintenance of physical conditioning, but at the same time is a monitor for change in status of the PAH indicating need for a change in therapy.

Nutrition management. Many of the medications are associated with side effects of anorexia or nausea, so careful attention to nutritional status is needed to maintain overall health.

Infusion pump management. Maintaining and troubleshooting of continuous infusions of vasoactive medications requires extensive training and disaster preparation of both the patient and a care support person. Initial training requires 20 hours of in-person teaching per patient, and meticulous attention to detail is essential for therapy to be successful.

Central venous catheter. Maintaining and troubleshooting catheters requires meticulous attentive care to be done safely.

Surveillance

See McLaughlin et al [2013] for consensus document, including Reassessing Patients Over Time.

The clinical course of HPAH is highly variable, ranging from rapid progression to long periods of stable clinical status. The appropriate surveillance measures and timing are determined by the relative stability of the patient's clinical condition. Patients who are declining should be in frequent contact with their health care providers so that therapies may be changed or added.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with or at risk for PAH should avoid all the following:

Appetite-suppressant medications (e.g., fenfluramine/phentermine, dexfenfluramine, and amfepramone [diethylpropion]), which have been associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) [Abenhaim et al 1996, Abramowicz et al 2003]

Cocaine, amphetamines, and related compounds causing vasoconstriction, which have anecdotal association with PH and could be risk factors

Other medications that have anecdotal suggestion of increased risk of PH, including estrogen compounds used as oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy. Anecdotal reports associating pregnancy with onset of PH raise some concern about the risks involved with pregnancy; however, there is no published consensus regarding the best approach to birth control in women with PAH. Because avoidance of exogenous systemic estrogen is desirable, many experts prefer IUD [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Hypoxia. The hypoxia that accompanies high altitude is associated with pulmonary vasoconstriction and PH in susceptible individuals.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

The WHO Symposia [Badesch et al 2009] recommends serial screening by echocardiography of at-risk family members every three to five years to enable earlier detection and treatment. However, many health insurers do not provide coverage for screening tests for asymptomatic individuals. No studies describe the frequency of compliance with the WHO recommendation.

In families with a known pathogenic variant in one of the genes known to be associated with HPAH, the use of molecular genetic testing to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives can allow individuals who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant to safely forego clinical screening. However, the role of molecular genetic testing for early diagnosis of at-risk family members has yet to be established [Newman et al 2001].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The physiologic stress of pregnancy in a woman with HPAH is significant and maternal mortality is believed to be substantial; newer effective therapies may decrease the risk.

Anecdotal reports of onset of PAH with pregnancy raise concern about risks of pregnancy as a basis for developing PAH, but no consensus exists regarding the best approach to birth control in women with HPAH [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Several investigations are actively seeking new treatment directions or compounds, and many have shown promising results in experimental models or pilot studies in affected individuals, including the following [Ghofrani et al 2009]:

Antiangiogenesis strategies

Growth factor inhibitors

Endothelial progenitor cells/stem cells in lung repair

Developing therapies against right-ventricle remodeling

Trials of combination therapy, using selected combinations of the FDA-approved therapies mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations, are in progress [Gomberg-Maitland et al 2013]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia (PPD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete skeletal survey, if not already done as part of the diagnostic evaluation

Referral to a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or specialist in treating bone dysplasias

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia team

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive. No specific therapy for PPD is available.

Pain due to secondary osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs. Other anti-inflammatory medications including steroids and immunosuppressive drugs (cyclosporine and methotrexate) have a limited role in treatment and are best avoided in view of their significant side effects.

Physical therapy may help preserve joint mobility. Immobilization (e.g., casting) should be avoided.

Most joint involvement requires intervention by an orthopedist and/or physical therapist.

Angular deformities of lower limbs. The indications for surgical correction are to restore normal alignment of the lower limbs and to alleviate gait disturbance, instability, and/or pain.

Progressive joint stiffness

Large joint stiffness is managed by physical therapy, activity modification, and walking aids.

Small joint arthropathy is managed by an occupational therapist who may advise adaptive devices, modification of activity, and/or vocational training.

Joint pain. Severe joint pain due to advanced osteoarthritis is treated by joint arthroplasty (i.e., hip and knee replacement). Early hip replacement (second decade of life) can be successful in relieving pain and restoring the ability to ambulate.

Progressive stiffness and deformities of the spine

Scoliosis and mild kyphosis can be managed with bracing.

Spinal canal stenosis can be managed with decompression, fusion, and instrumentation.

Surveillance

No specific guidelines for surveillance have been published.

Recommendations include the following:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications including bone deformity, secondary joint disease, spinal deformities, and pain

Evaluation by a specialist in skeletal dysplasia or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia clinic every year

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid immobilization (e.g., casting).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Deformities of pelvis may necessitate delivery by cæsarean section in pregnant women who have PPD.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with genetic prion disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with focus on the neurologic features of cognition, motor function, and coordination

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Therapy is aimed at controlling symptoms that may cause discomfort.

If present, seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as diphenylhydantoin or carbamazepine.

Myoclonus can sometimes be mitigated by clonazepam.

Issues related to dysphagia are often difficult to resolve. Since the disease is terminal, families are often faced with the decision of whether or not to place a permanent feeding tube. The timing of this decision differs depending on the type of prion disease. In general, placement of a feeding tube should be discouraged in those with late-developing dysphagia, as it may make it difficult for families to eventually withdraw feeding.

Evaluation by a social worker is mandatory to assist the family in management planning, as many decisions are required during the course of disease and at the end of the disease process. Autopsy to confirm the diagnosis should always be a consideration, as accurate information is important for family members.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Similar to the non-genetic forms of prion disease, some genetic forms of prion disease can also be environmentally transmitted to others. Therefore, caution is advised for any affected individual undergoing a surgical procedure (e.g., endoscopy, brain biopsy): surgical instruments used must be properly decontaminated or discarded to reduce the possibility of transmission of prion disease to other persons.

Surveillance

Affected individuals are examined at regular intervals for complications related to swallowing difficulties, intercurrent infections, and other disease manifestations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

There are no known substances that are reported to specifically worsen prion diseases, but as with any dementia, anticholinergics and antihistamines with high anticholinergic potential, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No cases of pregnant women affected with prion disease have been documented; if such a situation were to arise, clinical judgment regarding the safety and viability of the fetus and the life expectancy of the mother (which can be estimated based on the pathogenic variant and time of onset of symptoms) should be used in determining the best course of action during the pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

The drug quinacrine, an antimalarial agent that showed promise in tissue culture, was studied in both the US and the UK as a possible therapy, but in both cases it was found not to significantly affect the progression or symptoms of disease.

Several experimental therapies, including antibodies against PrP, gene silencing with RNA inhibitors, and anti-amyloids (such as Anle138b [Wagner et al 2013]) are being tested in animal models.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The National Prion Disease Surveillance Center is charged with collecting and recording all cases of prion disease in the US. They should be notified regarding all cases of suspected prion disease.

Individuals with genetic prion disease do NOT need to be quarantined. While all prion diseases are potentially transmissible through ingestion or injection of infectious tissue (neural), they are not contagious by typical means of close contact with affected individuals. It is advisable, however, that body fluids of symptomatic individuals be handled as biohazard waste.

Antiviral therapies have been tested and anecdotal reports do not support them to be efficacious.

In rodent studies, amphotericin B, pentosan polysulfate, and various other agents displayed promise when administered prior to infecting animals with prions; however, no successful clinical results have been reported.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with prolidase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of systems to assess for the possibility of pulmonary complications. In those with a history of pulmonary complications, consider chest imaging, pulmonary function tests, an echocardiogram to assess for pulmonary hypertension, and consultation with a pulmonologist.

Physical examination to evaluate for splenomegaly. If present, perform an abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate the extent of splenomegaly.

Complete blood count to evaluate for anemia and thrombocytopenia

Liver function tests to assess for the possibility of elevated liver enzymes

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a wound care specialist

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No curative treatment is available.

Care is preferably provided by a multidisciplinary team. Supportive treatment of skin, lung, and immunologic manifestations has been efficacious in some (but not in all) patients. Caution is warranted in the treatment of infections, which can be fulminant and fatal.

Click here (pdf) for further details, including treatments in which only partial or short-term benefit was reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Those who have undergone splenectomy should be appropriately immunized and treated promptly with antibiotics at the first sign of infection.

Antibiotic prophylaxis should also be considered in the appropriate setting.

Surveillance

In the absence of formal surveillance guidelines, the authors recommend:

Annual:

Skin examination for evidence of malignant transformation in persons with chronic recalcitrant skin ulcers

Complete blood count

Liver function tests

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver and spleen size

Follow up as recommended by a pulmonologist and immunologist;

Follow-up assessments of motor and cognitive development as recommended for educational planning.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with prolidase deficiency who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer.

Ikeda et al [1997] performed transfer of the human prolidase cDNA into fibroblasts from patients with prolidase deficiency. This increased the fibroblast prolidase activity up to 75 times normal.

Intracellular delivery of liposome-encapsulated prolidase.

Perugini et al [2005] showed that active prolidase encapsulated in liposomes was completely transported via endocytosis into fibroblasts six days after incubation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in each individual with newly diagnosed PROP1-related combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), it is important to evaluate for deficiencies of GH, TSH, LH, FSH, PRL, and ACTH because treatment of one hormone deficiency can precipitate symptoms of another hormone deficiency:

A total T4 assay can be used to evaluate thyroid hormone production.

Evaluation of LH and FSH production is more relevant in postpubertal individuals, particularly if sexual development is incomplete or if women display hypoestrogenic amenorrhea.

AM cortisol can be used to evaluate adrenal hormone production.

Medical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

The main principle of treatment in CPHD is replacement therapy with the appropriate hormones [Mehta et al 2009].

Growth hormone. GH deficiency is treated by subcutaneous injection of biosynthetic (i.e., recombinant) GH. To obtain an optimal outcome, replacement therapy should be started as soon as the diagnosis of GH deficiency is established. The initial dose of recombinant human GH (rhGH) is based on body weight, but the exact dose and the frequency of administration vary by protocol. The dose increases with increasing body weight to a maximum during puberty and is usually discontinued when final height has been reached, at approximately age 17 years [Ranke 1995, Rosén et al 1995, Growth Hormone Research Society 2000 (full text)].

There is increasing support for the use of rhGH treatment in young adults with GHD as well because of the possible effects on fat metabolism, lean body mass, and bone mineral density [Ho et al 2007 (full text)].

Clinical response to exogenous GH usually depends on the etiology and severity of the GH deficiency, deficiencies of other pituitary hormones, age of onset of growth failure, the time interval between the onset of growth failure and the onset of GH therapy, duration of replacement therapy, and the sex of the affected individual [Blethen et al 1997]. De Ridder et al [2007] developed a model that accurately predicts the adult height that will be achieved by GH therapy.

TSH. TSH deficiency is treated by thyroid hormone replacement in the form of L-thyroxine at a dose of approximately 1-3 µg/kg/day given orally. Of note, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been assessed and adrenal insufficiency is treated if present.

LH and FSH

Male infants with micropenis are treated with 50 mg testosterone enanthate intramuscularly every four weeks for a total of three to four doses.

If GH deficiency is present and if the child's growth normalizes before adolescence, it is appropriate to begin sex steroid replacement to induce secondary sex characteristics.

In males, this can be initiated at age 12 to 13 years with monthly injections of 100 mg testosterone enanthate, gradually increasing by 50 mg every six months to a dose of 200 to 300 mg per month.

In females, this can be initiated at age 11 to 12 years with conjugated estrogens or ethinyl estradiol, eventually cycling with estrogen and progesterone.

If the child has untreated growth hormone deficiency, the sex hormone replacement is given in lower doses and started at a later age to ensure maximal growth before epiphyseal closure.

Usually sex steroids are used to maintain secondary sex characteristics.

Fertility in both females and males is possible with administration of gonadotropins [Voutetakis et al 2004c]. Note: Because infertility in individuals with PROP1-related CPHD is secondary to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, appropriate treatment consists of gonadotropin replacement rather than the use of clomiphene citrate, which requires an intact pituitary gland.

ACTH. Long-term management is usually 10-15 mg/M2 oral hydrocortisone per 24 hours divided into three doses.

For individuals with GH deficiency, the lowest safe dose of hydrocortisone is used to avoid interfering with the growth response to growth hormone therapy.

For minor stress such as fever or minor illness, the dose of hydrocortisone is doubled or tripled until the illness has resolved.

For major stress, such as surgery or significant illness, hydrocortisone is increased to 40 to 100 mg/M2 and administered parenterally.

Surveillance

Growth should be carefully monitored; if growth velocity is low, evaluation for GH deficiency should be undertaken.

In persons with PROP1 pathogenic variants without known ACTH deficiency, cortisol levels should be monitored because ACTH deficiency may develop at a later time.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If both (paternal and maternal) PROP1 pathogenic variants are identified in a proband, it is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on younger sibs to enable early diagnosis and treatment.

For younger sibs who have not undergone molecular genetic testing, monitoring growth for evidence of growth failure is appropriate. Of note, affected sibs usually have extreme short stature because of thyroid hormone deficiency and growth hormone deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PA the following evaluations are recommended (see Figure 2):

Blood gas with base balance, electrolytes with anion gap, glucose, plasma ammonia, calcium, phosphorus, urine ketones

Plasma amino acids, total and free carnitine and acylcarnitine profile, and urine organic acid analysis

Complete blood count to evaluate for cytopenias

Consider initiating an evaluation for sepsis if the CBC and individual’s clinical signs suggest that infection is likely

Amylase and lipase to evaluate for pancreatitis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Once the patient becomes stable, evaluations include the following:

Clinical assessment of growth parameters, ability to feed, the need for G-tube placement, and neurologic status.

Laboratory assessment of nutritional status (calcium, phosphorus, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels [including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D], iron panel, and minerals and renal function); complete blood count to monitor for cytopenias

Clinical evaluation for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia with ECG, 24-hour Holter monitor, echocardiogram

EEG and brain MRI in symptomatic individuals

Developmental evaluation

Dilated eye examination

Hearing evaluation

Immunology consult

Other

Complete adherence to regional immunization schedules and influenza vaccination is indicated [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Maintain a high index of suspicion for endocrine, immune, and renal problems and address accordingly.

Treatment of Manifestations

Neonatal/acute decompensation. Birth, infections, trauma, surgery, postpartum recovery, or other forms of stress and hormonal changes can result in a catabolic response that leads, among other things, to protein breakdown with release of propiogenic amino acids that cannot be metabolized in PA. The goal of acute management is to reverse this process through promotion of anabolism and removal of toxic intermediates. The treatment of individuals with acutely decompensated PA is a medical emergency and requires a transfer to a center with biochemical genetics expertise and the ability to support urgent hemodialysis, especially if hyperammonemia is present.

In-patient management

Assess and manage ventilation and circulation as necessary.

Treat precipitating factors (fever, infection, dehydration, pain, vomiting, and other sources of stress).

Determine the need for sepsis workup and antibiotics.

Reverse catabolism by giving intravenous glucose and lipids.

The volume, glucose content and electrolyte composition of intravenous fluids is determined by age, target glucose infusion rate, cardiovascular status, renal condition, and co-administration of other medications.

Intravenous D10 ½ normal saline typically between 100% and 150% of the maintenance requirements is a common starting fluid. Dextrose solutions exceeding the concentration of 12.5% require a central line placement. The target glucose infusion rates varies by age [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Additional calories can be provided using parenteral lipid emulsion.

The use of intravenous insulin drip may be needed to maintain euglycemia and promote anabolism.

Manage protein intake to reduce propiogenic precursors; avoidance of protein transiently for <24-36 hours may be required.

Transition to enteral feedings should be commenced as soon as they are tolerated (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Dietary management).

If transition to enteral feedings within 48 hours is not possible, total parenteral nutrition is required.

Parenteral amino acid solutions are prescribed based on the recommended daily intake of age-appropriate energy, protein, isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine and adjusted using the daily and weekly growth data and plasma amino acid concentrations.

Remove toxic compounds.

Pharmacologic detoxification:

Nitrogen scavenger medications (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, sodium phenylbutyrate), such as those used in urea cycle disorders to help control ammonia levels during acute decompensations, should be used with caution in the treatment of hyperammonemia associated with PA as they can accentuate frequently observed low plasma glutamine [Al-Hassnan et al 2003, Filipowicz et al 2006]. For a discussion regarding the use of sodium benzoate versus sodium phenylacetate and sodium phenylbutyrate in propionic acidemia see Baumgartner et al [2014].

Oral N-carbamoylglutamate (carglumic acid; 100 mg/kg divided every 6 hours in individuals <20 kg and 2.2 gm/m2 in individuals >20 kg) can aid in the detoxification of ammonia during neonatal and acute decompensations [Filippi et al 2010, Schwahn et al 2010, Chapman et al 2012].

Extracorporeal detoxification is required for persistent acidosis and hyperammonemia (plasma ammonia level >250-300 μmol/L) not responding to fluid and drug treatment. Methods include (depending on age and clinical situation) continuous veno-venous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or hemodialysis [Chapman et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

Carnitine supplementation (100 mg/kg/day IV divided in 3 doses) may enhance the detoxification of propionic acid by conjugating into propionylcarnitine, which is excreted by the kidneys. Alternatively, it may relieve intracellular coenzyme A accretion and provide a benefit through this mechanism. Consult hospital pharmacy for the recommended maximum daily dose in older patients.

Manage pancreatitis using standard practices.

Home management of metabolic status. The detection and management of metabolic decompensations at home are a critical part of the chronic management of PA. Patients and care providers should notify their medical team about new symptoms and discuss the appropriateness of home management. Strategies to achieve home management should be tailored for the conditions of each patient and family and may include the following:

At-home detection and monitoring of urine ketones

Diet modification under the direction of the metabolic team

If fever is present due to an infection, treatment may include paracetamol and ibuprofen [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Use of anti-emetics such as ondansetron (see precautionary considerations in Agents/Circumstances to Avoid)

Other

Any injury, illness, hospitalization, or surgical procedure should involve consultation with the metabolic team.

The diagnosis and management of pancreatitis is the same as for pancreatitis of other causes.

Neutropenia and other cytopenias usually improve with metabolic control of PA.

Management of arrhythmias is similar to that from other causes.

Cardiomyopathy may improve after liver transplantation in some patients [Romano et al 2010].

Seizures are a frequent complication of PA, necessitating an antiepileptic drug. The use of valproic acid in organic acidemias is often avoided; however, several authors described its use in patients with PA [Haberlandt et al 2009, Schreiber et al 2012].

Dermatologic manifestations (e.g., persistent dermatitis or eczema) warrant a nutritional reassessment to rule out dietary deficiency of essential amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary management. The mainstay nutritional intervention is modification of diet to control the intake of propiogenic substrates (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine), while ensuring normal protein synthesis and preventing protein catabolism, amino acid deficiencies, and growth restriction.

Important note: Dietary management needs to be directed by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician.

Recommended protein intake depends on age of the patient (see Table 11 in Baumgartner et al [2014]).

The ratio of natural source protein to medical foods varies depending on the individual’s clinical status, laboratory parameters, and growth trajectory [Sutton et al 2012].

Laboratory parameters useful in guiding nutritional intervention can include the following:

Pre-prandial plasma essential amino acids

Plasma albumin

Prealbumin

Hemoglobin

Plasma ammonia

Urinary ketones, plasma lactic acid, and methylcitric acid to monitor and adjust nutritional management

Plasma vitamin D

Essential fatty acid profile

Additional calories can be provided using protein-free formulas.

G-tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence in chronic management of PA.

Since the number of acute decompensations negatively correlates with the intellectual quotient in patients with PA [Grünert et al 2012], prevention and proactive management of metabolic crises can be an important point of intervention to maximize favorable clinical outcomes.

Medications

Levocarnitine. The optimal dose of levocarnitine has not been established; doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/kg per day have been reported [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

When calculating the daily dose of levocarnitine, one needs to consider the presence of this pharmaceutic compound in medical foods and the maximum daily dose in older patients.

Levocarnitine can be given enterally and intravenously.

Antimicrobial therapy. Oral metronidazole has been shown to reduce propionic acid production by intestinal gut flora [Thompson et al 1990, Mellon et al 2000]. One regimen uses a one-week-on, three-weeks-off approach [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012].

Biotin supplementation. There is no consensus regarding the use of biotin supplementation nor the optimal dose in the treatment of PA. Given biotin’s favorable profile, a short therapeutic trial may be considered [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Whether a biotin-responsive form of PA exists is not known [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Management during episodes of metabolic decompensation includes:

Avoidance of fasting (e.g., using intravenous dextrose).

Increasing calorie intake to prevent catabolism (e.g., intravenous fat emulsion).

When enteral feeding cannot be provided for a prolonged period of time, judicious use of total parenteral nutrition may include standard amino acid mixes providing age-appropriate recommended daily allowance of protein [Sutton et al 2012]. In rare circumstances, specialized amino acid mixes with reduced content of isoleucine, valine, threonine and methionine are necessary.

Organ transplantation. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) may be indicated in those individuals who, despite adequate medical treatment, still experience frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable hyperammonemia, and poor growth [Barshes et al 2006, Charbit-Henrion et al 2015].

Benefits of OLT include decrease in the frequency of metabolic decompensations, improved quality-adjusted life years, increased life expectancy, life-time cost savings [Vara et al 2011, Li et al 2015], and reversal of dilated cardiomyopathy [Yorifuji et al 2004, Romano et al 2010].

Liver transplantation has been performed from unrelated donors [Barshes et al 2006, Romano et al 2010] and from heterozygous related donors [Morioka et al 2005, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012].

Continuous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Sato et al 2009, Kasahara et al 2012], and left ventricular assist devices have been used while waiting for OLT [Ameloot et al 2011].

OLT in patients with PA is not curative. It does not completely protect against a metabolic stroke, hyperammonemia, or metabolic decompensations.

Life-long post-transplant management is recommended [Yorifuji et al 2004, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continued protein restriction and L-carnitine supplementation after OLT is advocated by several authors [Saudubray et al 1999, Yorifuji et al 2004, Kasahara et al 2012].

Sedation and perioperative management. Anesthetic aspects of perioperative management of patients with PA have been infrequently discussed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Involvement of a metabolic specialist perioperatively to ensure adequate hydration and caloric management can help minimize the risk of decompensations.

Emergency situations. Emergency letters, bracelets, and emergency information in smartphones help facilitate appropriate emergency care by healthcare providers unfamiliar with propionic acidemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regular monitoring by a biochemical geneticist and a dietitian is necessary to avoid insufficient or excessive protein restriction. Many factors should be taken into account to guide protein restriction: age, gender, severity of PA, nutritional status, and presence of other factors such as intercurrent illness, surgery, level of physical activity, and growth spurts. The effects of excessive protein restriction can include impaired growth, essential amino acid deficiencies, and metabolic decompensations.

Acrodermatitis enteropathica, hair loss, and cutaneous Candida infections in patients with PA managed with medical foods can be caused by essential amino acid deficiency and require a re-appraisal of the nutritional management.

Psychotic episodes in patients with PA have been infrequently reported [Dejean de la Bâtie et al 2014]. Similar to other inborn errors of metabolism, care should be exercised when using antipsychotic medications as they can mask clinical signs of encephalopathy or cause adverse effects.

Surveillance

The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on factors such as age, disease severity, and presence of catabolic stressors; evaluation frequency can range from every three months to annually.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of the following:

Linear growth, weight gain, head circumference, and body mass index

Interval assessment for the need of G-tube

Neurologic evaluation including survey for seizures and movement disorders

Interval ophthalmologic evaluation including dilated eye examination

Audiology evaluation

Evaluation for clinical signs of cardiomyopathy (e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, shortness of breathy, hepatomegaly)

Evaluation of integumentary system (skin, hair, G-tube, and central line insertion sites)

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate

Laboratory evaluation should include the following:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, pre-prandial plasma amino acids (especially, isoleucine, leucine, valine, threonine, and methionine), plasma ammonia concentration, plasma free and total carnitine, and quantitative plasma acylcarnitine profile

Nutritional studies: electrolytes, mineral panel, albumin, prealbumin, hemoglobin, vitamin D, iron studies, essential fatty acids, and trace minerals (selenium and zinc)

Complete blood count and differential to monitor for cytopenias

Renal function tests; serum cystatin C can be more sensitive than plasma creatinine in identifying early evidence of chronic renal failure.

Amylase and lipase as needed to evaluate for pancreatitis

Other evaluations:

Cardiology evaluation, screening for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias by echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitor, annual and as needed

Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess optic nerve and retinal changes, annually and as needed

DEXA scan

Brain MRI, MRS, and EEG as clinically indicated

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy services to determine need

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid prolonged fasting, catabolic stressors, and excessive protein intake.

Lactated Ringer’s solution is not recommended in patients with organic acidemias.

In patients with QT abnormalities, avoid medications that can prolong the QT interval.

Ondansetron, an antiemetic drug used to control nausea, has been associated with QT interval prolongation on ECG [Tay et al 2014] and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with PA who have cardiomyopathy and QT interval abnormalities.

Neuroleptic antiemetics (e.g., promethazine) can mask symptoms of progressive encephalopathy and are best avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing of at-risk sibs is warranted to allow for early diagnosis and treatment. If prenatal testing has not been performed on at-risk sibs, measure urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, and acylcarnitine profile immediately in the newborn period in parallel with newborn screening.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although successful pregnancy outcomes have been reported in patients with PA [Van Calcar et al 1992, Langendonk et al 2012], pregnancy can pose a significant management challenge. Hyperemesis gravidarum may require the use of an antiemetic but the risk of QT interval prolongation and the effect on the central nervous system need to be considered [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Baseline evaluation and monitoring of cardiomyopathy before, during, and after pregnancy is recommended. Reference ranges for total and free plasma carnitine differ during pregnancy [Schoderbeck et al 1995]. Close nutritional follow up and fetal growth monitoring is necessary as the energy and protein requirements change throughout pregnancy. Close post-partum clinical and biochemical follow up and delayed discharge from the hospital are recommended. In the post-partum period, increased caloric and protein needs during lactation should be taken into consideration.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Proteus syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended [Tosi et al 2011]:

Detailed and comprehensive (general, spine, and hand) orthopedic evaluation

Skeletal survey as a baseline study of the extent and severity of overgrowth

CT imaging, possibly with three-dimensional reconstruction for patients with significant scoliosis. As the vertebral bodies are commonly progressively deformed, this study can be very helpful for surgical planning.

Pulmonology consultation, pulmonary function testing, and high-resolution computed tomography of the chest for patients with signs or symptoms compatible with bullous pulmonary disease

Other imaging techniques are highly useful and should be determined by manifestations on examination and by the medical history. Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasound have been extremely useful in the characterization of this disorder [Jamis-Dow et al 2004].

Treatment of Manifestations

As with any complex and multisystem disorder, patients with PS benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Overgrowth is an ongoing issue for many patients with Proteus syndrome. The management is complex and highly dependent on the nature of the overgrowth, which can vary substantially among patients.

For overgrowth of tubular bones, epiphysiostasis and epiphysiodesis should be the mainstays of management. One intervention that the authors have found to be detrimental to patients with Proteus syndrome is distraction osteotomy (so-called Ilizarov procedure) performed on the normal (shorter) limbs. Readers are referred to a recent review and conference report for more details on this complex issue [Tosi et al 2011].

The skeletal overgrowth of PS can result in significant biomechanical and functional compromise. Because of this, ongoing and comprehensive Rehabilitation Medicine care, including physical and occupational therapy, is important for many patients. In addition, many patients with PS develop substantial needs for custom-designed footwear or orthotics due to leg-length inequality or plantar CCTNs.

Patients with PS who develop large plantar CCTNs should receive regular dermatologic care and attention to manage malodor (a potential complication of difficulty with cleanliness of the deepening of the sulci in late adolescence) and other concerns, such as pressure ulcerations. Large plantar CCTNs can also contribute to problems with shoe fit and often warrant pedorthic intervention as mentioned above.

Management of the overgrowth of adipose tissue is challenging because the areas of adipose overgrowth are not encapsulated and discrete (in contrast to lipomas) and, therefore, can be difficult to resect and commonly regrow after surgical debulking. The authors generally recommend open surgical approaches over liposuction because the highly vascularized lipomatous overgrowth in some patients can result in hemorrhaging that is difficult to control and/or chronically weeping lymphatics.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). The most urgent and life-threatening complication of Proteus syndrome can be DVT and PE [Slavotinek et al 2000]. The rarity of this problem in the general pediatric population can result in a delay in diagnosis.

The authors recommend emergent evaluation of patients who develop symptoms of DVT (e.g., palpable subcutaneous rope-like mass, swelling, erythema, pain, and distal venous congestion) or PE (e.g., shortness of breath, chest pain, and cough which may include hemoptysis). Because patients with PE can be asymptomatic, it is recommended that a patient with a DVT be evaluated for PE regardless of symptoms.

Evaluation for DVTs. In the absence of cardiopulmonary compromise, consider the d-dimer assay and/or ultrasonographic evaluation.

Evaluation of PE. High-resolution chest CT (so called spiral CT) with contrast is recommended. Ventilation-perfusion nuclear medicine scanning may be appropriate in some cases.

Treatment of DVT and PE should follow recommended anticoagulation guidelines for these disorders. The authors recommend hematologic evaluation and consultation for consideration of anticoagulant prophylaxis for patients undergoing surgery or other procedures that may predispose to DVT/PE.

Bullous pulmonary disease. Although uncommon, bullous pulmonary disease does affect some patients with Proteus syndrome, and, as with other disease manifestations, this can progress with startling rapidity. Pulmonary evaluation is recommended for these patients and resection of large bullous lesions may be indicated in some cases. Bullous disease in the context of scoliosis can pose significant and complex challenges for appropriate management.

Psychosocial issues. In addition to functional compromise, the skeletal and connective tissue overgrowth of PS can result in disfigurement for some patients, a significant concern for many families [Turner et al 2007]. This condition is progressive and the degree of severity varies widely among patients, creating uncertainty for both clinicians and families. Coping with an ultra-rare and chronic condition like PS poses challenges for many patients and families, and genetic and psychosocial counseling is certainly warranted in most instances.

Although PS is exceedingly rare, a robust support group infrastructure exists and many families find this very helpful (see Resources).

Surveillance

Individualized surveillance plans for the skeletal, pulmonary, soft-tissue, and other manifestations of PS should be developed according to patients’ specific needs.

Because of the predisposition to a range of tumors (most of which are benign) patients should be monitored by their primary care provider with regular evaluations including a directed medical history and examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because PS is not inherited, relatives are not at increased risk and do not require evaluation.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS) superactivity, the following evaluations are recommended:

All individuals. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Juvenile/adult onset

Serum uric acid concentration

Joint examination for evidence of gout; generally, evaluation of joint integrity only, except during an acute flare of arthritis or an individual with chronic deformity or tophus formation following multiple attacks

Assessment of renal function and renal structural integrity (e.g., renal ultrasound examination)

Infantile onset. In addition to evaluations listed under Juvenile/adult onset:

Neurologic evaluation for hypotonia, ataxia, presence/absence of tendon reflexes

Audiometry for evidence of hearing loss, a critical differential point

Treatment of Manifestations

Hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria in individuals with PRS superactivity can be reduced by treatment with the following:

Reduced intake of red and organ meats, poultry, and shellfish [Choi et al 2004], oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines), beer, avoidance of high-fructose corn syrup-containing foods and drinks, and increased low-fat dairy intake

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, prescribed in doses with the ultimate aim of achieving serum urate concentrations lower than 6.0 mg/dL (360 μmol/L). The starting dose should be 100 mg once a day (in adults) with titration every three to four weeks according to the serum urate concentration. However, because of the uric acid overproduction and excessive uric acid excretion, allopurinol should be prescribed conservatively, as there is a high risk for xanthinuria and xanthine renal lithiasis – see Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Febuxostat, a newer urate-lowering xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat has not been tested in individuals with PRS superactivity, but there is no reason a priori to doubt that it will be effective in the treatment of this disorder. Febuxostat should also be prescribed conservatively, because of a high risk for xanthinuria causing renal lithiasis. Note: Excretion of >1.1 g uric acid per day in an adult is associated with a greater than 50% risk for kidney stones.

High daily fluid intake (i.e., ≥2 L/day in the adult)

Potassium citrate (usually administered 4x/day to alkalinize the urine) when urate urinary tract stones are present or uric acid gravel is in the urine [Becker 2008]. Xanthinuria does not respond to urinary alkalinization.

Note: The interventions described only prevent/treat gout and the other metabolic complications of hyperuricemia; they have no known beneficial effect on hearing loss or neurodevelopmental impairment.

Sensorineural hearing loss is managed in the usual manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management).

Ataxia is managed in the usual manner (see Hereditary Ataxias, Management).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Gout and renal lithiasis caused by chronically elevated serum and urine uric acid, the result of purine overproduction, can be reduced by a xanthine oxidase inhibitor.

Some neurologic attributes of the severe form of the disease may be preventable by early treatment with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), although this is experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

By analogy to individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, who also have marked purine overproduction, xanthine oxidase inhibition with allopurinol or febuxostat may result in the formation of xanthine urinary tract stones. These radiolucent stones can be confused clinically with uric acid stones. If residual symptoms of urolithiasis occur in PRS superactivity despite the achievement of goal serum urate concentrations, a stone should be isolated for analysis and/or urinary xanthine concentration should be measured. Management of this pharmacologically induced complication includes reduction in daily allopurinol or febuxostat dosing, with the possible need to accept serum urate concentrations higher than the usual goal range (<6.0 mg/dL; 360 μmol/L).

Surveillance

Monthly measurement of 24-hour uric acid excretion in the urine is particularly helpful in the assessment of the response to treatment. Alternatively, a spot urinary urate/creatinine ratio can be informative if accessibility to samples is restricted.

Once a normal serum urate concentration is achieved and maintained, serum urate concentration should be monitored at a minimum annually to assure that the targeted concentration is maintained.

A 24-hour urine should also be monitored at a minimum annually for urate and xanthine concentrations particularly to ensure that urinary xanthine does not exceed solubility (<1 mmol/L); plasma xanthine is cleared efficiently and does not accumulate.

Audiometry should be repeated as deemed appropriate by treating audiologist/otolaryngologist.

Neurologic evaluation should be performed annually or more frequently as recommended by the treating neurologist.

Note: Under usual circumstances, renal functional consequences are avoided if serum urate concentration and urinary excretion of urate are normalized and urinary xanthine does not routinely exceed its solubility (~1 mmol/L).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Red and organ meats, shellfish, or oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines) in excess; beer, high-fructose corn syrup-enriched foods and drinks [Choi et al 2004]

Dehydration

If possible, urate-retaining medications: low-dose aspirin, thiazide diuretics

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to screen apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (regardless of gender) of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, measurement of serum urate concentration; 24-hour urinary uric acid excretion or spot urine uric acid/creatinine ratio; and an audiology evaluation. Note: (1) Because collection of 24-hour urine in an infant or young child is very difficult, measurement of uric acid/creatinine ratio in a spot urine sample may be helpful. (2) Sometimes the serum urate concentrations are not extremely elevated in children with PRS superactivity, probably as a result of higher renal clearance of urate, however the urine urate excretion is abnormally high for age in all individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation may theoretically alleviate some of the neurologic symptoms of severe PRS superactivity by providing an oral source of purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. Although PRS superactivity exhibits high purine nucleotides (adenylates/guanylates) in some cells, these are low in red blood cells, which rely on purine salvage metabolism, and are believed to be low in the brain, which also relies on purine salvage metabolism.

An adult with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome has been reported as benefiting neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006].

For an open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (from ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome [Christodoulou et al, unpublished data] (approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia), oral SAM supplementation was set at 30 mg/kg/day. The boys appeared to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however slight deterioration in their vision was noted. Eventually, they both died of respiratory failure at the ages of 19 and 18 years in association with a severe lower respiratory tract infection.

Mildly affected heterozygous females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested. Whether treatment with SAM supplementation would benefit individuals with allelic disorders (PRS superactivity, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5) remains to be investigated.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of pancreatic exocrine function (see Treatment of Manifestations, Maldigestion)

Evaluation of pancreatic endocrine function (i.e., assessment of glucose tolerance)

Consideration of pancreatic cancer surveillance in persons with chronic pancreatitis.

Treatment of Manifestations

Medical treatment and management for PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis are similar to those for non-hereditary pancreatitis.

Treatment of acute pancreatitis usually focuses on pain management and discontinuation of smoking and alcohol use to slow the rate of progression and to decrease the likelihood of complications, including pancreatic cancer.

Pancreatic pain can result from pancreatic duct obstruction, parenchyma hypertension, pancreatic ischemia, inflammation, neuropathy, and central pain [Fasanella et al 2007, Mullady et al 2011]. Genetic factors, many of which remain unknown or not convincingly accountable, are thought to play a role in pain perception, tolerance, and response to medication.

Analgesics are offered when pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is not sufficient to control pain.

Antioxidants have been reported to improve pain control in a few individuals with hereditary pancreatitis [Perrault 1994, Uomo et al 2001] and non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Endoscopic and surgical interventions are reserved for complications such as pseudocysts, bile-duct or duodenal obstruction, infected pancreatic necrosis, and malignancy.

Obstructions or calcifications in the pancreatic ducts may be relieved by procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), in which endoscopic cannulation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct is followed by injection of radiographic dye. Decompressing/clearing of blockage decreases pain as well as the number of hospitalizations and recurrent attacks in many persons with HP [Dever et al 2010]. Note: Because of the risk of acute pancreatitis following ERCP, it is only recommended for obtaining brushings (for evaluation of strictures) and for therapeutic intervention, not diagnosis.

Although a variety of surgical approaches are used for non-cancerous pancreatic disorders that cause pain or obstruction from multiple strictures, pancreatic surgery in those with hereditary pancreatitis is unlikely to stop the underlying inflammatory process. Furthermore, pancreatic surgery often reduces the number of islet cells which are essential in pancreatic endocrine function [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. Because total pancreatectomy with islet cell auto-transplantation may be a future option for persons with HP, retaining as many islet cells as possible is an important consideration before proceeding with any pancreatic surgery [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2011].

Although controversial, pancreatectomy has been performed as a last resort to improve the quality of life in those with uncontrolled pain, particularly young adults and children [Sutton et al 2010]. It is recommended that persons in whom pancreatectomy is being considered be referred to expert centers. In persons with adequate endocrine pancreatic function, islet cell isolation and autotransplantation may be considered at the time of total pancreatectomy [Bellin et al 2008]. Note: Islet autotransplantation should not be offered to older adults with long-standing chronic pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus because the implanted cells may be malignant.

Pain is a variable complication of recurrent and chronic inflammation and ranges from minimal to severe and disabling. Pain can result from inflammation, ischemia, obstructed ducts, pseudocysts, and/or maldigestion [Fasanella et al 2007].

One small study from Italy suggested that vitamins and antioxidants reduced pain in hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]; two larger studies found that antioxidants helped relieve pain in idiopathic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Pain from maldigestion is improved with pancreatic digestive enzymes [Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011].

If the main pancreatic duct is obstructed, a trial of endoscopic treatment is often used for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic reasons in determining longer-term therapy.

Surgery has been reported to be helpful by many patients; however, surgical approaches should be postponed if islet autotransplantation is being considered.

Several expert groups (e.g., University of Minnesota, University of Pittsburgh) are offering pancreatic islet autotransplantation in an effort to both control severe pain and delay the development of diabetes mellitus [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. It is recommended that physicians and patients work closely with expert centers since the process is irreversible.

Treatment of chronic pancreatitis focuses on improving quality of life by managing pancreatic pain, maldigestion, and diabetes mellitus.

Maldigestion results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which is the failure of the pancreas to produce enough digestive enzymes to digest a meal.

Clinical measures of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency include observation of steatorrhea (fat and oil in the stool), symptoms of maldigestion (bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea) and nutritional deficiencies (e.g., fat soluble vitamins, and protein malnutrition with low albumin, prealbumin, or retinal binding protein).

Pancreatic enzyme deficiency can be identified using invasive or noninvasive testing (see review by Lieb & Draganov 2008):

Fecal elastase-1 analysis (ScheBo® Biotech AG; Giessen, Germany). This simple and relatively inexpensive test evaluates the amount of human elastase-1 present in the stool. It can be falsely positive with diarrhea, but can be used while an individual is taking pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. The test is insensitive for mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [Amann et al 1996].

Secretin-stimulated pancreatic bicarbonate secretion testing (ChiRhoStim®, ChiRhoClin, Inc; Burtonsville, MD). This test requires intubation of the duodenum and careful measure of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion over about an hour (depending on the method). It is considered very sensitive, but only assesses duct function.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) and its analogues (e.g., CCK-8) or receptor agonists (e.g., cerulean) have also been used to assess acinar cell function.

13C-mixed triglyceride breath test. Of limited availability in the US, this test measures the ability of pancreatic lipase to digest a special substrate in the intestine after a test meal [Domínguez-Muñoz et al 2007].

72-hour fecal fat. This test is used to demonstrate that pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements are effective in digesting fat in the intestine of persons with severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. It is usually performed in a clinical research unit over four to five days during which time the patient eats a special high-fat meal (>100 grams of fat per day) and all stool samples are collected and analyzed. It is not used for diagnosis because of the complexity and inconvenience of the test.

Sudan stain. This test, which identifies fat in the stool, is not sensitive or specific for pancreatic insufficiency since undigested oils or fats can be present as a result of:

Their nature (e.g., mineral oil, olestra);

Blocking of pancreatic lipase (e.g., orlistat); or

Diseases of the intestinal mucosa.

Diffusion-weighted MRI. Various “functional” tests have been advocated using abdominal imaging techniques, including secretin-stimulated MRI. Although diffusion-weighted MRI is probably better at detecting the structural changes of chronic pancreatitis than standard MRI [Akisik et al 2009], it does not measure function, and fluid volume cannot measure bicarbonate output.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy improves digestion in those with pancreatic insufficiency who have pain with eating, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), and/or diarrhea [Perrault 1994, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. Pancreatic enzymes most effectively relieve symptoms in persons with steatorrhea and in a subset of persons without steatorrhea [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

The amount of pancreatic enzyme replacement necessary depends on the diet and on the amount of residual pancreatic function (which diminishes over time). The normal amount of lipase secreted is about 750,000-1,000,000 units (USP) per meal. (Note that earlier papers used IU, and 1 IU = 3 USP units) [Pongprasobchai & DiMagno 2005]. Since a minimum of 10% of normal pancreatic enzyme output is needed to digest a meal, about 70,000-80,000 USP units of lipase are required for an average-sized adult (70 kg) with total pancreatic insufficiency. The amount can be reduced for smaller persons and those with residual pancreatic exocrine function – while monitoring symptoms and nutritional parameters.

Diabetes mellitus is a common disorder and both type 1 and type 2 can overlap with HP. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is caused by loss of pancreatic tissue as a result of surgery, chronic pancreatitis, or other rare pancreatic diseases [Rossi et al 2004, Cui & Andersen 2011]. Type 3c is important because loss of both the insulin-producing beta cells and the glucagon-producing alpha cells results in loss of counter-regulatory hormones and risk of hypoglycemia.

Chronic pancreatitis is associated with a gradual loss of function. The following may be of benefit [Cui & Andersen 2011]:

Monitoring for glucose intolerance

Optimizing pancreatic insulin secretion with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy via amino acid and fatty acid-stimulated release of endogenous incretins from the foregut, with the addition of antidiabetic agents as needed

Synchronizing the entry of nutrients into the circulation with exogenous insulin therapy delivery through diet and promoting predictable early nutrient digestion and absorption with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy

Use of metformin as an oral antidiabetic agent [Decensi et al 2010]

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prevention of primary manifestations in hereditary pancreatitis is limited. The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals are recommended to minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001].

Surveillance

Long-standing chronic inflammation of the pancreas is associated with an increased risk for pancreatic cancer. Persons with hereditary pancreatitis are at high risk because their onset of chronic pancreatitis is 20-30 years earlier than in sporadic forms of chronic pancreatitis.

Because surveillance for early evidence of colon cancer is effective, it is hypothesized that such surveillance may benefit individuals with hereditary pancreatitis age 40 years and older who have long-standing chronic pancreatitis and a strong family history of pancreatic cancer. Because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Brand et al 2007, Ulrich 2001], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels et al 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is recommended that relatives at risk for PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis be offered molecular genetic testing for the family-specific germline PRSS1 pathogenic variant to allow early diagnosis and prevention and/or management of symptoms [Applebaum et al 2000, Ellis et al 2001, Fink et al 2007]. Testing of children is appropriate in families with early onset symptoms. Presymptomatic testing is best performed in the context of genetic counseling [Fink et al 2007].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently, chemopreventive agents such as calcium-channel blockers are being investigated for treatment of manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis [Morinville et al 2007].

A pilot study evaluated the use of the calcium channel blocker amlodipine [Morinville et al 2007]; however, this treatment cannot yet be recommended.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pseudoachondroplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height and plotting growth on a disorder-specific growth chart

Evaluation by history and physical examination for skeletal manifestations, ligamentous laxity, and arthritis

“Genetic” skeletal survey including: AP views of the hips, knees, and hands, as well as lateral views of the knees and spine

Evaluation of the cervical vertebrae because of the potentially serious clinical complications associated with cervical spine instability [Shetty et al 2007], which can be assessed by flexion/extension radiographs or MRI, especially in persons with neurologic symptoms suggestive of cord compression.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Joint pain may be controlled with analgesics, but no systematic studies have evaluated the effectiveness of various forms of pain control in pseudoachondroplasia.

Osteotomy to treat the lower limb malalignment is common during childhood. The need for subsequent revision is also common, which most likely reflects the severe joint instability that can be present in some affected individuals [Hunter 1999, Li et al 2007].

Very few examples of extended limb lengthening have been reported for pseudoachondroplasia; thus, the outcome of this procedure in pseudoachondroplasia is not known.

Surgical treatment of scoliosis is rarely needed but may be effective in severe situations. Surgical methods are standard.

In persons with neurologic symptoms and radiographic evidence of cervical spine instability or cord compression, C1-C2 fixation is the recommended surgical procedure.

Awareness of psychosocial issues related to short stature, including stigmatization and discrimination, is important in caring for the individual. Social support organizations including the Little People of America and other similar organizations in other countries (see Resources) may be of great benefit in providing information to affected individuals and their families.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The articular cartilage of individuals with pseudoachondroplasia is likely to be severely disrupted; therefore, directing the individual toward physical activities that do not accelerate joint degeneration will be beneficial.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be examined regularly for the following by a medical geneticist and/or orthopedist familiar with the phenotype:

Symptomatic lower limb malalignment

Evidence of kyphoscoliosis

Symptoms related to joint hypermobility

Evidence of degenerative joint disease manifesting as joint pain or by radiographs

Neurologic manifestations, particularly spinal cord compression secondary to odontoid hypoplasia

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In the small fraction of individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For females with pseudoachondroplasia, delivery by cesarean section is often necessary because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Growth hormone treatment is ineffective in pseudoachondroplasia [Kanazawa et al 2003].Because of the increased incidence of a second thrombophilic defect among symptomatic individuals with inherited thrombophilia [Emmerich et al 2001], individuals heterozygous or homozygous for the F2

20210G>A allele should be tested for other inherited and acquired thrombophilic disorders in order to evaluate the risk for thrombosis. Testing should include:

An activated protein C resistance or DNA assay for factor V Leiden;

Serologic assays for anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-beta 2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies;

Multiple phospholipid-dependent coagulation assays for a lupus inhibitor.

Note: Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies should include assays for all three antibodies (anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-beta2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies, and lupus inhibitors) since only 50% of individuals with the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome have more than one type of antibody.

Evaluation of high-risk individuals (i.e., those with a history of recurrent VTE especially at a young age, or those with strong family history of VTE at a young age), should also include assays of:

Protein C activity;

Antithrombin activity;

Protein S activity or free protein S antigen.

Note: In an evaluation for thrombophilia: (1) Measurement of plasma concentration of homocysteine is no longer recommended because no data support the use of vitamin supplementation or modification of the duration of anticoagulation in individuals with hyperhomocysteinemia and a history of VTE [den Heijer et al 2007]; (2) there is no clinical rationale for DNA testing for MTHFR variants; and (3) routine measurement of factor VIII and other clotting factor levels is not recommended; however, such testing may be useful in certain instances [Bauer 2010, Jenkins et al 2012]

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of thrombosis in individuals with prothrombin-related thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide) [Kearon et al 2012]. Low molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux have largely replaced unfractionated heparin because of their many advantages [Garcia et al 2012].

Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with LMWH or fondaparinux (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international-normalized ratio (INR). A target INR of 2.5 (therapeutic range: 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in F2 20210G>A homozygotes.

Rivaroxaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, is also approved for the treatment of acute DVT and PE and secondary prevention of recurrent VTE.

Note: LMWH and warfarin are both safe in women who are breast-feeding. Rivaroxaban is contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding because animal studies showed reproductive toxicity, and evidence that the drug crosses the placenta and is secreted in milk [Ageno et al 2012].

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be based on an individualized assessment of the risks of VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with VTE experience recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent five years [Prandoni et al 2007]. Recurrence risk is determined by the clinical circumstances of the first event (provoked or unprovoked), adequacy of early treatment, and individual risk factors (see Clinical Description, Recurrent Thrombosis, Risk for recurrent thrombosis in adult 20210G>A heterozygotes.

20210G>A heterozygosity is generally not an indication for long-term anticoagulation in the absence of other risk factors. The presence of a hereditary thrombophilia was not a factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis based on evidence that inherited thrombophilic disorders are not major determinants of VTE recurrence risk [Kearon et al 2012] (full text). Other clinical guidelines and expert opinion also conclude that identification of 20210G>A heterozygosity should not affect clinical decision making [Baglin et al 2010, Bauer 2010, Kyrle et al 2010, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012, National Clinical Guideline Centre 2012]. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2012].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring [Kearon et al 2012]. The decision should be based on an assessment of potential risks and benefits regardless of 20210G>A status [Berg et al 2011]. Long-term anticoagulation is considered in selected individuals homozygous for the 20210G>A allele or with multiple inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders [De Stefano & Rossi 2013]. In these individuals at higher risk for recurrence, the potential benefits of long-term anticoagulation may outweigh the bleeding risks.

LMWH, fondaparinux, warfarin, and rivaroxaban are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of VTE. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin, argatroban, and dabigatran), and apixaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, are approved for use in specific circumstances [Schulman 2014].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. Treatment recommendations for children with VTE are largely adapted from studies in adults. There is no evidence that a 20210G>A allele should influence decisions about the intensity or duration of anticoagulation in children [Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012]. British guidelines for antithrombotic therapy in children do not consider inherited thrombophilia as a determinant of either the intensity or duration of therapy.

Children with a first VTE should receive initial treatment with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH for at least five days. LMWH is favored over warfarin for continued therapy, especially in very young children and those with complex medical problems. Recommendations on the duration of antithrombotic therapy are based on the nature of the thrombotic event (e.g., spontaneous or provoked) [Chalmers et al 2011, Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Anticoagulation is recommended:

For at least three months after a VTE provoked by a clinical risk factor that has resolved.

Beyond three months until the risk factor has resolved in children with ongoing but potentially reversible risk factors.

For six to 12 months after a first idiopathic (unprovoked) VTE.

Indefinitely for those with recurrent idiopathic VTE

Expert opinion emphasizes the importance of a careful risk/benefit assessment in each individual [Raffini & Thornburg 2009, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011].

Consensus guidelines are also available for management of stroke in infants and children [Monagle et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not recommended for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes, since the 1%-3% yearly risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated (<1%) yearly risk for thrombosis [Martinelli et al 2000a, Middeldorp & van Hylckama Vlieg 2008, Berg et al 2011].

Prophylactic anticoagulation may be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians consensus guidelines [Guyatt et al 2012] (full text).

Surveillance

Individuals receiving long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy. (See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

F2 20210G>A heterozygotes:

With a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT; asymptomatic women should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT and should consider alternative forms of contraception and strategies for control of menopausal symptoms.

Who are asymptomatic and elect to use oral contraceptives should avoid formulations with third-generation and other progestins with a higher thrombotic risk;

Who elect short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms should use low-dose transdermal preparations, which have a lower thrombotic risk than oral formulations [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007, Renoux et al 2010].

F2 20210G>A homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen-containing contraception and HRT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The genetic status of asymptomatic at-risk family members can be established using molecular genetic testing. However, as there is no clinical evidence that early diagnosis reduces morbidity or mortality, the indications for family testing are unresolved and the decision to test at-risk family members should be made on an individual basis [Segal et al 2009].

Clarification of 20210G>A allele status may be useful in:

Asymptomatic adult family members of probands with one or two known 20210G>A alleles, especially those with a strong family history of VTE at a young age;

Asymptomatic female family members of probands with known prothrombin-related thrombophilia who are pregnant or considering estrogen contraception or pregnancy.

There is no clinical evidence to support testing asymptomatic children with a family history of thrombosis and/or inherited thrombophilia. Guidelines suggest delaying testing until children are able to understand the implications of the results and (optimally) can give informed consent for testing [Chalmers et al 2011].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No consensus exists on the optimal management of prothrombin thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are derived from studies in non-pregnant individuals [Kujovich 2004a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]; see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements. LMWH is the preferred antithrombotic agent for prophylaxis during pregnancy. All women with inherited thrombophilia should undergo individualized risk assessment. Decisions about anticoagulation should be based on the number and type of thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is recommended for all women:

With a history of unprovoked VTE, including those heterozygous for 20210G>A. LMWH should be given during pregnancy followed by six weeks of postpartum anticoagulation [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Heterozygous for the 20210G>A allele with a prior pregnancy or estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, De Stefano et al 2006, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Should be considered for:

Asymptomatic women doubly heterozygous for 20210G>A and factor V Leiden, especially those with coexisting circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b];

Asymptomatic homozygous women with a family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis or other risk factors. These women should be counseled about potential thrombotic complications during pregnancy and the postpartum period [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

In two large prospective studies, low-risk asymptomatic women with thrombophilia (including 20210G>A heterozygosity) did not receive LMWH during pregnancy in the absence of additional risk factors. All women received a course of postpartum anticoagulation. The low incidence of antepartum VTE in both studies (0% and 0.34%) suggested that anticoagulation may be safely withheld during pregnancy in low-risk 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not have other risk factors [Bauersachs et al 2007, Dargaud et al 2009].

A six-week course of postpartum prophylactic anticoagulation is recommended for:

Heterozygous women with a positive family history of VTE or other additional risk factors;

All asymptomatic homozygous women;

All women with a prior history of VTE [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Prevention of pregnancy loss. It is still unkown if prophylactic antithrombotic therapy improves pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss. The available evidence consists of predominantly uncontrolled trials, observational studies, and a few randomized trials with important methodologic limitations. There are no prospective randomized trials that include an untreated control group that confirms the benefit of LMWH for preventing pregnancy loss in women with inherited thrombophilia. Of note, the ALIFE2 study, a multicenter randomized trial of LMWH versus standard surveillance in women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of recurrent miscarriage, began recruitment in December 2012 (www.trialregister.nl, NTR 3361).

Current consensus guidelines and expert opinion recommend against the use of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss outside of clinical trials because of the absence of high quality evidence confirming benefit [Baglin et al 2010, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011b, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b, Middeldorp 2013].

Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation improves pregnancy outcome:

The results of several observational studies suggested that prophylactic antithrombotic therapy may improve pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss [Brenner et al 2000, Carp et al 2003].

A recent study of women with a history of unexplained pregnancy loss compared the frequency of obstetric complications in women with factor V Leiden or 20210G>A alleles and women without thrombophilia. Women with a thrombophilic disorder with a prior fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation who received enoxaparin during their next pregnancy had a significantly lower rate of fetal loss and severe preeclampsia and a higher rate of live births compared to women without a thrombophilic disorder with the same obstetric history who did not receive prophylaxis [Bouvier et al 2014].

A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women heterozygous for 20210G>A, factor V Leiden, or protein S deficiency, and a history of a single unexplained fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin. However, there were methodologic problems with this study and the results have not been confirmed in other trials.

Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation does not improve pregnancy outcome:

Several studies found no benefit with LMWH on pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia [Laskin et al 2009, Warren et al 2009, Visser et al 2011].

Two recent randomized trials compared the efficacy of LMWH and aspirin to no antithrombotic therapy or placebo in women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. Combined LMWH and low-dose aspirin did not increase the live birth rate in either study [Clark et al 2010, Kaandorp et al 2010]. Because only a small proportion of the study populations had inherited thrombophilia (3.5% and 15.7%), subgroup analyses were insufficiently powered to assess the effect of antithrombotic therapy.

In the recent Thrombophilia in Pregnancy Prophylaxis Study (TIPPS) multinational randomized trial, antepartum prophylactic LMWH did not reduce the incidence of pregnancy loss or placenta-mediated complications in pregnant women with thrombophilia (22% with a 20210G>A allele) who are at high risk for these complications [Rodger et al 2014].

Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited and also conflicting [Gris et al 2011, de Vries et al 2012, Martinelli et al 2012]. There is insufficient evidence that LMWH (with or without aspirin) reduces the risk for preeclampsia, placental abruption, or other obstetric complications in women with or without inherited thrombophilia. Current guidelines recommend against antithrombotic prophylaxis for women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of pregnancy complications [Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Therapies Under Investigation

Several new oral anticoagulants (which have not been specifically studied in individuals with inherited thrombophilia) are alternatives to warfarin in specific clinical settings.

Dabigatran (a direct thrombin inhibitor) and rivaroxaban and apixaban (two new factor Xa inhibitors) are approved for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation [Weitz et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a PURA-related neurodevelopmental disorder, the following evaluations are recommended.

Table 2. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Affected System

Evaluation

Comment

Cognitive

Developmental assessment

Neurologic

Neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI

Indicated in a child w/a PURA-related neurodevelopmental disorder w/seizures and/or hypoventilation and/or abnormal vision or eye movements who has not previously had a brain MRI

EEG and video EEG

If seizures are suspected

Eyes

Ophthalmology examination

Electrodiagnostic tests may be indicated in some cases.

Cardiovascular

Consider echocardiogram

Respiratory

Assessment of pulmonary function

As needed

Gastrointestinal

Feeding assessment w/analysis of swallowing & evaluation for possible aspiration

As needed

Assessment for constipation

Genitourinary

Consider ultrasound of the urinary tract

Musculoskeletal

Appropriate radiographs

If hip dysplasia and/or scoliosis is suspected

Endocrine

Assessment of serum vitamin D levels

Assessment of bone density

If osteoporosis or osteopenia is suspected

Evaluation of anterior pituitary hormones

If necessary

Miscellaneous/other

Consultation w/a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals often benefit when management is provided by a multidisciplinary team including relevant specialists, which may include, but is not limited to, a pediatrician, clinical geneticist, child neurologist, pulmonologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, and speech and language therapist.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Cognitive/developmental delay

See Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues.

Seizures

Management by a neurologist

May include video EEG monitoring to help distinguish epileptic from non-epileptic events (e.g., dystonia, dyskinesia, dysconjugate eye movements)

Vision deficits

Correction of refractive errors; vision support; standard treatment for strabismus & exophoria

Hypoventilation

Supplementary oxygen (at night) & rarely tracheostomy

Ambulatory peripheral saturation monitoring may be required.

Some infants require short periods of intubation & mechanical ventilation, particularly during acute illness.

Congenital heart defect

Management as per current practice for the specific congenital heart defect

Frequent aspiration (or high risk of aspiration)

A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube may be considered.

GERD

Medical management; consideration of Nissen fundoplication if medical treatment is not sufficient

Constipation

Routine management

Referral to a gastroenterologist may be required in severe cases.

Congenital urogenital defect

Management as per current practice for the specific urogenital defect

Scoliosis

Standard management

Progressive neuropathic scoliosis may require spinal fusion.

Osteoporosis/osteopenia

Standard management

Instability in standing position

Ankle foot orthoses (AFO) may improve stability, allowing for better standing & transferring ability.

Neuropathic hip dysplasia, progressive subluxation, & dislocation

Consideration of hip reconstructions w/varus derotational proximal femoral osteotomies

Generalized joint laxity & continued inability to walk may cause relapsing hip subluxation even after previous femoral osteotomies.

Vitamin D deficiency

Vitamin D supplementation

Anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies

Standard treatment as directed by an endocrinologist

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide, federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP should be developed by the local public school district based on each individual’s level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of medications or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation.

Surveillance

Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Affected System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Cognitive

Monitoring by developmental pediatrics

Long-term

Neurologic

EEG & video EEG monitoring

If seizures are suspected

Eyes

Ophthalmologic & vision evaluations

Routine

Gastrointestinal

Monitoring for dysphagia & constipation

Routine

Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for musculoskeletal complications including hip dysplasia & scoliosis

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PWS, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Endocrinology consultation

Nutritional consultation

Assessment of newborns and young infants for sucking problems and failure to thrive

Regardless of age, measurement and plotting of height, weight, head circumference and body mass index (BMI) on either age-appropriate growth charts or charts developed for PWS [Butler et al 2011, Butler et al 2015]

Assessment for hypothyroidism in children, especially those with prolonged failure to thrive, those with excess weight gain in the absence of increased food intake, and those with poor linear growth despite growth hormone treatment

Evaluation of respiratory status with a low threshold for performing a sleep study regardless of age. These studies are specifically recommended prior to the initiation of growth hormone therapy (GHT) and four to eight weeks after starting GHT, along with assessment of the size of tonsils and adenoids, particularly in the obese individual.

Assessment of development of infants and of educational development of children including a speech evaluation

Assessment for the presence of behavioral problems and obsessive-compulsive features after age two years, and for psychosis in adolescents and adults. If history reveals evidence of these problems, referral for more detailed assessment is indicated.

Assessment of males for the presence of cryptorchidism regardless of age

Referral for ophthalmologic evaluation if strabismus is present, and for assessment of visual acuity by age one year or at diagnosis if it is later

Regardless of age, assessment for the presence of scoliosis clinically, and, if indicated, radiographically

Note: Very obese individuals cannot be adequately assessed for scoliosis clinically; x-rays are necessary to establish the diagnosis.

Treatment of Manifestations

A team approach to management is recommended [Goldstone et al 2008, Cassidy & McCandless 2010].

Feeding, hyperphagia, and obesity. Special feeding techniques, including special nipples or gavage feeding, may be necessary for the first weeks to months of life to assure adequate nutrition and avoid failure to thrive. Individuals diagnosed with PWS typically do not need a G-tube since the feeding will improve with time.

When weight centiles begin increasing in nutritional phase 2a (typically between 18 and 36 months), a program of a well-balanced, low-calorie diet, regular exercise, and close supervision to minimize food stealing should be instituted to prevent obesity (i.e., BMI Z score of <2) and its consequences. The same program is appropriate if obesity is present at any time. Consultation with a dietician and close follow up are usually necessary, and locking the kitchen, refrigerator, and/or cupboards is often needed once the child is able to open the refrigerator and cupboards. Caloric needs of infants and children with PWS are typically 60%-80% of the recommended daily allowance (RDA). The energy requirement of adults with PWS, which rarely exceeds 1200-1400 Kcal/day, should be considered in planning daily food intake. Assessment of adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake by a dietician, and prescription of appropriate supplementation, is indicated, especially for calcium and vitamin D.

No medications are known to aid in controlling hyperphagia, but several clinical trials are underway (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Gastric bypass is not recommended in PWS, as it does not appear to correct the lack of satiety and will not prevent overeating. In addition, complication rates are high [Scheimann et al 2012].

Growth hormone treatment normalizes height, increases lean body mass, decreases fat mass, and increases mobility, which are beneficial to weight management. Dose recommendations in young children are generally similar to those for individuals with isolated growth hormone deficiency (i.e., ~1 mg/m2/day) but the dose must be individualized as the child grows. Therapy can be started in infancy or at the time of diagnosis. The adult dose of growth hormone is 20%-25% of the dose recommended in children. Monitoring of growth velocity, head circumference, and serum IGF-1 is important to avoid overtreatment.

Controlled trials of growth hormone therapies have demonstrated significant benefit from infancy through adulthood [Carrel et al 2010, Sode-Carlsen et al 2010, Wolfgram et al 2013].

An increase in language and cognitive skills in treated infants [Myers et al 2007] and an improvement in mental speed and flexibility as well as motor performance in adults [Höybye et al 2005] have been reported based on controlled trials.

A review of the results of one to two years of growth hormone treatment among 328 children documented in the database of one pharmaceutical company indicated improved height velocity, particularly in prepubertal children, but no change in BMI [Craig et al 2006].

Significantly greater adult height was demonstrated in 21 individuals treated long term versus 39 untreated individuals without an increase in adverse side effects [Angulo et al 2007].

Some improvements in cognition have been suggested with growth hormone therapy in individuals with PWS [Osório 2012, Siemensma 2012], but more work and longer studies need to be done.

Although there was initial concern about growth hormone treatment contributing to scoliosis in PWS, later studies showed no difference in frequency or severity in those treated compared to those who were not treated [Nagai et al 2006, Angulo et al 2007].

Decreased saliva production can be addressed with products developed for the treatment of dry mouth, including special toothpastes, gels, mouthwash, and gum.

Therapies, education and behavior management. Early intervention in children before age three years, particularly physical therapy, may improve muscle strength and encourage achievement of developmental milestones. In older individuals, daily muscle training increases physical activity and lean body mass [Schlumpf et al 2006].

Initiate appropriate educational programming in children:

Begin speech therapy for language delay and articulation abnormalities in infancy and childhood.

Special education, either in an inclusion setting or in a self-contained classroom setting, is usually necessary during school age. An individual aide is helpful in assuring attendance to task. Social skills training groups have been beneficial.

Behavioral disturbance should be addressed with behavioral management programs, including firm limit setting. While no medication is beneficial in managing behavior in all individuals with PWS, serotonin reuptake inhibitors have helped the largest proportion of affected teenagers and adults, particularly those with obsessive-compulsive symptoms [Brice 2000, Dykens & Shah 2003].

Psychosis is reported to respond well to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, but not to mood stabilizers [Soni et al 2007]. There are no well-designed studies of the effectiveness of treatment for psychosis in PWS [Ho & Dimitropoulos 2010].

Hypogonadism. Cryptorchidism may resolve spontaneously, even up to adolescence, but usually requires hormonal and surgical approaches; however, preservation of fertility is not an issue. Standard treatment is appropriate. Human chorionic gonadotropin treatment for infants with undescended testes should be considered as it can improve the size of the scrotal sac and improve surgical outcome [McCandless 2011; Angulo & Miller, unpublished data].

Replacement of sex hormones produces adequate secondary sexual characteristics but is somewhat controversial because of the possible role of testosterone replacement in behavior problems in males and the role of estrogen replacement in the risk of stroke as well as hygiene concerns related to menstruation in females. Daily use of the testosterone patch or gel may avert exacerbation of behavioral problems by providing a more even blood level than use of a slow-release depo-testosterone injection every month. Also, it was shown in the non-PWS adult population that depo- testosterone injections were associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular events, hospitalizations, and deaths compared with gels and patches [Layton et al 2015].

Concern about osteoporosis should be considered in deciding about hormone replacement. Recent reports of fertility in four women with PWS raise the issue of need for birth control [Akefeldt et al 1999; Schulze et al 2001; Vats & Cassidy, unpublished data].

Sleep issues. Disturbed sleep in children and adults should prompt a sleep study, as treatment may be available. Treatment depends on the cause and may include tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy and/or CPAP or BiPAP, as in the general population.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (unrelated to the degree of sleep apnea) is frequently seen in individuals with PWS. Modafinil has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for this condition [De Cock et al 2011].

Skin picking. One study demonstrated decreased skin picking with topiramate treatment in some individuals [Shapira et al 2004]; other clinicians have reported anecdotally that approximately half of individuals with PWS who skin pick benefit from low-dose (25-50 mg daily) topiramate.

A recent study of 35 individuals with PWS (age 5-39 years) using 450-1200 mg/day of N-acetylcysteine found a high degree of success in reducing or eliminating skin picking [Miller & Angulo 2014].

Other

Management of strabismus is as for any infant.

Management of scoliosis, hip dysplasia, and complications of obesity is as in the general population.

Adulthood. For adults with PWS, the most successful living situation for behavior and weight management is a group home specially designated for individuals with PWS, where diet and access to food are tightly restricted and exercise is included in daily activities. Affected individuals generally require a sheltered employment environment.

Issues of guardianship, wills, trusts, and advocacy should be investigated no later than adolescence.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Obesity may be prevented if the diet, exercise, and supervision program described in Treatment of Manifestations is instituted. Early diagnosis allows the clinician to begin anticipatory guidance concerning the natural history of PWS, and in particular the nutritional phases, informing the family about the risk of obesity and the need to monitor weight increase and to restrict calories beginning around 18-36 months of age.

If started at a young age, growth hormone treatment, along with good dietary control, may retard obesity and the high proportion of fat mass. It may also prevent development of the typical facial appearance and improve motor milestones.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Diabetes mellitus rarely occurs in the absence of obesity.

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are probably beneficial, as low-calorie diets are often low in dairy products and osteoporosis has been documented in the majority of older children and adults with PWS.

If osteoporosis develops, consider treatment with a bisphosphonate.

Although no formal study exists, individuals with PWS tend to be very sensitive to medications of all kinds. Starting with lower doses is recommended.

Surveillance

Health supervision guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) have been published [McCandless 2011] (full text).

To assure appropriateness of exercise program and diet, including adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake and monitor height, weight, and BMI (weight in kg/height in m2):

Every month in infancy;

Every six months in the first decade of life;

At least annually thereafter.

Cryptorchidism can recur after orchidopexy; therefore, testicular position should be monitored.

Evaluate for the presence of diabetes mellitus by standard methods (e.g., obtaining glycosylated hemoglobin concentration and/or glucose tolerance test) in anyone with significant obesity or rapid significant weight gain.

Test annually for hypothyroidism, including free T4 and TSH levels.

Obtain history of any sleep disturbance; if present, obtain a sleep study.

Monitor for development of scoliosis clinically or, in the presence of obesity, radiographically at least annually.

Perform bone densitometry by DEXA to evaluate for possible osteoporosis every two years in adulthood.

Obtain history for behavioral and psychiatric disturbance at least annually.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In the last few years there has been great interest by the pharmaceutical industry in testing treatments for the major manifestations of PWS – particularly the hyperphagia, obesity, and behavioral problems. For a detailed description of these studies, click here (pdf).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), the following assessments are recommended:

Complete skin examination, including a biopsy of potentially lesional skin from the axilla or neck. A von Kossa or similar histologic stain for calcium should be done on the biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, although PXE can be strongly suspected on skin biopsy even without special stains.

Complete dilated eye examination by a retinal specialist, particularly looking for peau d'orange and angioid streaks. A fluorescein angiogram may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.

Baseline cardiovascular examination with periodic follow-up for individuals with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), including (as clinically indicated based on age, physical findings, and exercise level):

Echocardiography

Cardiac stress testing

Doppler evaluation of peripheral vasculature

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific treatment for PXE exists.

Management of PXE requires coordinated input from a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a dermatologist, primary care physician, ophthalmologist, cardiologist, vascular surgeon, plastic surgeon, genetics professional, and nutritionist. Support groups can benefit affected individuals and their families by providing accurate information and education and reducing isolation.

Current treatment for macular degeneration, especially the intraocular injection of anti-angiogenic drugs, also appears to be effective in PXE [Finger et al 2011]. A retinal specialist should be consulted immediately when the individual experiences any distortion in vision.

Surgical or radiologic intervention may be indicated for gastrointestinal bleeding, severe peripheral vascular disease (if correctable), and the improvement of changes of the skin of the face, neck, axilla, and groin that are of cosmetic concern. Although wound healing seems to be uncomplicated in PXE, cosmetic acceptability of surgery involving the skin is less predictable, although generally good [Viljoen et al 1990].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Weight control, avoidance of smoking, and aggressive management of hypertension and lipid disorders may reduce the risk of vascular complications by reducing the risk of comorbidity resulting from atherosclerosis. However, reduction in risk resulting from these measures has not been confirmed in controlled studies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with PXE who have coexistent mitral valve prolapse should have antibiotic prophylaxis for dental, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary procedures.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in retinal disease. Affected individuals benefit from learning to use the Amsler grid to monitor for central visual disturbances.

Regular physical examination with specific attention to the cardiovascular system

Monitoring by the affected individual for black tarry stool

Periodic monitoring of serum lipid concentrations

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Racquet and contact sports carry an increased risk for ocular and head trauma, both of which have been reported to precipitate retinal hemorrhage in patients with angioid streaks; participation in such activities should be discouraged.

Individuals with PXE who participate in sports and physical recreation should wear appropriate protective eyewear such as polycarbonate sports goggles and/or protective helmets with eye shields.

Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be avoided whenever possible to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In the series of Bercovitch et al [2004], there was no statistically significant effect of gravidity on the severity of skin, eye, cardiac, or peripheral vascular manifestations of PXE in women over 40. In addition, women over 40 with PXE who had been pregnant did not have more severe skin, cardiac, ocular, or vascular manifestations of PXE than those who had never been pregnant. Except for the consequences of severe maternal gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which appears to be uncommon, PXE has no known significant effect on the fetus. Retinal examination during pregnancy and prompt attention to any visual symptoms are advised.

Therapies Under Investigation

Based on animal studies [Larusso et al 2009, Li et al 2009c], magnesium supplementation has been proposed as a treatment to prevent progression of elastic tissue mineralization in PXE. A randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial to study the effect of magnesium oxide supplementation is beginning in 2012.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

It has been reported that high calcium intake in adolescence may correlate with the overall severity of PXE [Renie et al 1984]; however, this has never been confirmed by prospective controlled studies and thus remains unproven and controversial.

The AREDS study for macular degeneration suggested that a regimen of antioxidant vitamins could prove beneficial in that disease [Clemons et al 2004]. While it is possible that this could also be the case for PXE, it has not been reported and remains unproven.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a known ATP1A3-related neurologic disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP)

Brain imaging to exclude stroke

EEG to evaluate possibility of seizures

Neuropsychological testing to evaluate cognitive or memory problems

Note: Questionnaires to prompt treating clinicians to elicit history and observations relevant to disease symptoms and management may be obtained from organizations included in Resources.

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC)

Brain imaging to exclude stroke

EEG to evaluate possibility of seizures

Note: Questionnaires to prompt treating clinicians to elicit history and observations relevant to disease symptoms and management may be obtained from organizations included in Resources.

Cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) syndrome

Brain imaging to evaluate the cerebellum

EMG for areflexia and assessment for pes cavus to evaluate for peripheral neuropathy

Ophthalmology consult and OCT (optical coherence tomography) for evaluation of optic atrophy

Audiogram and hearing specialist consultation to evaluate sensorineural hearing loss

Treatment of Manifestations

For all phenotypes

Critical care: standard management of manifestations such as seizure or apnea

Note: A seizure care plan, with provision of rescue therapy for prolonged seizures if indicated, is strongly recommended for those in whom epilepsy has been confirmed by either electrodiagnostic testing or highly suggestive clinical features.

Occupational therapy to maximize motor function

Speech therapy for dysarthria

RDP. In a few patients with RDP decreased spasms have been noted with high-dose benzodiazepines. Dosing should be judged by the physician on an individual basis.

Standard therapies for the following are appropriate:

Seizures

Dysphagia

Psychotherapy for mood disorder (such as depression and anxiety), substance abuse, and/or psychosis

Two individuals treated with deep brain stimulation [Kamm et al 2008] did not show marked improvement [A Brashear, personal communication].

AHC. Medical treatment generally involves the following [Neville & Ninan 2007]:

Episode prophylaxis (avoiding triggers; reducing the frequency and/or severity of recurrent paroxysmal episodes by sleep – either natural or induced with daily prophylactic medications):

Prophylactic medications

Flunarizine. Symptomatic benefit in reducing the frequency and/or severity of the recurrent paroxysmal episodes of neurologic dysfunction has been reported with flunarizine [Silver & Andermann 1993, Sasaki 2001]. Flunarizine has been examined in a few small series of patients, and is reported to decrease the frequency and/or severity of the episodic dystonic and/or plegic episodes. In spite of the lack of well-designed placebo-controlled trials, flunarizine has remained the most commonly prescribed therapy for prophylaxis of episodic neurologic dysfunction in AHC for more than two decades. Note that abrupt withdrawal of the medication has been associated with deterioration in clinical status [Sweney et al 2009, Sasaki et al 2014a].

Topiramate is another commonly prescribed agent for prophylaxis [Jiang et al 2006, Chi et al 2012].

Sleep. Placing the affected individual in a quiet, dark room or putting a child down for a nap can help alleviate severe episodes and/or promote an earlier recovery.

Acute attack management with use of various rescue medications including:

Benzodiazepines, which are commonly used and reported to be of some benefit in increasingly the tolerability of episodes, especially for severe or prolonged dystonic episodes

Chloral hydrate

Other sleep inducers

A low threshold for suspicion of seizure activity is critical, particularly in the setting of either recurrent brief or more prolonged tonic or dystonic episodes associated with alterations in consciousness or apparent awareness of their environment. Epilepsy management utilizes existing anticonvulsants.

Recently, two separate reports described patients with AHC who responded to a ketogenic diet [Ulate-Campos et al 2014, Roubergue et al 2015].

CAPOS syndrome. Symptomatic treatment includes hearing and visual aids.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

When dystonia is present, physical therapy to prevent contractures in the hands and feet is appropriate.

Surveillance

Patients with RDP need to be monitored for evidence of:

Dysphagia, which (rarely) requires use of a feeding tube

Psychiatric symptoms

Seizures, which are reported in some individuals following acute onset of RDP

Patients with AHC need to be monitored for evidence of seizures which occur over time in a large proportion of affected individuals.

Patients with CAPOS syndrome need to be monitored for evidence of swallow dysfunction in order to reduce the risk of aspiration

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

At-risk family members and asymptomatic individuals with an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid alcohol or excessive exercise.

Infections and fever also are common triggers, and although practical prevention strategies are lacking, unnecessary exposure should be avoided. There is no known reason to avoid vaccinations.

RDP. Triggers associated with the abrupt onset of RDP that should be avoided include (but are not limited to) the following:

Alcohol

Fever

Psychological stress

Excessive exercise (such as running track)

AHC. Triggers associated with inducing paroxysmal episodes in AHC [Sweney et al 2009] include the following:

Psychological stress

Emotional excitement

Environmental stressors: bright light (sunlight or fluorescent lighting), excessive heat or cold, or situations associated with excessive sound, crowds

Water exposure in the form of bathing, swimming, shampooing

Certain foods or odors: chocolate, food dyes, missed meals

Excessive or atypically strenuous exercise (e.g., walking farther than usual, use of a playground swing)

Illness

Irregular sleep, missing a nap, delayed bedtime

CAPOS syndrome. Febrile illness can trigger an episode of ataxic encephalopathy and/or weakness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The pregnancy of a woman should be monitored for symptoms of RDP, onset of which has followed childbirth in some (not all) women who are heterozygous for an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant.

In principle, abortion or caesarean section could be sufficiently stressful to also be a trigger.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Levodopa and dopamine agonists usually provide little benefit, but are an important part of the diagnostic workup.

There is no known way to prevent the abrupt onset of symptoms in RDP. During the abrupt onset, no acute treatment other than symptomatic relief of dystonia is available.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a RASA1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history and physical examination with a focus on symptoms and findings secondary to arteriovenous malformations/arteriovenous fistulas (AVMs/AVFs)

Brain imaging –if not already performed- to identify AVMs/AVFs (e.g., vein of Galen aneurysms and other intracranial AVMs) to allow early identification of macrofistulas that can be treated prior to the development of symptoms [Revencu et al 2008]

Consideration of spine imaging to identify and characterize AVMs/AVFs. Currently no consensus protocols for radiographic evaluation of individuals with RASA1-related disorders have been developed; therefore, discussion with a radiologist is recommended in order to develop an appropriate plan for imaging based on the patient's age and the capabilities and experience of the imaging facility.

Consideration of further imaging in individuals with evidence of cardiac overload, to look for causative AVMs/AVFs

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Capillary malformations (CMs). Referral to a dermatologist can be considered for evaluation of CMs that are of cosmetic concern and discussion of the risks and benefits of intervention.

AVMs/AVFs. The risks and benefits of intervention for AVMs and AVFs must be considered. Depending on the location and symptoms of AVMs/AVFs, a multi-disciplinary team including specialists in interventional radiology, neurosurgery, surgery, cardiology, and dermatology is recommended to determine appropriate approaches (e.g., embolization vs. surgery).

Cardiac overload. Referral to a cardiologist is indicated if cardiac overload is suspected.

Hemihyperplasia and/or leg length discrepancy. Referral to an orthopedist is recommended in individuals with hemihyperplasia and leg length discrepancy.

Lymphangiography to evaluate for lymphatic malformations may be considered. Compression stockings for those with evidence of lymphedema may be considered.

Surveillance

The clinician should have a low threshold to repeat imaging studies if clinical signs/symptoms of AVMs/AVFs become evident over time.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although no agents/circumstances resulting in complications of RASA1-related disorders have been reported, a theoretic consideration is avoidance of routine use of anticoagulants unless indicated for treatment of a different medical condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Clarification of the genetic status of at-risk relatives is appropriate in order to allow early diagnosis and treatment of AVMs/AVFs to reduce/avoid secondary adverse outcomes. In particular, at-risk infants are candidates for prompt diagnosis given the possible early presentation of neurologic complications from intracranial AVMs/AVFs [Revencu et al 2008].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Roberts syndrome (RBS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographic documentation of the craniofacial, limb, and hand anomalies

Orofacial and limb malformation assessment to determine the need for management and plastic surgery

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Echocardiogram or evaluation by cardiologist to assess for structural heart defects

Ultrasound evaluation of the kidneys for cysts

Multidisciplinary evaluation including psychological assessment and formal, age-appropriate developmental assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Note: No published guidelines to evaluate the clinical manifestations contributing to morbidity and mortality exist. The recommendations given are based on the literature and the experience of clinical geneticists.

Treatment of Manifestations

It has been suggested that most individuals with RBS are stillborn or die in infancy. However, it is important to emphasize that, because it is possible for individuals to have normal intelligence and a healthy psychological adjustment, even with all of the stigmata of RBS, such individuals should be managed in a way that allows each to improve their quality of life and to reach their full potential.

Individuals with severe RBS who survive the newborn period face a number of medical problems, and management of these individuals usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatrics, genetics, ophthalmology, cardiology, nephrology, neurology, child development, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved. Comprehensive medical intervention is suggested, as is complete and clear parental counseling when discussing the possible outcome for these individuals [Karabulut et al 2001].

Treatment is based on the affected individual’s specific needs and may include the following:

Surgical treatments including cosmetic or reconstructive surgery for clefts of the lip and/or palate and for limb abnormalities (several surgeries are usually required). Hand surgery improves early and proper development of the prehensile grasp.

Prostheses

Speech assessment and therapy and aggressive treatment of otitis media if cleft palate is present

Intervention and/or special education if developmental delays are detected

Standard treatment for specific ophthalmologic problems, cardiac defects and renal dysfunction

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Periodic follow up to monitor mental and physical growth and to determine if frequent infections are an issue

Regular follow up for assessment of speech and ear infections/hearing loss if cleft lip and palate are present

Annual screening for developmental delays or learning disorders

Monitoring as per specific ophthalmologic, cardiac, or renal anomalies

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type I (RCDP1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full skeletal survey (with flexion and extension views of the neck)

Ophthalmologic examination

Growth parameters

Developmental assessment

MR imaging of brain (with MR spectroscopy)

Cardiac ultrasound examination

Renal ultrasound examination

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is supportive and limited because of the multiple handicaps present at birth and the poor outcome.

Cataract extraction may preserve some vision.

Physical therapy is recommended to assist in the improvement of contractures; orthopedic procedures have improved function in some individuals.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Dietary restriction of phytanic acid to avoid the consequences of phytanic acid accumulation over time may benefit individuals with milder forms of RCDP.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Poor feeding and recurrent aspiration necessitate the placement of a gastrostomy tube. Note: Improved nutrition does not enhance linear growth.

Individuals with RCDP1 require good pulmonary toilet and careful attention to respiratory function. Influenza vaccine and RSV monoclonal antibody should be provided.

Low plasmalogen levels can be associated with low levels of docosohexanoic acid (DHA). DHA can be measured in plasma; oral supplementation should be provided if levels are low.

Surveillance

Based on a retrospective review of the natural history of 35 individuals with RCDP, White et al [2003] provide health supervision guidelines for primary caretakers of children with RCDP, including the following:

Growth curves that allow weight comparisons to help determine the need for gastrostomy

The ages at which developmental milestones are achieved to provide realistic expectations

Recommendations for medical assessments including seizure control, vision, hearing, orthopedic care, and prevention of respiratory infections and contractures

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Data suggest that oral plasmalogen supplementation using alkylglycerol sources can increase tissue plasmalogen concentrations in rodents and red blood cell (RBC) plasmalogen concentrations in individuals with Zellweger syndrome spectrum disorders. Anecdotal reports of alkylglycerol supplementation in a few individuals with classic RCDP1 have not indicated dramatic clinical benefit; however, alkylglycerol supplementation has not yet been studied in a systematic fashion. Studies in Pex7-deficient mouse models have shown that plasmalogen precursors can partially recover plasmalogen levels in body tissues, but not in brain [Brites et al 2004, Wood et al 2011]

Nonsense suppressor drugs were unable to recover protein production in individuals with the common p.Leu292Ter allele [Dranchak et al 2011].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Refsum disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmology. Examination for retinitis pigmentosa/miosis, cataract, and visual fields [Claridge et al 1992]

Anosmia testing using the procedure described by Gibberd et al [2004]

Neurology. Ataxia, neuropathy, myography, and electrophysiologic assessment

Audiology. Pure tone audiometry and possibly otoacoustic emission testing and auditory brain stem evoked response (ABER) testing if hearing difficulties are suspected but not identified on pure tone audiometry [Bamiou et al 2003]

Radiology. Physical examination of hands, feet, and knees; radiologic assessment of hands and feet

Cardiology. Cardiac evaluation including electrocardiography (ECG) and cardiac ultrasound examination

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Chronic Treatment

The following are indicated:

Dietary restriction of phytanic acid intake

Avoidance of sudden weight loss

Lifelong treatment with hydrating creams

Regular care by a cardiologist for cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy in order to treat signs and symptoms properly with antiarrhythmic and cardiogenic supportive drugs

Because the pupils do not dilate well if at all, other measures, such as use of iris hooks, may be necessary to allow sufficient pupillary enlargement during cataract surgery. In addition, an anterior chamber lens with iris fixation may be necessary because the brittleness of the zonular fibers holding the lens capsule may not allow positioning of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag after cataract removal, a complication observed in one patient [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication].

Treatment of Acute Presentation

Many acute features such as polyneuropathy, ataxia, ichthyosis, and cardiac arrhythmias resolve with reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Plasmapheresis or lipapheresis can be used in the event of acute arrhythmias or extreme weakness because phytanic acid is transported on lipoproteins [Wierzbicki et al 1999]. During plasmapheresis, cardiac monitoring should be continuous and plasma glucose concentration should be kept high to prevent onset or exacerbation of arrhythmias.

A low phytanic acid diet can be given orally or by nasogastric tube. If oral intake is restricted, appropriate parenteral nutrition and fluid therapies are needed to maintain plasma glucose concentrations and prevent ketosis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No curative therapy currently exists for Refsum disease.

By restricting dietary intake of phytanic acid or eliminating phytanic acid by plasmapheresis or lipid apheresis, plasma phytanic acid concentrations can be reduced by 50% to 70%, typically to about 100 to 300 µmol/L. This reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration successfully resolves symptoms of ichthyosis, sensory neuropathy, and ataxia in approximately that order. However, it is uncertain whether treatment affects the progression of the retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and deafness [Gibberd & Wierzbicki 2000]. Although data are limited, it appears that despite strict dietary treatment the retinitis pigmentosa is very slowly progressive [BP Leroy, unpublished observations].

A high-calorie diet is necessary to avoid mobilization of stored lipids, including phytanic acid, into the plasma.

Postoperative care requires parenteral nutrition with solutions that do not contain phytanic acid, e.g., Intralipid® available in 10%, 20%, and 30% concentrations, which are all based on soybean oil and egg yolk phospholipid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment of hypertension may help in delaying cardiomyopathy, which inevitably leads to arrhythmias. It is probably better to avoid amiodarone as an anti-arrhythmic drug, because of the risk of hyperthyroidism, which results in catabolism and increased phytanic acid release from tissues if not recognized in time. This complication was observed in one individual [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication].

Once cardiomyopathy has become difficult to treat, cardiac transplantation can be life-saving. One individual with PHYH-related Refsum disease and one with PEX7-related Refsum disease have successfully received a donor heart [BP Leroy 2007 & 2015, personal observations].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Measurement of plasma phytanic acid levels every three to six months and more frequently during illnesses or increased stress that may lead to a catabolic state

Annual ophthalmologic examination to identify vision loss resulting from cataracts, which are treatable

Annual cardiac examination to identify cardiomyopathy and concomitant arrhythmias

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

All food products containing phytanic acid such as ruminant (cow, sheep, and goat) products and certain fish (cod) products. Some nuts should also be avoided [Brown et al 1993].

Fasting because stored lipids, including phytanic acid, are mobilized into the plasma

Ibuprofen because it is metabolized by AMACR and may interfere with the metabolism of phytanic acid

Amiodarone because of the risk that hyperthyroidism would induce enhanced catabolism, with consequent increase of plasma phytanic acid

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband before symptoms of Refsum disease occur in order to institute early treatment to reduce plasma phytanic acid concentration. Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurement of phytanic acid concentration in plasma or serum if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because of the tendency for pregnancy to induce catabolism, it is extremely important to manage plasma phytanic acid concentration during pregnancy in women with Refsum disease.

Fairly rapid reduction of visual fields has been observed during the third trimester of pregnancy [BP Leroy, unpublished observations], possibly due to increased plasma phytanic acid concentration resulting from increased catabolism.

Therapies Under Investigation

At present, the potential of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) similar to that for lysosomal storage diseases (e.g., Hurler syndrome [see MPS I], Fabry disease, and Gaucher disease) is under investigation. This may eventually replace dietary restrictions and plasma- or lipapheresis.

In the long run, gene therapy may be the treatment of choice, but many issues need to be resolved before it can be applied.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Rb, the following evaluations are recommended:

Prior to the planning of therapy, the extent of the tumor within and outside the eye should be determined. Each affected eye is assigned a classification, depending on the extent of disease and the risk that the cancer has spread outside the eye. Extent of the tumor is estimated by clinical examination under anesthetic and ultrasound or MRI, particularly focusing on the tumor-optic nerve relationship. Head MRI is also useful to evaluate for a pinealoblastoma, indicating trilateral retinoblastoma.

For very large tumors with risk factors for extraocular disease, bone marrow aspiration and examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may also be performed at diagnosis, or performed when pathologic examination of the enucleated eye reveals optic nerve invasion or significant risks for extraocular extension.

If Rb has spread outside the eye, the stage of cancer will need to be evaluated to determine the most appropriate care of the child.

In those individuals with a family history of Rb, and in uncommon circumstances in which the child presents with strabismus or poor vision, the retinal tumors may be small and detected on clinical examination under anesthesia.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations

Goals of treatment are first preservation of life, and then of sight. As optimal treatment may be complex, specialists skilled in the treatment of Rb from various fields including ophthalmology, pediatric oncology, pathology and radiation oncology collaborate to deliver optimized care.

In addition to eye classification and tumor stage, choice of treatment depends on many factors, including the number of tumor foci (unifocal, unilateral multifocal, or bilateral), localization and size of the tumor(s) within the eye(s), presence of vitreous seeding, the potential for useful vision, the extent and kind of extraocular extension, and the resources available.

Treatment options for the eye include enucleation; cryotherapy; laser, systemic, or local ocular chemotherapy including intra-arterial chemotherapy combined with or followed by laser or cryotherapy; radiation therapy using episcleral plaques; and, as a last resort, external beam radiotherapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If possible, any radiation (including x-ray, CT scan, and external beam radiation) should be avoided to minimize the lifetime risk of developing late-onset second cancers. Such tests should only be used if absolutely necessary in essential health care.

Surveillance

Further information regarding medical surveillance for those who have had or are at risk of developing Rb is available in the guidelines for retinoblastoma care.

Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Following successful treatment, children require frequent follow-up examination for early detection of newly arising intraocular tumors:

It is recommended that children known to have an RB1 germline pathogenic variant have an eye examination under anesthesia every three to four weeks until age six months, then less frequently until age three years. Clinical examinations with cooperative children are performed every three to six months until age seven years, then annually and eventually biannually for life.

Individuals who have unilateral Rb without an identified heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant are at risk for low-level mosaicism and can develop a tumor in the other eye [Rushlow et al 2009, Temming et al 2013]. This risk is small enough that examination under anesthesia may be replaced with regular clinical examination of the eyes, including clinical ultrasound (a simple, noninvasive procedure).

Individuals with retinomas (premalignant retinal lesions associated with Rb) are followed with retinal examinations and imaging every one to two years, to detect any change early.

Detection of second non-ocular tumors in individuals with retinoblastoma. Because of the high risk for second cancers, including sarcomas, melanoma, and specific other cancers, prompt investigation of any signs or symptoms is indicated. Total body MRI at regular intervals is under investigation to determine when the technology will be specific and sensitive enough for screening for second cancers in persons with a heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

It has been suggested by Fletcher et al [2004] that cancer risks in survivors of heritable retinoblastoma may be reduced by limiting exposure to DNA-damaging agents (radiotherapy, tobacco, and UV light). It is plausible that cancer risks in these individuals may be reduced by limiting exposure to chemotherapy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The American Society of Clinical Oncologists identifies heritable retinoblastoma as a Group 1 disorder, i.e., a hereditary syndrome for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [American Society of Clinical Oncology 2003]. It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from eye examination by an experienced ophthalmologist and allow for early identification of a retinoblastoma.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known, which reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant [Noorani et al 1996, Richter et al 2003];

Eye examinations by an ophthalmologist experienced in the treatment of retinoblastoma starting directly after birth as described above (see Surveillance, Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Young or uncooperative children may require examination under anesthesia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There are not many clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Visual acuity

Goldmann visual field

Family history

Electroretinogram

Funduscopic examination

Optical coherence tomography

Genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Low-vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low-vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs.

Public school systems are mandated by federal law to provide appropriate education for children who have vision impairment. Assistance may include larger print textbooks, preferential seating in the front of the classroom, and use of handouts with higher contrast.

Many individuals with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis are able to obtain a restricted driver's license. Some individuals have found specially designed telescopic lenses useful when driving; legal use of telescopic lenses may vary by locale.

Retinoschisis affects primarily the inner retinal layers; hence, retinoschisis alone (without retinal detachment) is at best difficult to treat surgically.

Treatment of retinoschisis may require the care of a retinal surgeon to address the infrequent complications of vitreous hemorrhage and full-thickness retinal detachment. The clinical presentation of a large area of peripheral retinoschisis may mask a true retinal detachment. Advice from an ophthalmologist or retinal surgeon should be sought when in doubt.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Ambylopia prevention therapy is indicated following surgical intervention to treat vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment, or in cases of severe retinoschisis or hypermetropia [Medscape, accessed 8-21-14].

Surveillance

Annual evaluation of children under age ten years by a pediatric ophthalmologist or retina specialist is recommended.

Patient education and close follow-up are the only clinical options that may allow for early identification and treatment of vision-threatening complications [Orphanet, accessed 8-21-14].

Older children and adults need less frequent monitoring.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage occur in a minority of affected individuals (5%-22% and 4%-40%, respectively), general avoidance of head trauma and high-contact sports is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk male relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the RS1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, examination by an ophthalmologist can be used to clarify the affected status of at-risk relatives for early treatment of retinal detachment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A mouse model of human X-linked juvenile retinoschisis was studied to determine whether supplementation with functional normal retinoschisin protein can produce improvement in ERG function and retina morphology [Zeng et al 2004, Min et al 2005]. Subsequent evaluation of the mouse model confirmed that it appropriately mimics structural features of human X-linked juvenile retinoschisis. Replacements of the deficient protein through use of a neomycin resistance cassette or through use of an AAV vector were both successful, suggesting that, with additional study, gene therapy could become a viable strategy for therapeutic intervention [Kjellstrom et al 2007].

Other researchers showed that older mice had significantly reduced benefit from AAV Rs1h cDNA (the mouse ortholog of human RS1) gene transfer compared to younger mice that had rescue of retinal structure and function. These benefits along with retinoschisin expression persisted for over 15 months. Other studies showed that intravitreal injection of a rAAV8 vector containing the mouse Rs1h cDNA under the control of a human retinoschisin promoter in Rs1h knockout mice yielded strong retinoschisin expression and structural and functional improvements. Wildtype retinoschisin delivered and expressed in human retinal culture cells has been shown to undergo protein folding, subunit assembly, and secretion mostly independent of endogenously expressed, defective retinoschisin protein. This suggests that gene therapy could be possible for affected individuals who have residual, pathogenic RS1 protein expression [Molday et al 2012].

Byrne et al [2014] explained that cell targeting and appropriate vector choice are very important to the success of retinal gene therapy. This group demonstrated that different cell types were able to secrete retinoschisin, transporting the protein across the retina. Photoreceptor cell secretion of this protein produced the best long-term rescue.

Another therapeutic approach involves in vivo directed evolution of AAV variants to deliver the wildtype gene to the outer retina after injection to the vitreous humor of the eye. The authors suggested that this has the potential to be a broadly applicable gene delivery method for inherited retinal diseases [Dalkara et al 2013].

Possible drawbacks of using viral vectors (e.g., the risks of oncogenicity, immunogenicity, and the possible persistence of such vectors in the brain after intravitreal injection) have triggered an interest in non-viral systems. A combination of solid lipid nanoparticles, dextran, and protamine as well as EGFP and RS1 plasmids have been used to develop non-viral vectors for X-linked juvenile retinoschisis treatment. Researchers studied the in vitro transfection capacity, cellular uptake, and intracellular trafficking of these vectors in ARPE-19 cells. In vivo intravitreal, subretinal, and topical forms of vector administration in Wistar rat eyes were also evaluated. EGFP expression in various cell types depended on the administration route. This work suggests that these non-viral vectors may be useful in treating X-linked juvenile retinoschisis, other degenerative retinal diseases, and ocular surface diseases as well [Delgado et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a MECP2-related disorder, the following evaluations should be considered:

Formal developmental assessment

Assessment of feeding/eating, digestive problems (including constipation and gastroesophageal reflux), and nutrition using history, growth measurements and, if needed, gastrointestinal investigations

History of sleep and/or breathing problems

Video/EEG monitoring to obtain definitive information about the occurrence of seizures and the need for antiepileptic drugs

Screening for prolonged QTc by ECG and Holter monitoring

Consider assessment of brain stem autonomic dysfunction to identify appropriate therapies, although this remains controversial [Julu et al 2001, Julu & Witt Engerström 2005]

Examination for scoliosis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment program needs to be individualized following an assessment of the affected individual’s clinical problems and needs.

Management is mainly symptomatic and focuses on optimizing the individual's abilities using a dynamic multidisciplinary approach, with specialist input from dietitians, physiotherapists, and occupational, speech, and music therapists [Lotan et al 2004, Weaving et al 2005].

Psychosocial support for families is an integral part of management.

Therapeutic horseback riding, swimming, and music therapy have been reported to be of benefit.

Effective communication strategies, including the use of augmentative communication techniques, need to be explored for these severely disabled individuals [Ryan et al 2004].

Treatment for seizures needs to be individualized with input from a pediatric neurologist. Topiramate may improve seizure control and/or respiratory abnormalities [Goyal et al 2004].

Risperidone (low dose) or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors have been somewhat successful in treating agitation.

Melatonin can ameliorate sleep disturbances [McArthur & Budden 1998]. Chloral hydrate, hydroxyzine, or diphenhydramine may be used along with melatonin.

Ample fluid intake and a high-fiber diet can help prevent acute intestinal obstruction. When diet is ineffective, Miralax® (polyethylene glycol) and other stool softeners may be used to control constipation; they are tolerated better than milk of magnesia.

Anti-reflux agents, smaller and thickened feedings, and positioning can decrease gastroesophageal reflux.

Scoliosis [Kerr et al 2003] and spasticity need to be treated to maintain mobility. Recently, guidelines were developed for the management of scoliosis in Rett syndrome [Downs et al 2009] (full text).

Some individuals known to have prolonged QTc may benefit from the use of β-blockers or cardiac pacing, in consultation with a specialist pediatric cardiologist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Osteopenia may be avoided with careful attention to nutrition, particularly calcium intake.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Examination at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, dentition, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills, hand function, and orthopedic and neurologic complications

Periodic ECG to screen for prolonged QTc

Examination at regular intervals for the progression of scoliosis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because individuals with Rett syndrome have an increased risk of life-threatening arrhythmias associated with a prolonged QT interval, avoidance of drugs known to prolong the QT interval, including the following, is recommended:

Prokinetic agents (e.g., cisapride)

Antipsychotics (e.g., thioridazine), tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine)

Antiarrhythmics (e.g., quinidine, sotolol, amiodarone)

Anesthetic agents (e.g., thiopental, succinylcholine)

Antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, ketoconazole)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A number of clinical trials are currently being conducted, including both observational and interventional studies. Phase I and II trials of parenteral administration of the tri-peptide form of insulin-like growth factor, rhIGF-1 (mecasermin [rDNA]), are currently underway. The tricyclic antidepressant desipramine (DMI) is currently in phase II studies, specifically focusing on the respiratory abnormalities associated with Rett syndrome. The NMDA receptor antagonist dextromethorphan (DM) is currently in trials targeting glutamate and NMDA receptor associated neuronal toxicity, and is focused on respiratory, seizure, and motor outcomes.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The ketogenic diet has been tried in Rett syndrome with some improvement in seizure control and other modest subjective improvements [Haas et al 1986].

L-carnitine was tested in a double-blind trial. Although parents and caregivers reported improvements in the general well-being of individuals with Rett syndrome [Ellaway et al 1999], significant functional improvements were not observed.

Carbidopa/levodopa may be tried for treatment of rigidity seen in Rett syndrome, but its benefit is unsubstantiated.

Following the report of reduced CSF folate concentration in four females with Rett syndrome [Ramaekers et al 2003], Neul and colleagues analyzed CSF from an additional 76 individuals with Rett syndrome, but could not reproduce earlier findings, and found that supplementation with folinic acid did not lead to any noticeable clinical improvements [Neul et al 2005]. It therefore remains to be established whether cerebral folate deficiency contributes to the pathophysiology of Rett syndrome.

Because elevated opioids had been observed in the CSF of individuals with Rett syndrome, the oral opiate antagonist, naltrexone, was investigated. Although it decreased breathing dysrhythmias and had some sedating properties, the efficacy of naltrexone is controversial [Percy et al 1994].

Based on the hypothesis that altering DNA methylation could improve global DNA methylation and thereby improve residual MeCP2 function, a trial of oral creatine has been undertaken. A statistical increase in global DNA methylation was seen. Improvement in the total and subscores of the Rett Syndrome Motor and Behavioral Assessment was observed, although it did not reach statistical significance [Freilinger et al 2011].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy, the following are recommended:

Evaluation by a neuromuscular specialist with attention to possible weakness, sensory loss, gait disturbance, and need for bracing

Sleep study and pulmonary consultation

Ophthalmologic evaluation with attention to visual acuity and possible optic atrophy

Audiologic assessment

Other consultations depending on clinical problems; for example, orthopedic consultation if scoliosis is present or psychiatry consultation if depression is present

Rehabilitation assessments: physiotherapy, occupational therapy, orthotics, speech and language therapy, wheel chair clinic

Consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Medications

High dose supplementation

of

riboflavin. Because oral riboflavin supplementation is effective (and possibly life saving), it should begin as soon as a riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy is suspected and continued lifelong unless the diagnosis is excluded by molecular genetic testing.

High-dose supplementation of riboflavin between 10 mg and 50 mg/kg/day has been effective in patients with genetically proven riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy and also in some patients in whom the genetic basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy has not been established.

Although no formal placebo control trial has been conducted and the longest course of riboflavin supplementation has been 36 months, riboflavin supplementation: improves symptoms and signs on clinical examination; improves objective testing (vital capacity, brain stem evoked potentials, nerve conduction studies), and normalizes acylcarnitine levels [Foley et al 2014].

Before initiating riboflavin supplementation, perform the assessments in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis.

Oral riboflavin supplementation should be given in gradually increasing doses in order to establish the optimum dose:

Riboflavin 10 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 20 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 30 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 40 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 50 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Note: Some patients are on doses up to 70 mg/kg/day.

Side effects, problems, or deterioration at any point require discussion with the treating clinician.

See Surveillance for recommended follow up of individuals treated with riboflavin supplementation.

Note: Treatments attempted before the basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy was known have included the following:

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been tried in a number of patients with reports of improvement as well as reports of no or non-sustained response [Bandettini Di Poggio et al 2014].

Some patients have reported additional improvement with other multivitamins and coenzyme Q10.

Supportive Care

The following are appropriate:

Respiratory support

Physiotherapy to avoid contractures

Occupational therapy for support in activities of daily living

Orthotics for limb and trunk bracing

Hearing aids and appropriate educational intervention for those with sensorineural hearing loss

Speech and language therapy to avoid choking and respiratory problems

Wheel chair as needed

Low vision aids for those with decreased visual acuity

Routine management of scoliosis to avoid long term respiratory problems

Routine management of depression

Surveillance

At three months and six months after initiation of riboflavin supplementation, recommended follow up is:

General examination

Neurologic examination

Discussion of any problems with riboflavin supplementation

Ideally, obtaining a blood sample for riboflavin/FAD/FMN, acylcarnitine analysis (if previous evaluation demonstrated abnormalities) to determine if these levels are normalizing

After one year of riboflavin supplementation, repeat examination/investigations as detailed in Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis except for consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid dietary restriction of riboflavin. If not possible to avoid dietary restriction, provide riboflavin supplements.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

When the SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on the older and younger sibs of a proband with riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy to identify as early as possible those with biallelic pathogenic variants who would benefit from early treatment with riboflavin supplementation and monitoring for potential complications of the disorder.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Females who have riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy with biallelic pathogenic variants in either SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 should take riboflavin supplements before and during pregnancy and when breast feeding to avoid inducing riboflavin deficiency in the fetus and infant. Recommended doses during pregnancy are 10 mg/kg/day.

Few studies have evaluated for adverse fetal outcome after excessive maternal riboflavin intake during pregnancy. Riboflavin deficiency during pregnancy, however, has been associated with an increased risk of maternal preeclampsia and preterm delivery [Wacker et al 2000, Carmichael et al 2013].

Note: Although no data are available, the authors recommend a diet rich in riboflavin during pregnancy for females who are heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in either SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 as it is unknown if they are at increased risk of developing symptoms due to an increased demand for riboflavin during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), the following evaluations are recommended.

Children

A lower-extremity x-ray (teleoroentgenogram), and x-ray of the wrists to assess the extent of skeletal disease

Bone age measurement to evaluate growth potential

Craniofacial examination for signs of craniosynostosis

Dental examination

Hearing evaluation

Adults

X-ray of skeletal sites with reported pain to assess for possible enthesopathy or stress fractures

Dental examination

Hearing evaluation

Individuals of any age

Evaluation of those with headache and vertigo for Chiari malformation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Pharmacologic treatment focuses on improving pain and correcting bone deformation.

In children, treatment generally begins at the time of diagnosis and continues until long bone growth is complete.

Treatment for most children consists of oral phosphate administered three to five times daily and high-dose calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Two different regimens have been used, but have not been compared:

Low dose. Treatment is generally started at a low dose to avoid the gastrointestinal side effects of diarrhea and gastrointestinal upset. The doses are then titrated to a weight-based dose of calcitriol at 20 to 30 ng/kg/day administered in two to three divided doses and phosphate at 20 to 40 mg/kg/day administered in three to five divided doses [Carpenter et al 2011].

High dose. Some clinicians favor a high-dose phase of treatment for up to a year. The high-dose phase consists of calcitriol at 50-70 ng/kg/day (up to a maximum dose of 3.0 µg daily) along with the phosphate [Sabbagh et al 2014].

Doses are adjusted based on (1) evidence of therapeutic success including reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase activity, changes in musculoskeletal examination, improvement in radiographic rachitic changes, and (when possible) improved growth velocity; and (2) evidence of therapeutic complications including hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Note: Normalization of the serum phosphate concentration is not a therapeutic goal as normal serum phosphate concentration frequently indicates overtreatment and increases the risk for treatment-related complications.

Jehan et al [2008] described differences in growth during treatment that are associated with different vitamin D receptor promoter haplotypes, providing a possible explanation for some of the clinical variability observed in XLH.

After growth is complete, lower doses of the medications can be used to reach the treatment goals.

In adults, the role of treatment has not been well studied; treatment is generally reserved for individuals with symptoms such as skeletal pain, upcoming orthopedic surgery, biochemical evidence of osteomalacia with an elevated alkaline phosphatase, or recurrent pseudofractures or stress fractures [Carpenter et al 2011]. The calcitriol doses that are frequently employed in adults are in the range of 0.50 to 0.75 µg daily; the phosphate is given as 750 to 1000 mg/day in three to four divided doses. As with children, the phosphate dose is slowly titrated to avoid gastrointestinal side effects, starting at 250 mg/day and titrating up by 250 mg/day each week until the final dose is reached.

Orthopedic treatment. Despite what appears to be adequate pharmacologic therapy (see following Note), some individuals have persistent lower-limb bowing and torsion, which may lead to misalignment of the lower extremity. In these individuals, surgical treatment is frequently pursued. No control trials of the different surgical techniques have been undertaken; the literature consists of case series. Note: Poor compliance with pharmacologic therapy during childhood and the teen years may be one factor for persistent lower-limb deformities.

In prepubertal children who have not yet reached their peak growth velocity (generally before age 10 years), stapling or toggle plate insertion can be considered as a minimally invasive method of reversible hemi-epiphysiodesis [Novais & Stevens 2006]. Note: The risk with this procedure is prematurely stopping growth.

In older children and adults, surgical techniques reported include distraction osteogenesis by external fixation, acute correction by external fixation with intramedullary nailing, internal fixation with intramedullary nailing, and acute correction by intramedullary nailing [Song et al 2006, Petje et al 2008].

Additionally, total hip and knee arthroplasty is sometimes required because of degenerative joint disease and enthesopathy. Treatment in adults has not been shown to influence enthesopathy [Connor et al 2015].

Craniofacial treatment. Although hypophosphatemic rickets is a rare condition, a recent review from three neurosurgical centers reported on ten patients treated over twenty years and recommended prompt referral to a craniofacial specialist when head shape abnormalities are seen in patients with this disorder [Vega et al 2016].

Dental treatment. Because individuals with XLH are susceptible to recurrent dental abscesses which may result in premature loss of decidual and permanent teeth, good oral hygiene with flossing and regular dental care and fluoride treatments are the cornerstones of prevention. Pit and fissure sealants have been recommended but have not been well studied. A recent study has suggested that treatment of adults with phosphate and calcitriol can improve the severity of dental disease [Connor et al 2015].

Sensorineural hearing loss has been reported in persons with XLH; individuals with this complication are treated in a standard manner. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview, Management.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations, Pharmacologic treatment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Hyperparathyroidism is associated with treatment for XLH. Rarely, hyperparathyroidism is present at the time of diagnosis; most often it occurs secondary to high phosphate doses and may proceed to tertiary hyperparathyroidism. In order to monitor for these complications, intact parathyroid hormone, serum calcium concentrations, and TmP/GFR should be measured quarterly (see Surveillance).

If secondary hyperparathyroidism is identified, either the calcitriol dose may be increased or the phosphate dose decreased. A small clinical trial and several case reports have investigated the use of cinacalcet in adults with XLH who have secondary hyperparathyroidism [Alon et al 2008]. No long-term studies have been conducted. The clinical trial (comprising 8 individuals ages 6-19) involved in-patient monitoring of phosphate, iPTH, and Tmp/GFR after a single dose of cinacalcet; results showed a decrease in iPTH and an increase in phosphate and TmP/GFR.

If tertiary hyperparathyroidism is identified, surgical evaluation is warranted.

Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria may also complicate long-term treatment for XLH and is associated with high calcitriol doses. Serum calcium concentrations and urine calcium/creatinine ratio should be monitored quarterly (see Surveillance). If hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria is detected, the calcitriol dose should be decreased.

Nephrocalcinosis, reported in persons medically treated for XLH, may occur independent of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria detected on laboratory evaluation. A baseline renal ultrasound examination should be performed at the start of treatment. The frequency of renal ultrasound examination to monitor for the development of nephrocalcinosis is not established; one- to five-year intervals have been recommended [Carpenter et al 2011, Sabbagh et al 2014].

Surveillance

Periodic clinical evaluation to assess for disease progression, treatment response, and therapeutic complications is indicated.

For individuals on calcitriol and phosphate therapy the following are recommended:

Quarterly monitoring of the following: serum concentrations of phosphate, calcium, and creatinine; alkaline phosphatase level; intact parathyroid hormone level; and urinary calcium, phosphate, and creatinine to identify and thus prevent therapeutic complications

Intermittent monitoring of lower-extremity x-rays (teleoroentgenograms) to assess skeletal response to treatment. The frequency has not been well established; although annual imaging can be considered, the decision for imaging should be based on symptoms and physical examination findings.

Renal ultrasound examination to assess for nephrocalcinosis. The frequency has not been well established.

Dental follow up twice a year (as for children and teenagers at high risk for caries)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

It is recommended that treatment with unopposed phosphate (without 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D) be avoided as this is felt to increase the risk for hyperparathyroidism.

Although 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D has been used as a single agent, this use is felt to increase the risk for hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing of at-risk infants and children is warranted to ensure early diagnosis and early treatment for optimal outcome.

Evaluation can be accomplished by:

Molecular genetic testing if the PHEX pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member;

Biochemical testing consisting of serum phosphorus, creatinine, calcium, alkaline phosphatase, intact parathyroid hormone, 25-hydroxy vitamin D [25(OH)D], and 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D concentrations and urine phosphorus and creatinine concentrations. Infants with initially normal test results require reevaluation every two to three months until at least age one year.

No role has been established for screening asymptomatic adult family members.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No data on the use of phosphate and calcitriol in pregnant women with XLH are available. Most women with XLH who are on active therapy at the time of conception are continued on treatment throughout the pregnancy with vigilant monitoring of urinary calcium-to-creatinine ratios to detect hypercalciuria early in order to modify treatment accordingly. Those individuals who are not on therapy at the time of conception are generally not started on treatment during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently, a novel therapeutic agent KRN23 is under investigation for XLH. This is a recombinant human monoclonal antibody targeting FGF23 (see Molecular Genetics). A randomized trial of a single dose of KRN23 has shown an increase in the renal tubular threshold for phosphate reabsorption (TmP/GFR) and an increase in serum Pi and 1,25(OH)2D compared with placebo [Carpenter et al 2014]. A second study in adults looking at monthly dosing of KRN23 for 16 months demonstrated increases in serum phosphate, TmP/GFR, and 1,25 (OH)2D3 [Imel et al 2015]. Analysis from quality of life testing during the first four months of the trial showed improvements in physical functioning and stiffness [Ruppe et al 2016]. Phase II studies in adults and children with XLH are ongoing.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome (ADRS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographs of the limbs, chest, vertebrae and skull to establish the extent of skeletal involvement

Assessment for possible abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal position for consideration of reconstructive surgery

Assessment for possible cryptorchidism

Clinical assessment for presence of cleft lip/palate and the need for surgical repair

Abdominal ultrasound examination for investigation of renal anomalies

Echocardiogram to evaluate for a cardiac defect

Endocrine consultation to assess the possibility of hormone therapy in the treatment of males with micropenis

Urology consultation in males with cryptorchidism and abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal transposition for consideration of reconstructive surgery

Orthodontics consultation as needed for misaligned teeth or persistent primary dentition

Hearing assessment

Formal cognitive assessment if developmental delay is present

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Corrective surgeries may be required for repair of:

Cryptorchidism

Abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal position

Cleft lip/palate

Hormone therapy may be helpful for males with micropenis. Injection of human chorionic gonadotropin and testosterone improved penile length and testicular volume in three boys with severe micropenis [Soliman et al 1998]. Hormone therapy should be initiated and monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Orthodontic treatment is typically required.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Head circumference measurements every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter

Developmental assessment every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter, or more frequently as needed if delays identified

Dental evaluation every six months to one year or as recommended by the dental professional on initial assessment

Regular cardiac and renal assessment by respective specialists as needed if abnormalities are identified

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and surveillance. If the WNT5A or DVL1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in affected women appears to be generally uncomplicated. For an affected fetus, cæsarean section may be required for abnormal presentation and/or cephalopelvic disproportion. Breech presentation requiring cæsarean section has been reported in one case of ADRS [Roifman et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ROR2-related Robinow syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Orofacial assessment to determine the need for plastic surgery (presence of cleft lip and/or cleft palate )

Dental assessment for misaligned, crowded teeth

Clinical and radiographic evaluation of the spine and rib cage to assess the severity of kyphoscoliosis and vertebral and rib anomalies, as these can lead to postural and respiratory complications [Wilcox et al 1997]

Radiographic documentation of the forearm shortening and hand anomalies

Assessment of micropenis for reconstructive surgery if due to penoscrotal transposition

Endocrine investigation to explore possible: (1) gonadotropin and testosterone deficiencies amenable to treatment in males with micropenis; and (2) growth hormone deficiency

Renal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to evaluate for structural heart defects

Treatment of Manifestations

Corrective surgeries may be required for the following:

Syndactyly repair

Severe scoliosis secondary to hemivertebrae and rib abnormalities

Cleft lip and cleft palate repair

Although it was not possible to detach the abnormal insertion of the penile crura, which can cause a normal-sized penis to be buried in the scrotum and thus appear small (see Clinical Description), Wilcox et al [1997] improved the cosmetic appearance by transposing the scrotum downward.

Injection of human chorionic gonadotropin and testosterone therapy improved penile length and testicular volume in three boys with severe micropenis [Soliman et al 1998]. Hormone therapy should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Orthodontic treatment is usually required

Growth hormone deficiency in children with Robinow syndrome responds to growth hormone therapy [Castells et al 1999].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The perioperative management of individuals with Robinow syndrome should include [MacDonald & Dearlove 1995, Lirk et al 2003, Sleesman & Tobias 2003]:

Preoperative radiologic assessment of the vertebrae and ribs because of the risk for respiratory complications;

Preoperative cardiac evaluation for the presence of congenital heart defects;

Awareness that endotracheal intubation may be difficult as a result of the midface hypoplasia.

Because growth hormone therapy can exacerbate scoliosis, progression of the spinal curve needs to be monitored during the course of therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Scoliosis surveillance in childhood and through adolescence, until growth is completed

Surveillance of growth in childhood for evidence of growth hormone deficiency

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.In most cases an individual diagnosed with Rotor syndrome is the child of a consanguineous couple. Thus, the diagnosis of Rotor syndrome may coincidentally identify such consanguinity. In some centers, this may be an indication for clinical genetics consultation and/or genetic counseling.

Treatment of Manifestations

No treatment is required.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No adverse drug effects have been documented in Rotor syndrome; however, the absence of the hepatic proteins OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 may have serious consequences for liver uptake and toxicity of numerous commonly used drugs and/or their metabolites which enter the liver via either of the two OATP1B transporters.

A list of drugs that enter the liver mainly via OATP1B1 and whose pharmacokinetics are known to be influenced by genetic variability in SLCO1B1 has been published [Niemi et al 2011]. Some of these drugs are also taken up by OATP1B3 [Shitara 2011]. The list includes:

Statins – simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, puitavastatin, rosuvastatin, fluvastatin

Ezetimibe

Anticancer drugs - methotrexate and irinotecan

Sartans – olmesartan and valsartan

Rifampicin

Mycophenolic acid

Torsemide

Thiazolidine diones – pioglitazone and rosiglitazone

Glinides – nateglinide and repaglinide

Lopinavir

Fexofenadine

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No special pregnancy management issues from the perspective of an affected mother and/or from the perspective of an affected fetus are known.

Of note, during pregnancy the hyperbilirubinemia of Rotor syndrome may complicate the diagnosis and management of liver disease related to pregnancy (e.g., intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy) and liver disease not related to pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Comprehensive clinical examination and neurology consultation that includes measures of functional neurologic status

Formal developmental evaluation (particularly in a child with the encephalomyopathic form with renal tubulopathy)

Formal assessment of vision and hearing

Brain MRI and electroencephalogram (EEG) in individuals with encephalopathy and/or seizures. Note: these may be normal with certain RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease phenotypes.

Nutritional assessment

Speech and language assessment

Physical therapy assessment

Occupational therapy assessment

Pulmonary function testing

For those with Kearns-Sayre syndrome, cardiac evaluation to include electrocardiogram (ECG) and/or echocardiogram

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Detailed evaluations are outlined in Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research Clinical Guidelines.

To date, there are no known cures and few effective treatments for any forms of mitochondrial disease, including RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease. Treatment modalities currently focus on symptomatic management and supportive care, and are best implemented by a multidisciplinary team.

General management guidelines for those with systemic involvement:

Nutritional support (e.g., nasogastric tube, gastrostomy) as needed for significant gastrointestinal involvement

Early referral to a pediatric renal specialist for those with proximal renal tubulopathy

Early referral to a pediatric pulmonologist for children with evidence of reduced respiratory function. Management may include consideration of tracheostomy and artificial ventilation.

Physical therapy to maintain muscle strength and mobility and to prevent contractures

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for seizure management. Of note, seizures may be refractory to treatment.

Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for discussion of management issues)

General management guidelines for those with progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO):

Ptosis surgery for cosmesis and/or symptomatic relief in those with good residual orbicularis oculi muscle strength

ECG in all individuals with PEO to screen for significant cardiac conduction defects which may warrant placement of a pacemaker, particularly in those with the Kearns-Sayre syndrome phenotype

General management guidelines for both those with systemic involvement and those with PEO:

Aggressive management of fever and infection

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines specific to RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease are available; however, detailed evaluations are outlined in Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research Clinical Guidelines.

The following evaluations should be considered:

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (encephalo-myopathic form with renal tubulopathy)

Regular assessments of neurodevelopment, speech, and language

Regular evaluations by a pediatric neurologist to evaluate for the presence and/or severity of encephalopathy, with consideration of EEG and video EEG monitoring to determine presence of seizures and/or subclinical status epilepticus

Regular evaluation by a pediatric renal specialist, including assessment of renal function (electrolytes in blood and urine and urine analysis)

Routine assessment of nutritional status, growth, and body mass index (BMI)

Regular pulmonary function testing including monitoring of blood gases for early detection of respiratory compromise

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome and mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain, and BMI, including regular review with speech and language therapist with consideration of gastrostomy as needed for nutritional support

Imaging and diagnostic procedures including EEG, ECG, and brain MRI as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

RRM2B-related multiple mtDNA deletions with external ophthalmoplegia

Care will be directed by clinical findings. The following general evaluations are recommended:

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain and BMI, biannually

Imaging and diagnostic procedures to include EEG, ECG, and MRI brain- as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

ECG advised biannually (KSS phenotype)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Valproic acid (commonly used for seizures and known to interfere with beta-oxidation) because it is considered to be a mitochondrial toxin with a theoretic risk of precipitating/exacerbating organ failure

Metformin (used to treat diabetes mellitus) because of the theoretic risk of exacerbating metabolic acidosis

Prolonged use of linezolid (an antibiotic used to treat S. aureus infections) because of the reported association with optic and peripheral neuropathy and lactic acidosis due to mitochondrial toxicity

Zidovudine (an antiretroviral nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase used to treat HIV) because of the reported risk of inducing mitochondrial disease by interfering with mtDNA replication

Dehydration and prolonged fasting, which can lead to clinical deterioration

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives so that those who harbor the pathogenic variant(s) can (1) undergo timely routine surveillance for disease complications and (2) avoid possible precipitating factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment and plotting of growth curves. For European children, see Wollmann et al [1995]; for North American children, see the MAGIC Foundation.

Physical examination for evaluation of possible limb-size asymmetry and oral and craniofacial abnormalities

For most children with RSS, evaluation for growth hormone deficiency by standard methods

For children with diaphoresis, evaluation for hypoglycemia

For children suspected of having gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), evaluation for esophagitis including barium swallow studies, pH probe, and endoscopy

Screening assessment of neurocognitive development, language, and muscle tone

Treatment of Manifestations

Growth. Children with any condition associated with body differences and/or short stature are often sensitive about body image. These factors can play a significant role in self-image, peer relationships, and socialization. Thus, psychological counseling is frequently helpful for children with RSS.

Human growth hormone therapy in children with intrauterine growth retardation of all causes has significantly improved growth and final height [Albanese & Stanhope 1997, Azcona et al 1998, Czernichow & Fjellestad-Paulsen 1998, Saenger 2002]. Specifically, children with RSS have benefited from growth hormone supplementation even in the absence of growth hormone deficiency [Albanese & Stanhope 1997], including significant growth acceleration and improved final height [Azcona et al 1998] and continued normal growth rate after the discontinuation of growth hormone therapy [Azcona & Stanhope 1999].

Such treatment is best undertaken in a center with experience in managing growth disorders.

One study demonstrated significant increase in height in children with RSS treated with growth hormone, but without a change in body or limb asymmetry [Rizzo et al 2001].

Children with RSS with UPD7 had more gain in height with growth hormone therapy compared to children with 11p15.5 epimutations possibly because children with 11p15.5 methylation abnormalities showed elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor II (product of IGF2); children with RSS with UPD7 had response characteristics similar to other children who were small for gestational age [Binder et al 2008].

A later study looking at both IGF1 and IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) levels revealed no correlation between changes in the levels of these proteins and growth velocity after treatment with growth hormone; however, the diagnosis of RSS was based solely on clinical presentation and no data regarding testing for 11p15 methylation defects or maternal UPD7 were reported [Beserra et al 2010].

In a recent long term outcome study of 26 children with RSS treated with growth hormone for a median period of 9.8 years, a significant response was noted with median height of -2.7 SD at the beginning of therapy and a median height of -1.3 SD at the conclusion of therapy [Toumba et al 2010].

Unfortunately it is difficult to interpret the results of many studies of children with RSS who have received growth hormone, given the known genetic heterogeneity of the disorder and lack of etiologic data included in these studies. Also, it will be important to look at the long-term effects of growth hormone therapy on children with RSS, especially with respect to influence on final adult height and any possible changes in orthopedic management for those individuals with limb-length asymmetry.

Growth hormone deficiency. Treatment with human growth hormone is necessary in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency.

Skeletal abnormalities. Lower-limb length discrepancy exceeding 3 cm can lead to compensatory scoliosis and thus requires intervention. Initial treatment is use of a shoe lift. In older children, distraction osteogenesis or epiphysiodesis can be considered.

Neurodevelopment

For infants with hypotonia, referral to an early-intervention program and physical therapist

For children with evidence of delay, referral for early intervention and speech and language therapy

For school-age children, working with the school system to address learning disabilities through appropriate neuropsychological testing and an individualized educational plan

Hypoglycemia should be treated in a standard manner with dietary supplementation, frequent feedings, and use of complex carbohydrates.

Gastrointestinal disorders should be aggressively managed.

Treatment of gastroesophageal reflux initially with positioning and thickened feeds is recommended along with use of acid blocking medications (preferably proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole or patoprazole) as needed. Surgical management with fundoplication may be necessary in more severe cases or in instances in which conservative measures are unsuccessful.

Feeding aversion can be addressed with therapy by a speech pathologist and/or occupational therapist.

Craniofacial anomalies. For those children with severe micrognathia or cleft palate, management by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team is recommended. Orthognathic surgery is rarely required.

Dental hygiene and dental crowding can be appropriately managed in a routine manner by pediatric dentists and orthodontists.

Genitourinary abnormalities

Referral of males with cryptorchidism to a urologist; surgery as required

Referral of males with micropenis to an endocrinologist; androgenic hormone therapy as indicated

Neoplasia. The risk for malignancies in individuals with RSS is low. Although body asymmetry may be present, it appears not to be hemihypertrophy, as seen in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome; therefore, routine serial abdominal and renal sonograms are not indicated for children with RSS.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth with special attention to growth velocity

In infancy and in older children with diaphoresis or poor appetite, monitoring of blood glucose concentration for hypoglycemia

At each well-child visit in early childhood, examination and measurement of limb-length discrepancy

Close monitoring of speech and language development

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS), the following evaluations are suggested [Wiley et al 2003]:

Measurement of growth and plotting of parameters on published syndrome-specific growth charts

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation including assessment of gross and fine motor skills, speech/language, cognitive abilities, and vocational skills

Ophthalmologic examination

Hearing evaluation using auditory brain stem evoked response testing (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for details of evaluation)

Dental and orthodontic evaluations

Echocardiogram or evaluation by cardiologist for structural heart defects

Assessment for gastroesophageal reflux as warranted

Assessment for constipation

Renal ultrasound examination

Assessment for presence of cryptorchidism in males

Orthopedic assessment of thumbs and halluces, joints and spine

Evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea if indicated by snoring, particular sleeping posture, wakefulness at night, and excessive sleepiness during the daytime.

Ultrasound of the spinal canal in the neonatal period to screen for tethered cord; MRI of the spinal canal should be performed in older children, if symptomatic.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Early intervention programs, special education, and vocational training to address developmental disabilities

Standard treatment for refractive errors, strabismus, glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye abnormalities if identified

Standard treatment for hearing loss if identified

Standard treatment for cardiac defects if identified

Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux and constipation

Standard treatment for cryptorchidism if identified

Surgical repair of significantly angulated thumbs or duplicated halluces

Appropriate treatment for sleep apnea if identified

Behavior management strategies including referral to a behavioral specialist/psychologist and consideration of medication if needed

Referral of the family to support groups and other resources

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with RSTS can be difficult to intubate because of the easy collapsibility of the laryngeal wall. An anesthesiologist comfortable with managing complex pediatric airway problems should therefore administer general anesthesia when needed. Because of these problems, individuals with RSTS may require earlier intubation and later extubation than other individuals undergoing similar procedures.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual follow-up evaluation for ophthalmologic abnormalities

Yearly audiologic screens; more frequent evaluation if a history of multiple episodes of otitis media exists

Monitoring as per routine for cardiac or renal anomalies

Regular dental and orthodontic follow up

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline skeletal radiographic examination by age five years to identify underlying skeletal abnormalities

Baseline complete blood count with differential

Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for cataracts

Dermatologic evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Dermatologic. Pulsed dye laser has been used for cosmetic management of the telangiectatic component of the rash [Potozkin & Geronemus 1991].

Hematologic. Individuals with clinical evidence of anemia or cytopenias should be evaluated by CBC and bone marrow biopsy if clinically indicated.

Cataract. Visually significant cataracts require surgical removal.

Cancer. Affected individuals who develop cancer should be treated according to standard chemotherapy and/or radiation regimens. Doses should be modified only if the individual experiences significantly increased toxicities.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure and use of sunscreens with both UVA and UVB protection are recommended to prevent skin cancer. Calcium and vitamin D supplements may also be warranted in individuals with osteopenia or a history of fractures.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Annual evaluation by a physician familiar with RTS

Monitoring of growth

For individuals without cataracts, yearly eye examinations for screening purposes

Prompt skeletal radiographic examination when clinical suspicion of osteosarcoma is present (including bone pain, swelling, or an enlarging lesion on a limb) due to the high risk for this potentially lethal malignancy, particularly for those individuals with pathogenic deleterious variants in RECQL4

Frequent monitoring for any evidence of malignancy in affected family members of individuals with RTS and osteosarcoma (because of reports of more than one sib with RTS also developing osteosarcoma)

Close monitoring of the skin for lesions with unusual color or texture, as individuals with RTS are at increased risk for skin cancers

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposure to heat or sunlight may exacerbate the rash in some individuals.

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure decreases the risk for skin cancer.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Given the theoretic potential for tumorigenesis, growth hormone (GH) therapy is not recommended for individuals who have normal GH levels. For individuals with documented GH deficiency, routine treatment with growth hormone is appropriate.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LQTS, the main focus in the management of individuals with LQTS is to identify the subset of individuals at high risk for cardiac events. For this risk stratification the following evaluations are recommended:

ECG evaluation. Individuals with a QTc interval >500 ms are at higher risk for an event; individuals with QTc interval >600 ms are at extremely high risk [Priori et al 2003, Goldenberg et al 2008] Overt T-wave alternans, especially when present despite proper beta-blocker therapy, is also associated with a higher risk of cardiac events [Priori et al 2013]. Individuals with a pathogenic variant who have a normal QTc interval are at low risk [Priori et al 2013].

Medical history. Individuals with syncope or cardiac arrest in the first year of life [Schwartz et al 2009, Spazzolini et al 2009] or younger than age seven years [Priori et al 2004] are at higher risk. These individuals may not be fully protected by pharmacologic treatment. Individuals with arrhythmic events while on proper pharmacologic treatment are also at higher risk [Priori et al 2013]. Asymptomatic individuals with pathogenic variants or individuals with prolonged QT intervals who have been asymptomatic at a young age (age <40 years) are at low risk for events later in life, although females remain at risk after age 40 years [Locati et al 1998].

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

All symptomatic persons should be treated (see Priori et al [2013]). Complete cessation of symptoms is the goal. Management is focused on the prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death through use of the following:

Beta blockers are the mainstay of therapy for LQTS, including asymptomatic individuals with prolonged QT intervals and individuals who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Some individuals have symptoms despite the use of beta blockers [Moss et al 2000]. However, a majority of cardiac events that occur in individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype “on beta-blockers” are not caused by failure of the medication, but in fact by failure to take the medication (non-compliance) and/or the administration of QT-prolonging drugs [Vincent et al 2009]. It is suspected that the same holds true for individuals with LQTS type 2, but that has not been systematically studied. It is therefore important that:

Inadequate beta blocker dosing is prevented by regular adjustments in growing children with evaluation of the efficacy of dose by assessment of the exercise ECG or ambulatory ECG;

Beta blockers are taken daily, and strategies are in place in case of missed doses;

QT-prolonging drugs (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) are not administered to persons with LQTS without careful consideration of risk versus benefit by the individual(s) and physician(s).

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) are recommended in individuals with LQTS resuscitated from a cardiac arrest, although children with a LQTS type 1 phenotype with an arrest while not receiving beta blockers can be treated with beta blockers or with left cardiac sympathetic denervation [Alexander et al 2004, Vincent et al 2009, Jons et al 2010]. ICDs can be useful for those individuals with beta-blocker-resistant symptoms or a contraindication for beta blocker therapy (severe asthma) [Zareba et al 2003, Priori et al 2013].

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) is recommended for high-risk patients with LQTS in whom ICD therapy is refused or contraindicated and/or in whom beta blockers are either not effective, not tolerated, not accepted, or contraindicated [Schwartz et al 2004, Priori et al 2013]. LCSD can be useful in individuals who experience events while on therapy with beta blockers or ICD [Priori et al 2013].

Sodium channel blockers can be useful as additional pharmacological therapy for individuals with a LQTS type 3 phenotype with a QTc interval >500 ms in whom this additional compound is shown to shorten the QTc interval by >40 ms [Priori et al 2013].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Beta blockers. Beta blockers are clinically indicated in all asymptomatic individuals, including those who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Males who have a pathogenic variant and who have been asymptomatic before 40 years are at low risk of cardiac events. In these individuals the necessity of beta-blockers can be discussed [Locati et al 1998].

ICD. In general, ICD implantation is not indicated for asymptomatic individuals with LQTS who have not been tried on beta blocker therapy. Prophylactic ICD therapy can be considered for asymptomatic individuals suspected to be at very high risk, such as asymptomatic individuals with two or more pathogenic variants on molecular testing [Priori et al 2013]. LQTS-related sudden death in a close relative is not an indication for an ICD in surviving relatives [Kaufman et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Examine the past medical history for asthma, orthostatic hypotension, depression, and diabetes mellitus because these disorders may be exacerbated by treatment with beta blockers.

Although the incidence of arrhythmias during elective interventions such as surgery, endoscopies, childbirth, or dental work is low, it is prudent to monitor the ECG during such interventions and to alert the appropriate medical personnel in case intervention is needed.

Surveillance

Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects; doses should be altered as needed. Dose adjustment including efficacy testing is especially important in growing children.

Individuals with an ICD implanted should have regular, periodic evaluations of ICDs for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes should be avoided for all individuals with LQTS. See CredibleMeds® (free registration required) for a complete and updated list. Epinephrine given as part of local anesthetics can trigger arrhythmias and is best avoided.

Since electrolyte imbalances may also lengthen the QTc interval, identification and correction of electrolyte abnormalities is important. These imbalances can occur as a result of diarrhea, vomiting, metabolic conditions, and imbalanced diets for weight loss.

Lifestyle modifications are advised based on genotype. For individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype avoidance of strenuous exercise – especially swimming without supervision – is advised. In individuals with LQTS type 2 phenotype reduction in exposure to loud noises such as alarm clocks and phone ringing is advised. In individuals at high risk for cardiac events or with exercise-induced symptoms competitive sport should be avoided [Priori et al 2013]. For some individuals participation in competitive sports may be safe. It is therefore recommended that all individuals with LQTS who wish to engage in competitive sports have their risk evaluated by a clinical expert [Johnson & Ackerman 2012, Priori et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Presymptomatic diagnosis of at-risk relatives followed by treatment is necessary to prevent syncope and sudden death in those individuals who have inherited the pathogenic variant and/or have ECG findings consistent with LQTS. At-risk family members should be alerted to their risk and the need to be evaluated.

Relatives at high potential risk for LQTS who require further testing include members of a family:

That has documented LQTS;

In which evaluation for LQTS has not been performed.

Presymptomatic diagnosis for at-risk asymptomatic family members can be performed by one

or both of the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known

If the pathogenic variant is not known or if genetic testing is not possible, QTc analysis on resting and in case of normal QTc also QTc analysis on exercise ECGsNote: The diagnostic accuracy by QTc analysis is considerably improved by evaluation of the exercise ECG QTc intervals, in addition to the resting ECG, using the QTc values listed in Table 1.

Relatives at low potential risk who do not require further testing include members of a family in which the connecting ancestor:

Has a low probability of LQTS based on QTc interval (see Table 1) and has not experienced LQTS-type events; or

Has a normal QTc interval and no evidence of a pathogenic variant in one of the genes known to cause LQTS; or

Does not have the family-specific pathogenic variant, if known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The post-partum period is associated with increased risk for a cardiac event, especially in individuals with the LQTS type 2 phenotype. Beta blocker treatment was associated with a reduction of events in this nine-month time period after delivery [Seth et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene-specific therapies (mostly for LQTS type 3 phenotype) have been investigated, especially in individuals with cardiac events despite beta blocker, ICD, or LCSD therapy. Examples are mexiletine [Schwartz et al 1995], flecainide [Moss et al 2005], and ranolazine [Moss et al 2008]. Follow-up experience with these drugs is still limited.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Most affected individuals live normal lifestyles. Education of adult individuals and the parents of affected children, especially about beta blocker compliance, is an important aspect of management.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Salih myopathy, the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Assessment of strength and joint mobility by physical and occupational therapists

Assessment of cardiac function with particular attention to possible cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, which are often fatal complications

Comprehensive respiratory evaluation including assessment of respiratory rate and pulmonary function

Spinal x-rays to evaluate for presence of scoliosis in the second decade

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment involves prompt management of disease manifestations using a multidisciplinary approach that includes specialists in pediatric neurology, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, orthopedics, cardiology, and pulmonology.

Stretching exercises and physical therapy help prevent contractures and promote mobility. Assistive mechanical devices including orthotics, canes, and walkers can be used as needed.

Attention to education by providing school technical aid is important since cognition is normal. Stimulation and emotional support can improve school performance and the sense of social involvement.

Parents and/or caregivers should be made aware of the symptoms of heart failure, arrhythmia (including presyncope and syncope), and thromboembolic disease, and of the need to urgently seek medical care when any of these symptoms appear.

Training of caregivers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be suggested once the symptoms of cardiomyopathy start.

Adequate posture should be maintained when lying prone and sitting. Garchois brace (made of plexidur, a rigid but light and heat-deformable material) is used to reduce the degree of deformity and slow the progression of scoliosis [Wang et al 2010].

Cardiac transplantation should be considered for progressive dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure refractory to medical therapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Annual influenza vaccine and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Lower respiratory tract infections should be treated aggressively when they occur.

Surveillance

Monitor as follows:

Every six months: cardiac function (by ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording and echocardiography) starting at age five years.

Yearly: respiratory function, using pulmonary function testing or spirometry.

As needed: orthopedic complications (foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity) by clinical examination and x-rays as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Ibuprofen (Brufen®):

Give with care in those with evidence of cardiomyopathy. A patient who had reduced LVEF developed edema following its administration [Subahi and Salih, unpublished observation]

Avoid in those with congestive heart failure.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs by clinical examination and/or molecular genetic testing is important in order to monitor motor development and cardiac function so that treatment can be instituted early.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a fetus is diagnosed prenatally to have Salih myopathy, special considerations are needed at and following delivery since muscle weakness may manifest during the neonatal period.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SAMD9L-related ataxia-pancytopenia (ATXPC) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Medical history and physical examination including neurologic examination

Brain MRI examination and referral to a neurologist

Complete blood count with differential

Referral to a hematologist/oncologist; bone marrow examination including chromosome 7-targeted FISH if hematologic abnormalities are more than minimal

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hematologic manifestations

Management of hematologic impairment is based on the severity of cytopenias and consists of red cell or platelet transfusions as needed.

Evaluate and treat for unrelated causes of anemia such as iron and vitamin deficiencies.

Marrow transplantation for myelodysplasia was successful in two individuals to date.

Note: There are no data to support use of erythropoietin or granulocyte-stimulating factor in SAMD9L-related ATXPC syndrome; these growth factors may increase the risk for myelodysplasia and myeloid leukemia.

Neurologic manifestations. Management of ataxia is supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

Individuals should continue to be active and use canes and walkers to prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Complete blood count annually. If cytopenias are identified these should be monitored more frequently.

Patient/family education to seek prompt clinical evaluation if any signs or symptoms suggestive of hematopoietic cytopenia develop (e.g., fatigue, pallor, unexpected bleeding, recurrent infections).

Annual evaluation of gait, coordination, and speech.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic agents are contraindicated if thrombocytopenia is present and should be used with caution given the fluctuating nature of the cytopenias.

Avoid consuming alcohol and medications that cause sedation, which can increase problems with gait and coordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the SAMD9L pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from hematologic surveillance and prompt initiation of treatment for severe cytopenias and myelodysplasia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no information of the effect of pregnancy on manifestations of SAMD9L-related ATXPC syndrome. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia may increase the risk of pregnancy complications.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA), the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination to evaluate the grade of ataxia and neuropathy

Audiologic examination to evaluate the grade of hearing deficit and need for hearing aids

Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate the grade of ophthalmoparesis and optic atrophy

Neurophysiologic examinations

ENMG (electroneuromyography)

SEP (somatosensory evoked potentials). Note: Changes in SEP occur early in the disease course and correlate with sensory system involvement.

VEP (visual evoked potentials)

Neuroimaging. Brain MRI

Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic:

Deafness. Hearing aids, speech therapy, and sign language to support social adaptation and prevent educational problems in children with IOSCA. Computers may be a valuable aid in support of communication and learning.

Sensory axonal neuropathy. Physiotherapy and orthoses to prevent foot and spine deformity; supportive shoes, splints, and braces; orthopedic surgery for foot deformities (pes cavus) and spine deformities (scoliosis); foot care to treat calluses and ulcerations

Ataxia. A walker, wheelchair, physiotherapy, occupational therapy

Epilepsy. Conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (phenytoin and phenobarbital) are ineffective in most patients [Lönnqvist et al 2009].

Some patients have benefited from lamotrigine or levetiracetam.

Benzodiazepines, especially midazolam-infusion, when started early in status epilepticus, were occasionally effective.

Oxcarbazepine has some effect, but hyponatremia is a troublesome side effect.

Psychiatric symptoms. Antipsychotics (neurolepts, risperidone, olanzpine) to prevent psychotic behavior and antidepressants (SSRIs) for severe depression

Surveillance

Small children

Neurologic, audiologic, and ophthalmologic evaluation every six to 12 months

Neurophysiologic studies when clinically indicated

Brain MRI every three to five years

Adolescents and adults

Neurologic examination annually

Audiologic and ophthalmologic examinations every one to two years

EEG and brain MRI at least during status epilepticus

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproate is contraindicated in patients with IOSCA, as it is in other disorders that potentially affect mitochondrial function in liver. Valproate caused significant elevation of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALAT] 232 units/L [normal: 10-35 U/L] and gamma-GT [GGT] 160 U/L [normal: 5-50 U/L]) and icterus with elevated bilirubin levels (total: 224 µmol/L [normal: 5-25 µmol/L]; conjugated: 160 µmol/L [normal:1-8 µmol/L]) in one patient, and similar elevation of liver transaminases in another. When valproate was discontinued, icterus disappeared and the liver enzymes normalized.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual with molecularly confirmed spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Neurologic examination

Video esophagram in those with dysphagia to determine the consistency of food that is least likely to trigger aspiration

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with SCA1 remains supportive, as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists. Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists, physical and occupational therapists, and other specialists as needed.

Studies have shown that intensive rehabilitation (or coordinative physiotherapy) improves motor function in a heterogeneous group of individuals with various types of cerebellar degeneration [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010, Miyai et al 2012]. Although these studies did not include individuals with SCA1, intensive coordinative training may be recommended for persons with SCA1 because of symptom improvement with limited adverse events. However, further studies that include individuals with SCA1 will need to be performed to determine the efficacy of such training.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Repeated aspiration or significant weight loss may point to the need for a feeding device in some.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Certain manifestations indirectly related to the disease such as spasticity, depression, and pain may require appropriate pharmacotherapy.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Surveillance

Neurologic evaluation every three to six months is appropriate

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to be neurotoxic such as those that cause neuropathy (e.g., isoniazid, large-dose vitamin B6) or those associated with central nervous system toxicity (e.g., diphenylhydantoin). Circumstances that could lead to physical harm, such as operating machinery or climbing to great heights, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Lithium [Watase et al 2007] and insulin-like growth factor 1 [Vig et al 2006] have improved neurologic function in a mouse model of SCA1; no human trials with insulin-like growth factor 1 have been done to date. Metabolomics data using the mouse model of SCA1 showed that lithium restores purine metabolism in the cerebellum [Perroud et al 2013]. A human Phase I trial of oral lithium has been completed as an intramural NIH study; results have not been published (NCT00683943). A similar trial for SCA2 did not lead to any significant difference in the SARA score, but was well tolerated and did lead to a reduction in the Beckman depression inventory scale (BDI-II).

Riluzole has been shown to provide some symptomatic relief of ataxia in a mixed group of individuals including persons with SCA1 [Ristori et al 2010, Romano et al 2015]; however, further investigation is needed, particularly longer-term disease-specific trials. An eight-week double-blind randomized placebo control trial of riluzole prodrug BHV4157 is ongoing (NCT02960893).

Chronic treatment with 3,4-diaminopyridine had beneficial effects in a mouse model of SCA1 [Hourez et al 2011]; Giordano et al [2013] subsequently treated 16 individuals with chronic cerebellar ataxia (including 3 with SCA1) with 4-aminopyridine (4-AP). This open-label case series suggested modest short-term improvement in ataxia. Similarly, an open-label case series of 13 persons with cerebellar ataxia, including one with SCA1, who were treated with acetyl-DL-leucine (5 g/day) for one week suggested modest improvement of ataxia without side effects [Strupp et al 2013]. Similar encouraging results have also been observed in a follow-up four-week case series by the same group [Schniepp et al 2016]. However, randomized placebo-controlled studies will be needed to assess the efficacy of such treatment. The protocols for these studies are now being formulated [Feil et al 2017].

Cvetanovic et al [2011] reported that mutated Atxn1 repressed transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) in mice with SCA1; the mice showed a decrease in cerebellar microvessel density and length. Overexpression or pharmacologic infusion of Vegfa resulted in phenotypic improvement and decreased cerebellar pathology.

Intrathecal injection of 3,000 mesenchymal stem cells in SCA1 transgenic mice mitigated the cerebellar neuronal disorganization, atrophy of dendrites, and motor function [Matsuura et al 2014, Nakamura et al 2015]. Investigators at the General Hospital of Chinese Armed Police Forces is recruiting study subjects with hereditary cerebellar ataxia for clinical trials using umbilical stem cell therapy (NCT01489267).

SCA1 mice (Atxn1 with 154Gln residues) showed no improvements in motor function on the accelerating rotor-rod test after acute doses of riluzole, amantadine, zolpidem, and buspirone over two days [Nag et al 2013].

Downregulation of several molecules of the RAS-MAPK-MSK1 pathway decreases ataxin1 levels and suppresses neurodegeneration in Drosophila and murine models of SCA1. Pharmacologic inhibitors of this pathway also decrease ataxin1 levels, suggesting that these components represent therapeutic targets in SCA1 [Park et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10), the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI. The extent of cerebellar atrophy on serial MRI studies may be useful for documenting the progression of the disease.

EEG. EEG is of particular importance, as many individuals with SCA10 develop epilepsy and epilepsy-related deaths have been recognized [Grewal et al 2002].

Nerve conduction tests. Nerve conduction studies are needed only when affected individuals have clinical evidence of polyneuropathy.

Neuropsychological tests. Formal neuropsychological tests are appropriate for individuals with problems in learning and social adaptation.

Speech pathology evaluation may be needed if dysarthria is atypical or severe enough to cause communication problems. For individuals with frequent choking or severe dysphagia, speech pathology evaluation may be important in assessing aspiration risks.

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Control of seizures is the most important management issue, as uncontrolled seizures may lead to potentially fatal status epilepticus. Conventional anticonvulsants such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid achieve reasonable control, although occasional breakthrough seizures may occur.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Severe dysphagia may require percutaneous placement of a gastric tube for prevention of aspiration and maintenance of nutritional intake.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Although not specifically studied in SCA10, intensive coordinative training has shown sustainable improvements in motor performance in individuals with degenerative ataxias [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010].

Canes and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No therapy is known to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

No drugs have been proven to provide symptomatic relief of ataxia; however, minor tranquilizers may show some benefits in motor coordination in those persons who experience anxiety.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor that curtails symptoms has been documented; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly for those with poor nutritional status.

Falls and aspiration are two major threats to individuals with ataxia, including those with SCA10. Walking aids and proactive plans for feeding strategies are useful.

Surveillance

Follow-up outpatient clinical evaluation every four to six months is indicated to identify early signs of potential complications and to adjust anticonvulsant treatments.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and drugs known to adversely affect cerebellar functions should be avoided.

Falls should be avoided because resulting injuries may greatly compromise motor function and the ability to perform activities of daily living.

Any activities that are potentially dangerous to individuals with ataxia or epilepsy should be avoided, depending on the severity of the manifestations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

At-risk individuals should be aware of the possibility of inducing ataxia during pregnancy or puerperium [Teive et al 2011a].

Epilepsy should be managed during pregnancy according to the American Academy of Neurology Practice Parameter Update: Management issues for women with epilepsy (an evidence-based review).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Although taltirelin hydrate is widely used for symptomatic treatment of ataxia in Japan, it has never been used for individuals with SCA10.

Tremor-controlling drugs, such as beta blockers and primidone, are ineffective for cerebellar tremors.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history

General and neurologic examination

Head MRI

Nerve conduction studies

Neuropsychological tests for individuals with problems in learning and social adaptation

Medical genetics or neurogenetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Speech and language therapy to address dysarthria and swallowing problems and to teach patients strategies to improve their articulation and to avoid aspiration

Occupational therapy, including home adaptations

Physiotherapy and assessment for cane and wheelchair

Ankle-foot orthotics (AFOs) for those with neuropathy

Ophthalmology consultation is often helpful for individuals with nystagmus as prism glasses can help double vision

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Weight control can help to facilitate ambulation.

Surveillance

Annual evaluation by a neurologist is indicated to monitor the ataxia and to identify any new findings that may occur over time.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 12, the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history

Tremor rating and gait ataxia assessment

Evaluation for peripheral neuropathy and autonomic dysfunction

Radiologic investigation to evaluate for associated brain structural damage which can influence the disease course

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic treatment including the following may be of great value:

Pharmacologic agents, including beta-blockers, clonazepam and phenobarbital derivatives, and benzodiazepines to decrease tremor amplitude. Modest success has been observed in some affected individuals.

Supplements of antioxidants, which may have some beneficial effects. However, their effect on disease outcome has not been validated through clinical trials.

Treatment of psychiatric syndromes as needed

Physical therapy to help maintain strength, flexibility, and independent mobility

Technical assistance with writing and other fine-motor tasks

Prevention of Secondary Complications

A safe home environment can minimize the risk of injury from falls.

Surveillance

Annual reevaluation may be helpful for disability assessment and identification of comorbidities.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Recommended:

Education of affected individuals and their families

Neuroimaging studies as appropriate to exclude the presence of other lesions, particularly after fallsTo establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 13 (SCA13), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history

Neurologic examination

EEG

Formal neuropsychological tests for individuals with problems in learning and social adaptation

Speech pathology evaluation if dysarthria is atypical or severe enough to cause communication problems. For individuals with frequent choking or severe dysphagia, speech pathology evaluation may be important in assessing aspiration risks.

Treatment of Manifestations

Epileptic seizures can be improved by treatment with anticonvulsive medications.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Note: Tremor-controlling drugs are not effective for cerebellar tremors.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation.

Surveillance

Evaluation by a neurologist is indicated annually, or more often in the event of an acute exacerbation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and sedating drugs can exacerbate ataxia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Weight gain during pregnancy can further impair gait ataxia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Axial myoclonus may be improved by clonazepam or valproic acid [Yamashita et al 2000].

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should continue to be active.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

Gait, coordination, and speech should be evaluated annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and sedation may make gait and coordination worse.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 (SCA15), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical evaluation

MRI to determine the pattern and extent of cerebellar atrophy and confirm the absence of extracerebellar changes

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Education for affected individuals and their families is the cornerstone of management.

Physical and occupational therapy, as used for ataxic syndromes of any etiology, may be employed.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

To date significant dysphagia has not been an issue for individuals with SCA15; however, if significant dysphagia were to develop, a speech pathologist expert in the management of neurogenic dysphagia should be asked to help guide management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Later, risk of falls can be reduced via appropriate gait aids and home modifications; if falls are frequent, a personal alarm system may be required.

To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present.

Surveillance

Follow up by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists every two or three years is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Because individuals with ataxic syndromes in general have abnormal sensitivity to the motor effects of alcohol, it is reasonable to limit alcohol intake to lessen the risk of falls.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Treatment of symptomatic tremor has not been reported in SCA15. At least in the Australian pedigrees, tremor did not cause major functional disability.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuropsychological testing to evaluate for dementia and/or psychiatric disturbance

Brain MRI to evaluate areas and degree of atrophy

Neurology consultation, if not completed prior to initial diagnosis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications

Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)

Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia

Treatment of dystonia with local injections of botulinum toxin

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The side effects of psychotropic medications and AEDs (e.g., depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dsykinesia) can be major secondary complications in persons with SCA17. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms of the disease; such individuals may benefit from total or intermittent discontinuation of the treatment or reduction in dose.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing rapidly, as may happen in the advanced stages [Toyoshima et al 2004].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties, such as ethanol or certain medications, may markedly increase incoordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected women may be on medications (e.g., antiepileptics) to control the symptoms of SCA17. Because some medications can have adverse effects on the developing fetus, a thorough discussion of the medical benefits vs. risks to the fetus of such medications before pregnancy (or, in the case of an unplanned pregnancy, immediately after pregnancy is determined) is appropriate.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Baseline assessment of cognition

Neuroimaging

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Improvement of severe tremor with thalamic stimulation has been reported in one individual [Pirker et al 2003]. Another individual showed improvement with stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus [Freund et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be examined at least annually by a physician experienced in movement disorders and ataxia.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and medications known to affect cerebellar function should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 20 (SCA20), the following evaluations are recommended:

Careful clinical and neurologic evaluation

Speech assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria or dysphonia.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, videofluoroscopic swallow evaluation can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease.

Later, prevention of falls via appropriate gait aids and home modifications, and (if falls are frequent) a personal alarm system may be required. To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Periodic speech assessment if dysphagia becomes a problem

Routine follow up with a neurologist about every two years or as needed

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to cause nerve damage (e.g., isoniazid).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.

Education for affected individuals and their families is the cornerstone of management.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 28 (SCA28) the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination (including scales to evaluate the severity of cerebellar ataxia and to allow subjective follow up)

Cerebral MRINote: MRI is part of the routine evaluation of persons with ataxia; however, in SCA28 no association between the extent of cerebellar atrophy and disease severity or progression has been proven.

Speech assessment

Examination by an ophthalmologist

Evaluation of cognitive abilities

Treatment of Manifestations

At present, only symptomatic treatments are available. These include the following:

Crutches (less often canes) and walkers

Home adaptations including grab bars for the bathtub or shower chairs and raised toilet seats as needed

Speech/language therapy for dysarthria and swallowing difficulties

Physical therapy to ameliorate coordination difficulties, especially with tasks such as eating, dressing, walking, and bathing

Surgical intervention as needed for severe ptosis

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Psychological support helps affected individuals cope with the consequences of the disease.

Weight control can facilitate ambulation.

To avoid complications such as aspiration pneumonia, thickened feeds or gastrostomy should be considered.

Surveillance

Annual assessment of the cerebellar ataxia using SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia), CCFS (Composite Cerebellar Functional Severity Score), or similar scales should be performe to evaluate stability or progression of the disease.

Monitoring of speech and swallowing difficulties is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol consumption and sedatives such as benzodiazepines may exacerbate gait ataxia and coordination difficulties.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), the following evaluations are recommended if specific symptoms are present:

MRI of the brain and spinal cord if there are cognitive problems or unusually severe ataxia, motor, or sensory findings

Speech and swallowing assessment if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present

Gait assessment

EMG/NCV if peripheral symptoms are present to assess the degree of involvement of the peripheral nervous system

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with SCA3 remains supportive as no medication has been proven to slow the course of disease [D’Abreu et al 2010].

However, some symptoms may respond –in some cases dramatically – to certain drugs:

In particular, the extrapyramidal syndromes resembling parkinsonism may benefit from levodopa or dopamine agonist [Subramony et al 1993, Nandagopal & Moorthy 2004].

Symptoms of restless legs syndrome may respond to these agents.

Other manifestations, including spasticity, drooling, and sleep problems, also respond variably to appropriate agents such as lioresal, atropine-like drugs, and hypnotic agents.

Botulinum toxin has been used for dystonia and spasticity [Freeman & Wszolek 2005].

Daytime fatigue, a common problem in individuals with SCA3, may respond to psychostimulants used in narcolepsy such as modafinil.

Depression is common in individuals with SCA3 and should be treated with antidepressants [Cecchin et al 2007]. A trial of occupational therapy in SCA3 showed that depression scores improved as a consequence of therapy, underscoring the fact that non-pharmacologic measures may also improve affective disorder in SCA3 [Silva et al 2010].

Clik here (pdf) for a review of clinical trials of medications that have not shown a definite benefit for those with SCA3.

Non-pharmacologic therapy is important in SCA3:

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy slows the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falling, and motorized scooters later in disease can help maintain independence. Intensive coordinative training or a course of combined physical and occupational therapy focused on gait and incoordination can lead to symptomatic improvement [Ilg et al 2009, Miyai et al 2012]

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Regular physical activity is recommended to help retain gait and coordination in the setting of a progressive degenerative disease.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

General anesthesia may be problematic; experience with local anesthesia has been reported [Teo et al 2004].

Surveillance

Speech, swallowing, and gait function should be monitored annually or biannually to assess need for assistive devices.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36) the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination with appropriate scoring protocols:

SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia) is used to monitor disease severity.

The mini-mental state examination (MMSE) may be sufficient for the initial neurologic check-up; however, other cognitive tests more specifically directed to evaluate frontal-subcortical functions may be more appropriate as the disease progresses.

Examination by an otolaryngologist and audiologist, with emphasis in a comprehensive characterization of degree and anatomic level of hearing dysfunction.

Clinical genetics consultation and genetic counseling

Additional brain MRI is not necessary following the diagnosis of SCA36; however, it can be used for complementary follow-up evaluation.

Treatment of Manifestations

Specific treatment for SCA36 is currently not available. The therapeutic approach should be multidisciplinary and include the following:

Physical and occupational therapy to improve gait, balance, and fine motor coordination. Special attention should be paid to activities of daily life.

Regular physical exercise and weight control to reduce the effect of future balance and walking problems

Walking aids to facilitate ambulation and mobility. The use of a wheelchair is rare; however, it may be necessary in advanced disease stages. Living space may need to be adapted to help with accessibility.

Speech therapy and communication devices for those with dysarthria

Dietary assessment and feeding therapy programs to improve dysphagia and reduce the risk of aspiration

Depending on the severity of hearing loss and the relative impairment at different levels of the auditory tract, consideration of hearing aids on a case by case basis. The utility of cochlear implants in SCA36 is unknown; however, they have been proposed for central auditory impairment in other neurodegenerative ataxias [Frewin et al 2013]. Audiologic rehabilitation and speech therapy can help improve the ability to distinguish words and speech patterns from background sounds, while also taking into account the dysarthria in the therapy program.

Management of emotional and cognitive decline through cognitive therapy, treatment of depression, and psychological support.

Surveillance

The following routine monitoring is recommended after a diagnosis of SCA36 has been confirmed.

At least annual evaluation by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing

Annual or bi-annual evaluation by an otolaryngologist to detect or monitor hearing loss

Surveillance of speech and ambulation

In presymptomatic individuals who tested positive for the NOP56 expansion, it is appropriate to start surveillance of neurologic status and hearing by age 40-45 years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Alcohol, as well as drugs with possible side effects on cerebellar function (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, metronidazole, amiodarone, lithium), or the inner ear (e.g., salicilates)

Environmental noise at work and in everyday life (e.g., listening to loud music or videos directly through headphones)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and proper management of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical, neurologic, family and social history

Neurologic examination, including use of a rating scale to be used annually to assess progression

Brain MRI to gauge the extent of atrophy of cerebellum or other structures

Swallow evaluation for aspiration risk and counseling

PT evaluation to assess risk of falling, to determine whether assisted ambulation is necessary, and to advise regarding exercise.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is supportive.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Acetazolamide may eliminate episodes of ataxia, but does not delay or slow the overall progression.

Vestibular suppressants may reduce vertigo and/or osscilopsia.

Ophthalmology consultation is indicated for refractive or surgical management of diplopia.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy stems the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Physical therapy should be targeted to maximizing compensation and strength.

Canes, walking sticks, and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech disturbances occasionally occur and may be managed as in other settings. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Before dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify safest behaviors and the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Clonopin may be used for REM sleep behavior disorders (RBD) unless sedative effects increase imbalance in the morning. Note: RBD is rare in individuals with SCA6.

Continuous positive airway pressure may be used for sleep apnea.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist, with consultations as needed by physiatrist and physical and/or occupational therapist. Driving ability should be assessed by professionals periodically.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties such as ethanol or certain medications may produce marked increases in incoordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Although the disease rarely manifests during years of fertility, measures to support imbalance should by enhanced in symptomatic pregnant women.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gazulla & Tintore [2007] suggested gabapentin and pregabalin as potential therapeutic agents.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs are not usually effective in reducing cerebellar tremors.

Patients and their families should be informed about natural history, treatment, mode of inheritance, genetic risks to other family members, and consumer-oriented resources.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination including assessment of visual acuity, visual fields, and color vision

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of affected individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists.

Cerebellar ataxia. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals with spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Note: Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.

Retinal degeneration. Use of sunglasses and limitation of UV exposure are encouraged in order to limit damage to the retina.

Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks.

Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields.

Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with retinal degeneration. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

Routine follow up by an ophthalmologist is appropriate to measure visual acuity and visual fields and to help identify appropriate visual aids.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Walking during pregnancy may be more difficult than usual because of the ataxia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Scholefield et al [2009] have suggested allele-specific RNA interference as a therapeutic approach for SCA7.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 (SCA8), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic assessment, including neuroimaging (brain MRI or CT)

Assessment of the family pedigree and the disease course in other affected family members to aid in establishing a clinical prognosis

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Use of canes and walkers helps prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy, communication devices such as writing pads, and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain some degree of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, a video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination, individuals with SCA8 should try to remain active in order to maintain their muscular and cardiopulmonary conditioning.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Management of affected individuals remains supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should regularly visit a neurologist familiar with the ataxia syndromes to identify potential complications that develop over time and to manage clinical challenges associated with decreased mobility and exercise or difficulties with speech and swallowing.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol should be avoided because it can exacerbate problems with incoordination.

Affected individuals should get plenty of rest; symptoms are often aggravated by fatigue.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Carnitine levels. Total and free carnitine levels can be used to detect free carnitine deficiency; however, carnitine levels are usually normal in individuals with SCAD deficiency.

Urine organic acids; used to detect ethylmalonic acid (EMA) during acute illnesses

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Since most individuals with SCAD deficiency are asymptomatic, the need for treatment when well is unclear.

Given the paucity of research, especially long-term follow up studies, there are no generally accepted recommendations for dietary manipulation or the use of carnitine and/or riboflavin supplementation in SCAD deficiency.

However, since the risk for episodes of metabolic decompensation is increased above background risk, increased alertness for dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia during times of otherwise minor illness is prudent.

Basic management of acute metabolic acidosis should be similar to that for other fatty acid oxidation disorders: promoting anabolism and providing alternative sources of energy, both of which can be accomplished by administration of intravenous fluids with high dextrose concentrations with or without insulin. Usually 10% dextrose is given at a rate to provide 8-10 mg/kg/min of glucose. This approach is especially important if nausea and vomiting prevent the oral intake of fluids.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon but can be treated in the same fashion as acute metabolic acidosis.

Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is an essential cofactor for SCAD function. Thus, riboflavin (vitamin B2) supplementation has been suggested as a possible therapy for SCAD deficiency. In one study, a Dutch cohort of 16 individuals with confirmed SCAD deficiency and at-risk genotypes (biallelic for pathogenic variants; compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant; biallelic for susceptibility variants) were treated with riboflavin 10 mg/kg/day for a maximum dose of 150 mg divided three times daily [van Maldegem et al 2010b].

FAD levels were within normal range in all individuals throughout the study, though they were the lowest in the subgroups with genotypes that were either compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant or biallelic for a susceptibility variant.

Plasma levels of C4-C (butrylcarnitine) remained essentially unchanged throughout the study period across all subgroups.

Urine EMA levels decreased only in the subgroup of compound heterozygotes for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant.

Four of 16 demonstrated biochemical changes and exhibited clinical improvement per parent report. Of note, these four individuals had the lowest baseline FAD levels and maintained biochemical and clinical improvements even after riboflavin supplements were discontinued. No genotype-phenotype correlations for riboflavin responsiveness could be identified.

In another retrospective study, 15 individuals with SCAD deficiency ascertained over a period of seven years were challenged with fasting and fat-loading tests [van Maldegem et al 2010a]. Three genotypic subgroups were defined: biallelic for pathogenic variants, heterozygous for a pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant, and biallelic for susceptibility variants.

Free carnitine levels were normal in all individuals.

When fasted, three individuals developed ketotic hypoglycemia associated with decreased insulin levels and increased levels of growth hormone and cortisol. Lactate, pyruvate, and plasma ammonia concentrations were normal and plasma amino acid concentrations were consistent with normal gluconeogenesis and normal proximal urea cycle function [van Maldegem et al 2010a].

Note: In contrast, in disorders of medium- and long-chain fatty acid oxidation, fasting has been associated with a Reye-like illness with elevated plasma ammonia concentrations and severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia, suggesting impairment of gluconeogenesis and the proximal urea cycle.

Fat loading elicited a normal ketogenic response without a rise in urine EMA, confirming previous speculation that ketogenesis is likely normal in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].

In the two studies described above as well as previous case reports, hypoglycemia occurred in fewer than 20% of individuals with SCAD deficiency and normal ketogenesis was observed, ensuring cellular energy during some physiologic stressors.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive measures if necessary include avoidance of fasting longer than 12 hours (during childhood) and an age-appropriate heart-healthy diet. Age-appropriate shorter fasting periods would be required in infants and toddlers. No dietary fat restriction or specific supplements are recommended in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].

Surveillance

Longitudinal follow up of persons with SCAD deficiency may be helpful in order to more clearly define the natural history over the life span, including annual visits to a metabolic clinic to assess growth and development as well as nutritional status (protein and iron stores, concentration of RBC or plasma essential fatty acids, and plasma carnitine concentration).

For individuals with a history of metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and/or other acutely presenting symptoms, the need for closer follow up and surveillance should be determined by the physician.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Fasting longer than 12 hours especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness may predispose an affected individual to dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia. Shorter fasting periods (at least the normal age-appropriate recommendations) should be followed in infants and toddlers.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic and/or susceptibility variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic and/or susceptibility variants in the family are not known, biochemical genetic testing, such as plasma acylcarnitines and urinary organic acids, can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Mothers of children diagnosed with fatty acid oxidation disorders, including SCAD deficiency, should inform their obstetrician so that routine monitoring for pregnancy complications can be observed.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy (SCAN1), the following evaluations are recommended: complete neurologic examination (including assessment of muscle strength, reflexes, coordination, and sensation) is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

Prostheses, walking aids, and wheelchairs are helpful for mobility depending on disabilities.

Physical therapy may be helpful in maintaining a more active lifestyle.

Surveillance

Routine visits to a neurologist are appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposure to genotoxic anti-cancer drugs such as camptothecins (e.g., irinotecan and topotecan) and bleomycin is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [Hirano et al 2007].

Exposure to radiation is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [El-Khamisy et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SCN8A-related encephalopathy with epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination including:

EEG, which may provide an assessment of the overall degree of epileptic encephalopathy and seizure type

Brain MRI if not previously performed

Cognitive and behavioral neuropsychological evaluation

ECG to assess for cardiac arrhythmias, which have been identified in some patients with mutation of genes encoding other sodium channel subunits and may increase the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No published treatment guidelines exist.

Seizure control should be managed by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy management who is familiar with the pharmacotherapy for SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy and how it differs from treatment of similar disorders (e.g., Dravet syndrome; see SCN1A-Related Seizure Disorders and Differential Diagnosis).

Vigorous attempts to control seizures with drug polytherapy are warranted because children with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy are at risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) as well as prolonged acute seizures that may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010].

Sodium channel blockers. Several studies suggest that patients with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy respond favorably to the class of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that block sodium channels; these include phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, lacosamide, lamotrigine, rufinamide, and oxcarbazepine [Kong et al 2015b, Larsen et al 2015, Boerma et al 2016]. The effectiveness of sodium channel blockers is consistent with the activating effects of most SCN8A pathogenic variants [Wagnon & Meisler 2015, Wagnon et al 2015a, Wagnon et al 2015b]. Most patients are maintained on multiple medications with incomplete seizure control. One study of four patients reported a positive response to high doses of phenytoin [Boerma et al 2016].

Other AEDs

Clobazam, part of the standard of care for epilepsy in Europe, is now FDA-approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009].

Phenobarbital, while effective for seizure control, is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition.

Levetiracetam (Keppra®) has been reported by several families to be ineffective or occasionally associated with an increase in seizure frequency [M Hammer, unpublished data].

Other. When seizures are not responsive to conventional AEDs, the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective based on anecdotal information:

Corticosteroids

Immunoglobulins

Vagus nerve stimulator

Ketogenic diet

Cannabinoids

Sleep hygiene. As described for Dravet syndrome, sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN8A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected.

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Surveillance

Evaluate periodically for neurologic, cognitive, and/or behavioral deterioration.

Monitor with EEG and other modalities (e.g., video EEG telemetry or ambulatory EEG) when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Because of the increased risk of SUDEP, some families use oxygen monitoring during sleep.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Several families of affected individuals report worsening of seizures with levetiracetam (Keppra®) [M Hammer, unpublished data].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Determination of the degree of facial asymmetry to establish a baseline for future recognition of progressive facial asymmetry

Ophthalmologic examination for evaluation of ptosis, strabismus, amblyopia, lacrimal duct stenosis, and increased ICP [Woods et al 2009]

Screening for vertebral (particularly cervical) anomalies using routine radiographs (At age ~2 years, increased mineralization of the vertebrae allows for better interpretation of flexion/extension views of the cervical spine in evaluation for functional instability.)

Audiologic screening for hearing loss

Examination for cleft palate; if cleft palate is present, assessment of feeding ability and growth

Examination of upper and lower extremities for anomalies; if anomalies are present, x-ray and/or orthopedic evaluation for radial ray or hallux anomalies

Measurement of height and growth velocity; if short stature and/or reduced linear growth velocity is present, evaluation by an endocrinologist

Screening developmental assessment on any child demonstrating developmental delays and all children found to have a 7p microdeletion, if developmental delay is identified, comprehensive developmental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

As with all children with functional craniofacial malformations, management through an established craniofacial team is recommended.

While management protocols are likely to differ among craniofacial teams, it is generally accepted that individuals with SCS should undergo cranioplasty in the first year of life.

Cranioplasty involves extensive surgery to release fused sutures including repositioning and reconstruction of the malformed calvaria. It prevents the following:

Progressive facial asymmetry that can develop in individuals with unilateral or asymmetric coronal fusion

Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) that can develop in individuals with multiple sutural synostosis (bicoronal or other sutures)

Progressive hypertropia resulting from overaction of the ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle in cases of unilateral coronal synostosis [Weiss & Phillips 2006].

In some circumstances, midfacial surgery is necessary during childhood to address dental malocclusion, swallowing difficulties, or respiratory problems.

If cleft palate is present, it is treated as in other disorders, including surgical closure, assurance of adequate feeding and weight gain, and speech therapy. In most cases, cranioplasty precedes palatal repair.

Orthodontic treatment and/or orthognathic surgery may be required at or near the completion of facial growth.

If developmental delay is identified, early intervention and/or special education are appropriate.

Hearing loss, if present, should be treated in a standard manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in a standard fashion. Ptosis and strabismus should be corrected during early childhood to prevent amblyopia, either with patching or surgery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early referral to a craniofacial center with expertise in the management of SCS can minimize the secondary effects of craniosynostosis and other functional deficits. Referral to early intervention services if there are concerns for developmental delay is appropriate to improve outcome.

Tympanostomy tubes are appropriate for children with cleft palate or other causes of persistent middle ear effusion and/or otitis media.

Cervical spine radiograph to evaluate for segmentation defects is appropriate before initiating activities that put the spine at risk (e.g., gymnastics, football, soccer).

Surveillance

Because increased intracranial pressure (ICP) can develop even after successful treatment of craniosynostosis, brain imaging or ophthalmologic evaluation for chronic papilledema should be obtained periodically until age 15 years, or at any time symptoms (e.g., headache, reduced school performance) are identified.

Examination for progression of facial asymmetry particularly in individuals with untreated unilateral coronal synostosis should continue until the completion of facial growth (age ~16 years).

Audiologic screening throughout childhood is indicated.

Regular ophthalmologic evaluations (frequency determined on the basis of symptoms) should begin before age two years or earlier if strabismus or severe ptosis is identified.

If cleft palate is present, monitor for ear infections and hearing loss.

Screen for sleep-disordered breathing at all visits.

At least annual assessment of developmental status of preschool-aged children is appropriate. If findings suggest developmental delay, comprehensive developmental assessment and referral to early intervention is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual following the initial diagnosis of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), current consensus practice typically recommends the following evaluations to assess the status of the pancreas, liver, bone marrow, and skeleton [Dror et al 2011]; discussions to update recommendations are ongoing.

Assessment of growth: height, weight in relation to age

Assessment of nutritional status to determine if supplementation with pancreatic enzymes is necessary and/or effective:

Measurement of fat-soluble vitamins (vitamin A, 25-OH-vitamin D, and vitamin E) or their related metabolites

Measurement of prothrombin time (to detect vitamin K deficiency)

Assessment of serum concentration of the digestive enzyme cationic trypsinogen and, if sufficiency is observed, subsequent confirmation with a 72-hour fecal fat balance study (with discontinuation of enzyme supplementation for at least a 24-hour period)

Pancreatic imaging by ultrasound

Complete blood count with white cell differential and platelet count at three- to six-month intervals (or more often as clinically indicated)

Bone marrow examination with biopsy and cytogenetic studies at initial assessment

Skeletal survey with radiographs of at least the hips and lower limbs

Bone densitometry as clinically indicated

Assessment of serum aminotransferase levels

Assessment of developmental milestones (including pubertal development) with neuropsychological evaluation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary team including specialists from the following fields is recommended: hematology, gastroenterology, medical genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, immunology, dentistry, child development, psychology, and social work as needed [Dror & Freedman 2002, Rothbaum et al 2002, Durie & Rommens 2004, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a].

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be treated with the same oral pancreatic enzymes commonly used in treatment of cystic fibrosis; dose should be based on results of routine assessment of pancreatic function and nutritional status. Steatorrhea often resolves in early childhood, but pancreatic enzyme levels can remain low; routine monitoring (see Surveillance) is recommended.

Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) is recommended.

Blood and/or platelet transfusions may be considered for anemia and bi- or trilineage cytopenia.

Hematologic abnormalities. If recurrent infections are severe and absolute neutrophil counts are persistently 500/mm3 or less, treatment with prophylactic antibiotics and granulocyte-colony stimulation factor (G-CSF) can be considered.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) should be considered for treatment of severe pancytopenia, bone marrow transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome, or AML. Chemotherapy can be utilized as a bridge to HSCT in individuals with SDS and AML; however, sustained complete remission is problematic and prompt continuation to HSCT remains imperative. Although earlier reports indicate that survival is fair, cautious myeloablation and newer reduced intensity regimens have demonstrated improved outcomes in small cohorts [Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007, Bhatla et al 2008].

Note: Bone marrow abnormalities are not treated unless severe aplasia, myelodysplastic changes, or leukemic transformation are present.

Skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal manifestations of SDS may range from clinically asymptomatic to severe, and can evolve or progress over time. Severe manifestations such as asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy due to rib cage restriction will require subspecialty care including pediatric pulmonary and orthopedic specialists. Other rib and joint abnormalities may require surgical intervention if severe and consultation with an orthopedic surgeon familiar with SDS for those with skeletal dysplasia may be beneficial.

Growth. Children with poor growth and delayed puberty benefit from ongoing consultation with an endocrinologist, who may also consult with orthopedists regarding possible surgical management of asymmetric growth and joint deformities.

Other

Bone densitometry should be considered if clinically indicated, or in early adulthood.

Cognitive, learning, and behavioral complications can be features of SDS, and remedial interventions are considered beneficial.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Frequent dental visits to monitor tooth development and oral health are recommended to reduce the incidence of mouth ulcers and gingivitis. Home care should include aggressive dental hygiene with topical fluoride treatments to help prevent dental decay.

Prophylactic antibiotics and G-CSF may be especially helpful when interventions such as complex dental procedures or orthopedic surgery are being considered.

Surveillance

The following is recommended given the intermittent nature of some features of SDS and the evolution of the phenotype over time [Rothbaum et al 2002, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a]:

Complete blood counts with white blood cell differential and platelet counts at least every three to six months, or more frequently if peripheral blood counts are changing or infections are recurrent and debilitating

Developmental assessment every six months from birth to age six years and growth every six months.

Assessment of nutritional status every six months and measurement of serum concentration of vitamins to evaluate effectiveness of or need for pancreatic enzyme therapy

Repeat bone marrow examinations every one to three years following the baseline examination, and more frequently if changes in bone marrow function or cellularity are observed.

Monitoring for orthopedic complications with x-rays of hips and knees during the most rapid growth stages

Bone densitometry before puberty, during puberty, and thereafter based on individual findings. Results must be interpreted in the context of stature and pubertal status.

Neuropsychological screening in children age 6-8 years, 11-13 years, and 15-17 years

Note: Discussions to update and maintain recommendations are ongoing.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged use of cytokine and hematopoietic growth factors such as G-CSF is cautioned against in view of their potential contribution to leukemic transformation [Rosenberg et al 2006].

Some drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide and busulfan) used in standard HSCT preparative regimens may not be suitable because of possible cardiac toxicity [Mitsui et al 2004, Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate as early as possible the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify those who will benefit from treatment and preventive measures. This can also potentially prevent asymptomatic affected sibs from being used as bone marrow transplant donors.

If the SBDS pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For pregnancies in women with SDS, high-risk pregnancy care including consultation with a hematologist is recommended [Alter et al 1999].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (X-linked SEDT), the following is noted:

The radiographic survey necessary for an accurate diagnosis also serves to document the extent of disease at the time of presentation.

Individuals with X-linked SEDT need to be assessed for the possibility of clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Medical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

Surgical intervention may include joint replacement (hip, knee, shoulder) or spine surgery (correction of scoliosis or kyphosis).

Chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to any surgical procedure involving general anesthesia to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be followed annually for the development of joint pain and scoliosis.

Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to school age to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the TRAPPC2 pathogenic variant in the family is known, presymptomatic testing of at-risk males allows early diagnosis and may obviate unnecessary diagnostic testing for other causes of short stature and/or osteoarthritis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in a person diagnosed with sialuria, the following evaluations are recommended, if they have not already been completed. Note: The priority of these recommendations depends on the signs observed in the patient and/or noted by the parents:

CBC with differential to evaluate for microcytic anemia

Measurement of serum bilirubin concentration to evaluate for jaundice

Skeletal survey to evaluate for dysostosis multiplex

Developmental and neurologic assessment

EEG when relevant

Neuroimaging with the purpose of differentiating sialuria from neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders

Treatment of Manifestations

Persons with sialuria need symptomatic and supportive management, including treatment of anemia, prolonged but mild jaundice, and convulsions. Barbiturates have been more effective in treating the occasional convulsion in early childhood than other antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Affected individuals benefit from early developmental intervention and appropriate educational programs.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Appropriate antibiotics to prevent secondary bacterial super-infection in the upper/lower airways are indicated.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Clinical follow-up during and after infancy to confirm that CNS disease is not progressive (in contrast to free sialic acid storage disorders) and to document the gradual remission of signs and/or symptoms present in infancy

Follow-up evaluations three to four times in infancy, twice in the second year of life, and once every subsequent year

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Click here (pdf) for information on therapy trials in “knock-in” mice yielding preliminary data for future possible therapies in humans.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 1 (SGBS1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of neonates for hypoglycemia

Assessment for upper airway sufficiency if macroglossia is present

Evaluation of young children with hypotonia and macroglossia for sleep apnea

Evaluation by a craniofacial team, including a feeding specialist if orofacial clefting is present

Hearing evaluation

Eye examination

Cardiac evaluation for structural defects and conduction abnormalities including chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for genitourinary malformations

Abdominal/pelvic ultrasound examination to evaluate for intra-abdominal tumors

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for visceral anomalies; further studies (e.g., MRI) if findings are suspicious

Examination for evidence of skeletal anomalies requiring intervention (e.g., scoliosis during period of rapid growth rate)

Development assessment including speech and language assessment

Neurology evaluation / MRI of the brain if seizures are present

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia if present

Prompt treatment of upper airway obstruction resulting from macroglossia, micrognathia, and/or glossoptosis

Referral of children to the following pediatric specialists as needed:

Craniofacial team for management of cleft lip and/or palate, or macroglossia and related feeding difficulties

Audiologist, otolaryngologist, and speech therapy for management of hearing loss

Ophthalmologist for management of vision problems

Cardiologist for management of congenital heart defects and/or cardiac conduction defects

Orthopedist for the treatment of vertebral malformations and scoliosis if present

Urologist for surgical correction of anomalies such as hypospadias and cryptorchidism

Neurologist if seizures are present

Oncologist if a tumor is identified

Neurodevelopmental follow up for individual treatment plan that may include special education, occupational therapy, and physical therapy

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Routine pre- and post-surgical preparation and monitoring for individuals with congenital heart disease and/or conduction defects

Surveillance

For males with SGBS1:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia in the newborn period

Physical examination to monitor for scoliosis during period of rapid growth rate; radiographs as needed

If development appears to be normal on initial assessment, routine monitoring of social and intellectual development

Monitoring of renal function if renal anomalies are present

Physical examinations to monitor for tumor risk [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every three months until age four years

Every four months from age four to seven years

Biannually after age seven years

The following screening recommendations require further study to determine benefit. The clinician and family should discuss the methods to be used:

Wilms tumor. Abdominal ultrasound examination every three or four months from birth until at least age seven or eight years, and yearly thereafter [Choyke et al 1999, Lapunzina 2005]. Abdominal ultrasound examination should assess for both Wilms tumor and hepatic tumors.

Note: When associated with an overgrowth syndrome, the risk for Wilms tumor decreases after age eight years [Beckwith 1998].

Gonadoblastoma or hepatocellular carcinoma. Serial measurement of serum alpha fetoprotein and beta human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months between ages four and seven years

Annually after age seven years

Neuroblastoma. Measurements of urinary catecholamine metabolites including vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic acid as well as urinary free fractionated catecholamines with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months from age four to seven years

Annually after age seven years

Annual lifelong chest radiograms have also been suggested [Lapunzina 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of affected males in a family helps identify those who will benefit from early diagnosis and intervention to reduce morbidity and mortality.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographs to detect skeletal manifestations that may require attention by an orthopedist (e.g. severe scoliosis, C1/C2 abnormality)

Brain MRI

Echocardiogram

MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to identify arterial aneurysms and arterial tortuosity throughout the arterial tree should be considered [Carmignac et al 2012]

Surgical evaluation for hernia repair, if indicated

Developmental assessment

Ophthalmology examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of SGS is best conducted through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and craniofacial team.

The following are appropriate:

Cardiovascular

If aortic dilatation is present, treatment with beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications should be considered in order to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Surgical intervention for aneurysms may be indicated.

Hernia

Surgical repair of abdominal hernias may be indicated.

Craniofacial

Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team; treatment is the same as in all disorders with these manifestations.

Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary.

Clubfoot deformity may require surgical correction.

Pectus excavatum may be severe; rarely, surgical correction is indicated for medical reasons.

Physiotherapy

Physiotherapy may help increase mobility in individuals with joint contractures.

Special education

A developmental assessment will help with placement in a special education center or in a special education program in a regular school.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is recommended for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria for individuals with cardiac complications.

Surveillance

All individuals with SGS should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with this condition.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, which may lead to catastrophic complications in those with cardiovascular issues or cervical spine anomalies/instability

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system, including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint pain or injury

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SHORT syndrome the following evaluations are recommended if not performed at the time of diagnosis:

For individuals of any age just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome:

Examination by an ophthalmologist experienced in management of developmental eye disorders or glaucoma with particular attention to the anterior chamber and intraocular pressure

Hearing assessment

Medical genetics consultation

For infants just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome:

Measurement of length and weight

Assessment of speech and language or motor skills in those with evidence of developmental delays

For older children and adults just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome:

Dental examination

Assessment for evidence of insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus

Treatment of Manifestations

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly or related anterior chamber ocular anomalies. Treatment by an ophthalmologist experienced in management of developmental eye disorders or glaucoma is indicated to reduce and stabilize ocular pressures and to preserve vision.

Dental anomalies. Treatment of dental anomalies is standard and may include crowns and dental prostheses.

Insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment for glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus with diet, lifestyle, oral medication, and insulin under the supervision of a specialist in diabetes care is recommended.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of growth including height, weight, and body mass index

Ongoing eye examinations in individuals with evidence of an anterior chamber anomaly by an individual with expertise in developmental eye disorders or glaucoma

Screening for insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus beginning in mid-childhood

Periodic hearing assessments in childhood

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Given the increased risk for insulin resistance in individuals taking growth hormone, it has been suggested that growth hormone be contraindicated in individuals with SHORT syndrome [Thauvin-Robinet et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Successful pregnancies have occurred in women with SHORT syndrome. If present, diabetes mellitus is managed as appropriate.

Fetal growth should be monitored recognizing that SHORT syndrome could be an explanation for IUGR in a pregnancy at 50% risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of end-organ damage and needs in an individual diagnosed with sickle cell disease (SCD), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Hematology consultation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Additional evaluations vary with the age and clinical status of the individual:

Infants

after 12 months should have baseline laboratory studies including the following:

CBC and reticulocyte count

Measurement of HbF (%)

Assessment of iron status

A thalassemia screen, which includes hemoglobin electrophoresis or HPLC and an inclusion body prep

Baseline vitamin D; renal and liver function tests

Extended red cell phenotyping so that antigen matched blood may be given if transfusion is urgently needed

During childhood HLA typing should be offered to the affected individual and all full biologically matched sibs.

Older individuals. See Surveillance.

Treatment of Manifestations

Lifelong comprehensive care is necessary to minimize morbidity, reduce early mortality, and maximize quality of life. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Education of parents, caregivers, and affected individuals is the cornerstone of care:

Families must appreciate the importance of routine health maintenance visits, prophylactic medications, and early intervention for both acute and chronic complications.

Warning signs of acute illness such as fever, respiratory symptoms, pallor, lethargy, splenic enlargement, and neurologic changes must be reviewed regularly and must include education for the affected individual, as developmentally appropriate.

A systematic approach to pain management should be reviewed regularly. This includes identifying and reversing common triggers for sickle cell pain (and distinguishing it from other etiologies of pain), hydration, warmth, ambulation, distraction, and other comfort maneuvers. Initiation of NSAIDs and appropriate use of opiates should be reviewed.

All families should have a plan in place for 24-hour access to a medical facility that can provide urgent evaluation and treatment of acute illnesses such as fever, acute chest syndrome, splenic sequestration, and stroke.

Families should be provided baseline (steady state) laboratory values for purposes of comparison, as values often change during acute illness.

General management of specific problems [NHS 2010, Bender & Seibel 2012, Brousse et al 2014, Yawn et al 2014] includes the following:

Vaso-occlusive pain episodes (including dactylitis)

The initial focus should include the reversal of inciting triggers (e.g., cold, dehydration).

Pain episodes are optimally managed using a multi-model approach that may include warmth, hydration, massage, distraction, acupuncture, biofeedback, self-hypnosis, and pharmaceuticals.

Uncomplicated pain episodes may be managed at home with oral hydration and oral analgesics including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates.

More severe pain episodes require hospitalization and administration of parenteral fluids and analgesics in addition to adjunctive treatments such as massage and physical therapy.

Optimal analgesia is generally achieved with morphine (or other opiate) given around the clock by a patient-controlled analgesia device (PCA) or by continuous infusion.

NSAIDs (e.g., ketorolac, ibuprofen, naproxen) may be used to augment the analgesic effect of opiates. NSAIDs can also decrease inflammation, which is part of the pathophysiology.

Adequate, but not excessive hydration with IV fluids should be provided to maintain euvolemia, and individuals should be monitored closely for the development of other complications such as acute chest syndrome (ACS), splenic sequestration, or opiate-induced constipation.

A thorough evaluation for infection, including blood culture, urine culture, and chest x-ray should be considered based on the clinical scenario.

Note: Transfusion and hydroxyurea are not useful treatments for acute pain episodes (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Fever/suspected infection. Individuals with temperature greater than 38.3° C or persistent temperature elevation above baseline require:

Rapid triage and physical assessment;

Urgent CBC and reticulocyte count;

Blood culture (and other cultures as clinically indicated) and a low threshold for chest x-ray when respiratory symptoms are present, as ACS can often present with a normal physical examination;

Parenteral broad-spectrum empiric antibiotics such as ceftriaxone pending culture results. A macrolide antibiotic should be added if pneumonia/ACS is a concern. Additional antibiotics should be added only for proven or suspected meningitis or other severe illness.

Note: With the changing natural history of fever and sepsis in individuals with SCD in the US there is increasing evidence that empiric treatment with parenteral antibiotics without obtaining cultures may be appropriate for well-appearing, fully immunized children with fever <39 C; however, this work has not yet been replicated nor has it become accepted practice [Baskin et al 2013, Ellison et al 2015].

Acute chest syndrome (ACS). The index of suspicion for ACS should be high when individuals with SCD have fever, chest pain, or respiratory signs or symptoms. Given the high mortality associated with ACS, an aggressive multimodal treatment strategy should be initiated [Miller 2011]:

Perform chest x-ray examination.

Provide aggressive treatment with oxygen, analgesics, and antibiotics (including a macrolide).

Incentive spirometry should be encouraged.

Hypoxemia can progress to need for intubation and mechanical ventilatory support.

Blood transfusion may be required for those who are critically ill, have multi-lobar disease, or have progressive disease despite conservative therapy.

Aplastic crisis. Monitoring of hematocrit (both absolute and compared with the individual's baseline), reticulocyte count, and cardiovascular status are required. Blood transfusion may be necessary. Aplastic crisis caused by parvovirus B19 will often spontaneously resolve; however, if the reticulocyte count does not improve, intravenous gamma-globulin can be considered to assist in viral clearance. Any sibs or other close contacts with SCD should be monitored for red blood cell aplasia because the parvovirus is easily transmissible.

Splenic sequestration. Severe episodes of splenic sequestration may progress rapidly to cardiovascular collapse and death; thus, emergency red blood cell transfusion is indicated when signs of cardiovascular instability are present. Parents should be taught how to monitor for splenic enlargement and recognize symptoms of sequestration and when to seek medical attention. Individuals who experience multiple severe episodes of splenic sequestration may require splenectomy.

Pulmonary hypertension. Diagnostic criteria, as well as when and how to intervene, are becoming increasingly controversial [Hassell et al 2014, Klings et al 2014a, Klings et al 2014b, Hebson et al 2015]. Existing consensus guidelines are not fully accepted by experts in the field. Thus, discussion with local sickle cell and pulmonary hypertension experts should be used to guide care. The following general approach is reasonable:

Aggressive evaluation and treatment of additional etiologies contributing to pulmonary hypertension (e.g., thrombotic disease, obstructive sleep apnea)

Optimization of SCD-related therapy to stop progression (e.g., chronic transfusions, hydroxyurea, oxygen therapy if hypoxemic)

Stroke. Any history of an acute neurologic symptom or event warrants emergent evaluation including a CBC with reticulocyte count and a non-contrast brain CT examination. Cerebral hemorrhage requires immediate neurosurgical consultation. An MRI/MRA to define injury should be obtained as soon as available, but definitive treatment with exchange transfusion should never be delayed for these results.

Treatment for children with acute ischemic stroke includes the following:

Monitor neurologic status and aggressively treat increased intracranial pressure and seizures, if present.

Exchange transfusion with the goal of decreasing HbS percentage to <30% of the total hemoglobin followed by a chronic transfusion program can significantly decrease repeat risk for stroke [Wang et al 2000]. Without continued therapy, as many as 60%-90% of individuals who have had a stroke have a second stroke within three years. Thus, in most individuals a preventive chronic transfusion protocol is initiated after a CNS event and continued indefinitely [Adams & Brambilla 2005] (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Hydroxyurea has been studied as an alternative to transfusion therapy [Ware & Helms 2012]. While it does not provide the same protection as transfusion therapy, it may be an alternative for affected individuals who are unable to receive transfusion therapy (e.g., those living in limiting resource settings such as the Third World) or are difficult to transfuse due to alloimmunization [de Montalembert 2012].

Chronic transfusion has been shown to reduce silent infarcts; however, unlike for overt infracts, there is not a universally accepted consensus regarding the management of individuals with silent infarcts [DeBaun et al 2014, Estcourt et al 2017].

Priapism. Episodes of severe priapism require urgent evaluation and treatment, including hydration and analgesia, and may require aspiration and irrigation by an urologist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Ongoing education is essential to help minimize morbidity and mortality. Education comprises a regular review of interventions including the following:

Maintaining hydration and avoiding extremes of climate

Monitoring for signs and symptoms requiring acute medical intervention

Early detection of chronic complications

Updates on new therapies

Disease-modulating therapies are discussed in several reviews [Vichinsky 2012, Kassim & DeBaun 2013, Ware et al 2017].

Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. The initial goal of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy varies depending on indication but typically is to maintain the percentage of HbS <30% and suppress reticulocytosis. Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy may be warranted for the following [Yawn et al 2014, Howard 2016, Ware et al 2017]:

Primary prevention of stroke in individuals with an abnormal transcranial Doppler

Prevention of stroke recurrence

Treatment of chronic pain refractory to other therapies

Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic renal failure

Recurrent episodes of ACS

Severe end-organ damage

Complications of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy include: iron overload, alloimmunization, and, rarely, infection. To limit alloimmunization and transfusion reactions, extended matching of red blood cell antigens should be performed and blood products should be leuko-reduced (removal of white blood cells from the transfusion product). Red blood cells antigen matched at the full Rh locus (D, C, E) and Kell have been suggested to decrease alloimmunization rates, as well as other alleles when possible [Lasalle-Williams et al 2011]. Approaches to decrease alloimmunization in the future include obtaining a better understanding of the process of alloimmunization as well as molecular genotyping. Defining antigens molecularly has multiple benefits including the ability to type cells when serologic reagents are not available [Yazdanbakhsh et al 2012, Matteocci & Pierelli 2014].

Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea), until recently the only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, is only approved for adults. Hydroxyurea benefits individuals with SCD via several mechanisms [Platt 2008, Ware 2010] including:

Induction of HbF synthesis resulting in decreased sickling and improved red-cell survival;

Reduction of white blood cell (WBC), reticulocyte and platelet counts;

Metabolism into nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator;

Overall improvement in blood flow;

Reduction of vascular inflammation.

Multiple NIH consensus statements have noted strong evidence to support its routine use in adults [Brawley et al 2008, Yawn et al 2014]. It has been demonstrated that hydroxyurea therapy is safe to use in children as young as nine months with no decrease in immune function [Ware 2010, Rogers et al 2011, Wang et al 2011, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Lederman et al 2014]. It is now very strongly recommended that every individual with S/S and S/β0-thalassemia age nine months or older be offered treatment with hydroxyurea [Yawn et al 2014]. This early initiation decreases clinical events [Thornburg et al 2012]. In addition, use of hydroxyurea has been associated with a decrease in healthcare costs [Wang et al 2013].

Hydroxyurea can have potentially significant toxicity, including myelosuppression. Individuals treated with hydroxyurea must be monitored closely with CBCs and reticulocyte counts. In order to balance the benefits with potential toxicities of hydroxyurea, many suggest a careful titration of the drug to find a dosing for each affected person that provides an appropriate reduction in WBC count without toxicity [Ware 2010, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Yawn et al 2014].

Glutamine has just received FDA approval for the prevention of acute complications in individuals age five years and older with SCD, whether on hydroxyurea or not. Due to its antioxidant properties and in vitro activity, glutamine has long been considered of potential benefit in the treatment of SCD. Though not published, a multicenter placebo-controlled clinical trial suggests that chronic use of oral glutamine can decrease the frequency of sickle cell pain-related episodes (clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01179217). Having a second FDA-approved drug opens the door to combination therapy using multiple agents.

Stem cell transplantation from a healthy donor or one with sickle cell trait can be curative in individuals with SCD and while the number of matched-sib transplants continues to rise, there is rapid evolution in the use of alternate donors. Children with SCD receiving stem cell transplantation using a matched sib donor can expect a 92% chance of cure with an overall survival of 95%. [King & Shenoy 2014, Nickel et al 2014, Walters 2015]. These phenomenal outcomes are balanced by potential long-term consequences including chronic-graft-versus host disease and infertility. There is debate now as to who should be transplanted and when. Transplanting with a matched sib early in life can subvert a life of debilitating complications and decreasing end-organ function – the latter making transplant at a later age more difficult. Notably, pediatric providers may overly worry about the risks of transplant, while not appreciating the high morbidity of sickle cell disease manifestations in adulthood. However, the comparative long-term benefits of supportive care (including hydroxyurea and improvements in sickle cell management) versus transplantation are not yet known.

Despite the great successes associated with transplantation, it is estimated that fewer than 30% of individuals with SCD have suitable matched-sib donors, few have suitable matched unrelated donors, and transplant for adults with SCD has been far more difficult due to regime-related toxicity. The field of transplantation for SCD is currently undergoing rapid expansion. Thus, the use of alternate donors (including unrelated donors and haploidentical donors) and cord blood is an active area of research [Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016, Walters et al 2016].

Initial myeloablative regimes yielded too much toxicity for older individuals with SCD; the recent development of less toxic transplant regimens makes stem cell transplantation a more acceptable option for older individuals [Tisdale et al 2013].

While unrelated cord blood transplants are falling out of favor due to the high rate of graft failure, there is an increased use and success of haploidentical transplants, vastly broadening the number of individuals who could potentially be cured [Gluckman 2013, Tisdale et al 2013, Walters 2015, Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016].

Gene therapy. As all allogenic transplants for SCD present a risk for graft-versus-host disease, there has been an explosion of research in gene therapy for SCD. While both gene editing and gene addition approaches are being activity pursued, only viral mediated gene therapy approaches are being used in clinical trials [Goodman & Malik 2016, Cavazzana et al 2017].

The criteria, risks, and benefits of transplantation are changing rapidly; thus, it is important for families and providers to discuss the risks and benefits with a transplantation center with expertise in SCD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Newborn screening has made presymptomatic diagnosis possible, allowing for early, aggressive education on management issues, such as management of fevers. The use of prophylactic penicillin, immunization, and education emphasizing access to healthcare have significantly decreased morbidity and mortality in children, primarily by reducing deaths from sepsis.

Penicillin prophylaxis prevents 84% of life-threatening episodes of childhood Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis [Gaston et al 1986]:

By age two months, all infants with SCD should receive penicillin V potassium prophylaxis, 125 mg orally, twice a day.

At age three years, the dose is increased to 250 mg orally, twice a day, and then continued until at least age five years.

Prophylaxis for those allergic to penicillin can include erythromycin or azithromycin but care should be taken to avoid medications that alter metabolism and increase the risk of prolonged QTc syndrome [Gerber et al 2009].

Immunizations. Timely administration of vaccines is essential. Clinicians should follow the recommended vaccine schedule for functionally asplenic individuals, which includes additional vaccines such as the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, and an altered schedule for meningococcal vaccines. Persons with sickle cell are considered high priority for annual influenza vaccine [Yawn et al 2014].

Folic acid supplementation should be considered to support the increased RBC synthesis secondary to the high RBC turnover in sickle cell.

Iron overload. Individuals receiving prophylactic as well as chronic transfusions are at risk for iron overload and should be monitored closely, initially by tracking the amount of blood transfused and monitoring serum ferritin concentration. Those with high exposures or documented iron overload should have an assessment of organ iron accumulation. With its increasing availability and safety and the ability to assess iron in multiple organs while avoiding sampling bias, quantitative radiographic evaluation such as T2*-weighted MRI is increasingly replacing biopsy [Wood 2007]. The noninvasive nature of monitoring iron overload via MRI or SQUID has led to significant improvements in the outcome of individuals with iron overload [Coates 2014]. Both oral or subcutaneous iron chelation therapy are recommended for those with documented excessive tissue iron deposition, with patient acceptance and use of medications being the main limiting factor [Coates & Wood 2017].

Surveillance

Surveillance should be tailored to an individual's specific phenotype and clinical history; however, most individuals benefit from routine age-dependent screening to allow for early detection and treatment of end-organ damage [NHS 2010, Yawn et al 2014]. The following are general guidelines compiled from several sources. Recently NHLBI has released updated guidelines that readers are encouraged to review. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Comprehensive medical and social evaluation. Affected individuals should be seen routinely for evaluation of risks, review of care plan, education, and assessment of growth and development. Social work assessment with emphasis on support, resources, and the impact of disease on lifestyle should be performed. Routine dental care is recommended.

Mental health and neurocognitive assessment. Periodic mental health screening for signs of depression, anxiety, and isolation should occur. Neurocognitive testing should be performed prior to school entry and repeated periodically to identify learning difficulties that may be related to silent cerebral infarcts as well as other factors.

Annual laboratory assessment should include the following:

CBC with differential and reticulocyte count

Assessment of iron status

Liver function tests (LFTs), BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis (UA)

LDH as a marker of hemolysis

Vitamin D level; may be indicated because of the high prevalence of deficiencies in this population

Baseline values should be given to parents for comparison during times of illness.

Extended red cell phenotyping should be done once to decrease risk of alloimmunization with transfusions.

Assessment of stroke risk. Historically more than 10% of young children with Hb S/S and Hb S/β°-thalassemia (as well as some others) had overt strokes. Yearly screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) starting at age two years followed by initiation of chronic therapy for those with high-velocity blood flow has drastically decreased stroke incidence in SCD [Fullerton et al 2004]. Individuals with an abnormally high arterial blood flow velocity have a high rate of stroke, which can be prevented by chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. Children with normal velocities require yearly reevaluation as a proportion of them convert to higher-risk velocities over time [Adams et al 2004]. Initial studies suggest that this approach is decreasing the incidence of overt stroke in individuals with SCD, but additional measure may be of benefit as well [Fullerton et al 2004, Jordan et al 2012, Webb & Kwiatkowski 2013].

End-organ evaluation. While there is a clear consensus for use of screening TCD starting at age two years through at least age 16 years, there is variability in recommendations for additional screening. The NHLBI [Yawn et al 2014] suggests screening for a proliferative retinopathy by an ophthalmologist starting age ten years, and additional screening based on clinical history that may include:

Chest x-ray examination

ECG

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to determine the tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet with consideration of right heart catheterization depending on symptoms

Six-minute walk test

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study (to assess nighttime hypoxemia)

Iron overload by MRI

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Education for individuals with SCD involves learning how to control one's environment to minimize the chance of exacerbations. Environmental controls include avoiding the following:

Dehydration

Extremes of temperature (e.g., swimming in cold water, which can trigger a pain episode)

Physical exhaustion

Extremely high altitude without oxygen supplementation

Cocaine. While alcohol and illegal drugs are never endorsed, cocaine and its derivatives, with their vasoconstrictive and cardiac stimulation effects, are particularly dangerous drugs in the setting of SCD.

The analgesic meperidine, which should be avoided as first-line therapy because of potential CNS toxicity

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk family members may allow intervention before symptoms are present.

If born in the United States, sibs affected with SCD are diagnosed by universal newborn screening soon after birth (at which time referral to a pediatric hematologist is appropriate). Many states also identify sickle cell trait on newborn screening.

If newborn screening data is not available for at-risk sibs, several diagnostic approaches can be considered.

If the HBB pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the gold standard is a combination of HPLC or isoelectric focusing combined with a CBC and reticulocyte count. As microcytosis helps guide interpretation of results, a measure of iron status such as a ZPP (zinc protoporphyrin) test or serum iron and TIBC (total iron binding capacity) is of benefit.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy complications in SCD can be minimized with close follow up and collaboration between hematology and obstetric teams [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. Pregnancy in women with SCD involves increased risk for thrombosis, infectious complications, and acute painful episodes [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. There is conflicting information as to whether the risks for preeclampsia, eclampsia, pre-term labor, and maternal death are increased [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. The risk of pregnancy complications increases when access to prenatal care is limited, reinforcing the importance of close hematologic and obstetric follow up [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. The benefits of a chronic transfusion program versus the use of “as-needed” transfusions has not been established [Okusanya and Oladapo 2016]. As hydroxyurea is recommended for (and increasingly used in) adults, the current recommendation is that it be discontinued during pregnancy. While reports of human infants exposed prenatally to hydroxyurea have not noted an increased risk of malformations, in experimental animal models hydroxyurea has been noted to lead to an increase in congenital anomalies. The role of chronic transfusions in lieu of hydroxyurea needs to be addressed.

More than 99% of births to women with SCD occurring after 28 weeks’ gestation are live births with normal Apgar scores [Smith et al 1996]. Several studies have reported increased rates of low birth weight and intrauterine growth retardation in babies born to women with SCD [Hassell 2005]. Attention to postnatal opiate withdrawal in the babies of mothers treated with high-dose opiates during pregnancy is warranted.

Infants with SCD are asymptomatic in the antenatal, perinatal, and immediate postnatal periods; they manifest disease symptoms when fetal hemoglobin production switches to adult hemoglobin.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently only one drug – hydroxyurea – is FDA approved for SCD, and labeling does not include children. After decades of slow progress in the field, acknowledgment of the plethora of pathways modulating the severity of SCD has led to a diverse array of therapeutic agents that are being investigated [Archer et al 2015, Kato 2016].

Some examples emphasizing the diverse array of involved pathways and agents are listed below. The field is changing rapidly; refer to ClinicalTrials.gov for the status of current studies.

Prevention of HbS polymerization. Hemoglobin S polymerizes in the T (tense) conformation associated with de-oxygenation, but not the R (relaxed) conformation associated with oxygenation. Thus, small molecules that block the T-state or stabilize the R-state are being assessed in clinical trials [Oder et al 2016].

Decreasing adhesion to the endothelium. Adhesion of WBC to the endothelium of the microcirculation slows blood flow, increasing HbS polymerization and worsening SCD. Agents that decrease cell adherence without compromising immune function are being pursued. E- and P-selectin specific agents are being tested with one showing promising results in a Phase III trial [Zhang et al 2016, Ataga et al 2017].

Modifying inflammatory responses. Regadenoson is an adenosine A2A receptor agonist that modifies natural killer cell activity and has shown benefit in animal models. It has been evaluated in a Phase I study and a Phase II clinical trial is under way [Field et al 2013].

Antioxidants therapy. Multiple antioxidants are being studied. One, glutamine, is a key factor in determining red cell red-ox state and its level has been a marker of disease severity [Morris et al 2008b]. Results for a Phase III clinical trial of glutamine supplementation are pending.

Rejuvenation of nitric oxide (NO) stores. Arginine, the precursor of NO, has been studied in several contexts and a Phase II clinical trial has shown benefit in hospitalized people with sickle cell pain [Morris et al 2013]. As a result, arginine has been featured in multiple clinical trials.

Induction of fetal hemoglobin. Multiple pathways and factors associated with the high-level expression of the fetal hemoglobin genes (HBG1 and HBG2) have been identified and are currently targets for intervention [Perrine et al 2014, Lettre & Bauer 2016]. Representative pathways include LSD-1 inhibitors [Shi et al 2013, Cui et al 2015], thalidomide inhibitors (e.g., pomolidomide) [Dulmovits et al 2016], nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 inhibitors (e.g., tert-butylhydroquinone) [Macari & Lowrey 2011, Macari et al 2013], HDAC inhibitors [Okam & Ebert 2012], short-chain fatty acids (e.g., butyrate or valproic acid), and antimetabolites (e.g., 2’ deoxy 5’ azacytidine [decitabine]) [Saunthararajah et al 2008]. A promising approach to therapy is the development of inhibitors to the protein Bcl11a. Bcl11a was identified as an HbF cell quantitative trait locus in a genome-wide association study [Menzel et al 2007]. Since then it has been shown to bind within the β-globin locus and to be critical for suppressing fetal globin gene expression in adult erythroid cells [Sankaran et al 2008, Sankaran et al 2010]. Knockdown or knockout of Bcl11a in model systems, as well as naturally occurring deletions that remove its binding site in humans, result in substantial increases in HbF. These elevated levels of HbF provide therapeutic benefits to individuals with both SCD and thalassemia [Sankaran et al 2011, Wilber et al 2011, Xu et al 2011]. Multiple approaches are being taken to inhibit Bcl11a function in vivo, including gene editing to disrupt the erythroid-specific enhancer of Bcl11a [Lettre & Bauer 2016].

Phytomedicines, including some mixtures of plants, are under investigation. There are initial promising safety and efficacy data for Niprisan® and SCD-101 [Oniyangi & Cohall 2015].

Gene therapy. As SCD arises from a defined single-nucleotide substitution in the β-globin gene whose expression is restricted to erythroid cells derived from bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells, SCD is an ideal candidate for gene therapy. Gene therapy provides the benefit of stem cell transplantation, but without the problems associated with the use of an allogenic source of stem cells. Ideally, gene therapy would lead to an increase in non-sickle β-like chains, while lowering the number of sickle chains, for example by replacing the HbS pathogenic variant (p.Glu6Val) with a normal allele.

The most progress has been made using viral vector-mediated addition of a normal β-like gene, potentially modified to have additional anti-sickling properties. This leaves the endogenous sickle allele intact. While multiple groups are moving towards these gene addition clinical trials, to date only one individual is reported to have been cured [Cavazzana et al 2017, Ribeil et al 2017]. The status of these trials is changing rapidly; refer to ClinicalTrials.gov for the most up-to-date information.

Multiple gene therapy strategies that do not involve the addition of an additional, therapeutic globin gene are being pursued. A major obstacle to the above gene addition approaches is the requirement for long-term, high-level expression of the therapeutic gene, which requires the inclusion of large amounts of the major regulatory element, the locus control region. In contrast, these approaches involve the transduction and stable integration of therapeutic reagent for which low-level expression suffices. These include:

Using transactivators to stimulate the minimally expressed delta gene or the fetal or embryonic genes;

Inducing embryonic α-like chains that, when forming tetramers with sickle chains, are less likely to polymerize;

Decreasing Bcl11a expression whether by knocking out erythroid regulatory elements or binding sites, knocking down mRNA, or altering protein interactions; and

Inducing “looping” between the locus control region and the fetal globin genes resulting in activation of HbF.

Some of the above approaches have the additional benefit of reducing expression of the sickle gene while increasing expression of a therapeutic gene. However, they require long-term expression, typically from a viral vector integrated into the genome, leading to the very real risk of severe sequelae, such as leukemia, stemming from insertional mutagenesis [Cavazza et al 2013]. These detriments of routine gene therapy are avoided by “gene editing.” As multiple techniques to modify the human genome with base pair accuracy are becoming increasingly easy and efficient, gene editing approaches are being aggressively pursued [Scharenberg et al 2013, Kim & Kim 2014]. Gene editing typically entails the generation of a break in the DNA at or near the site of interest and the presence of a “corrective template.” Fortuitously, the cell’s endogenous DNA repair machinery inadvertently uses the therapeutic template when repairing the DNA, resulting in the incorporation of the corrective sequence. Gene editing is a “hit and run” approach, as it can be performed with the transient expression of the editing tools, thus avoiding the need for long-term expression as well as the risk for insertional mutagenesis, yet providing lifelong correction of the DNA. Two major approaches are being taken: removal of the sickle pathogenic variant and replacement with a normal sequence; and disruption of regulators of globin gene expression – such as Bcl11a, which in turn results in increased expression of the fetal genes. As this can be done in hematopoietic as well as induced pleuripotent stem cells, gene editing is the future of gene therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with sideroblastic anemia and ataxia (XLSA/A), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain CT or MRI

Psychological testing if indicated

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no effective treatment for XLSA/A.

Males with ataxia benefit from early physical therapy to facilitate acquisition of gross motor skills. Adaptive devices such as ankle fixation orthoses and walkers may be needed.

Weighted eating utensils may help promote independent skills in childhood.

Speech therapy may improve intelligibility problems resulting from dysarthria.

Difficulty with handwriting may be managed with computers for word processing.

The anemia is usually mild and asymptomatic and does not require treatment; hepatic and systemic iron overload does not occur.

Surveillance

It is debated whether monitoring for possible iron overload is warranted in older individuals through routine screening of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), and serum ferritin concentration; iron overload is theoretically possible but has not been reported.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

One possible therapeutic approach to some of the disorders involving iron misdistribution is drug-mediated iron relocation. Deferiprone (DFP), an iron chelator used to treat iron overload, has iron-relocating abilities when used to treat disorders of regional iron accumulation. Because of their possible side effects, siderophores (small, high-affinity iron chelating compounds secreted by microorganisms) and other chelators must be administered with care; thus, the potential use of iron-redistributing agents in some iron-misdistribution diseases (such as XLSA/A) warrants rigorous investigation [Boddaert et al 2007, Camaschella 2008, Kakhlon et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia (SIOD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of growth and assessment of body proportions, with plotting on age-appropriate growth charts [Lücke et al 2006a]

Evaluation of renal function by measurement of serum concentrations of creatinine and urea, protein excretion in urine, and creatinine clearance

Referral to a nephrologist for evaluation

Hematology evaluations to assess lymphopenia, anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia

Immunology evaluations to evaluate the numbers of memory and naïve CD4 and CD8 T cells and B cells and immunoglobulin levels

Assessment of developmental status with referral for formal evaluation if significant developmental delays or schooling delays are identified

Dental evaluation after teeth are present

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Detailed history for headaches or neurologic abnormalities

Orthopedic evaluation for symptoms of joint pain or evidence of scoliosis or kyphosis

Assessment for osteopenia

Thyroid function studies

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Renal manifestations

The renal disease progresses from proteinuria to ESRD at variable rates and is not prevented by any known drug therapies, although a few affected individuals treated with cyclosporin A, tacrolimus, or corticosteroids have had a transient reduction in the rate of renal disease progression.

Renal transplantation effectively treats the nephropathy and neither nephropathy nor arteriosclerosis recurs in the graft [Lücke et al 2004, Elizondo et al 2006, Clewing et al 2007a]. Mild immunosuppressive therapy, such as immunosuppressive monotherapy, appears to improve outcome after renal transplantation [Lücke et al 2009].

Orthopedic manifestations

Some affected individuals who have survived beyond childhood have required hip replacement.

Treatment of scoliosis and/or kyphosis is standard.

Immunologic manifestations

Neutropenia usually responds well to supplementation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

One affected individual has been successfully treated by bone marrow transplantation (BMT) [Petty et al 2000, Thomas et al 2004], and four affected individuals have died after BMT [Baradaran-Heravi et al 2013].

Individuals with autoimmune problems have had variable responses to treatment.

A few individuals have been transfusion dependent because of anemia or thrombocytopenia.

In one affected individual with thrombocytopenia, the autoimmune features resolved spontaneously; in one they resolved after steroid and IVIG treatments, and in one they cleared after splenectomy. All other affected individuals, excepting one with Evans syndrome, were successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy such as steroids, cyclophosphamide, or IVIG. The individual with Evans syndrome was resistant to treatment with steroids, cyclosporin A, and rituximab [Zieg et al 2011].

Infectious disease manifestations. Individuals with recurrent infections, opportunistic infections, or declining lymphocytes or T-cell counts frequently require the care of an immunologist.

Affected individuals with recurrent herpetic infections benefit from treatment with acyclovir.

A few affected individuals have developed severe disseminated cutaneous papilloma virus infections that have improved with imiquimod and cidofovir.

Neurologic manifestations

Individuals with transient ischemic attacks or strokes usually show temporary improvement on treatment with agents that improve blood flow or decrease coagulability (pentoxifylline, acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, warfarin, heparin). To date, no curative or effective long-term therapies have been identified.

Migraine headaches are often difficult to treat since response to anti-migraine medication is variable. Medications that have helped some individuals include ergotamine, sumatriptan, verapamil, and propranolol. Note: Use of ergotamine and sumatriptan is contraindicated in individuals with SIOD with severe vasoocclusive disease or cerebral ischemic events.

Hypothyroidism can be treated with levothyroxine supplementation; however, supplementation does not have an ameliorative effect on the renal disease or T-cell deficiency.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with severe early-onset disease are best vaccinated according to the protocol for other T-cell immunodeficiencies (i.e., only inactivated vaccines should be used with avoidance of all live-attenuated vaccines).

Because of the increased risk of opportunistic infection, prophylaxis (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or atovquone) against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is usually recommended.

If recurrent oral herpetic infections or shingles occur, prophylactic acyclovir may reduce the morbidity.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of the hips

Annual monitoring of renal, immune, and hematologic status

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Hypertension. Poor blood pressure control can exacerbate or evoke cerebral ischemia. In particular, the hypertension arising from using high-dose steroids for empiric treatment of the nephrotic syndrome can evoke cerebral ischemia.

Heat, stress, and lack of sleep. Individuals with transient neurologic attacks that are not of an ischemic origin have found that heat, stress, and lack of sleep can precipitate the attacks.

Vaccinations with live vaccines. The T-cell deficiency is substantial and there have been serious infections in some individuals. Therefore, vaccination with all live vaccines should be avoided, including rotavirus, MMR, varicella, BCG, oral Salmonella typhi vaccine, and yellow fever virus vaccine.

Anti-cancer therapies. SIOD cells and model organisms are hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents [Bansbach et al 2009, Ciccia et al 2009, Postow et al 2009, Yuan et al 2009, Yusufzai et al 2009, Bansbach et al 2010, Baradaran-Heravi et al 2012b].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate (see Diagnosis) older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Combined renal and bone marrow transplantation may be discussed as an approach in individuals with declining renal and immune function prior to the onset of end-stage disease.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Individuals with SIOD usually have normal growth hormone studies. No affected individual treated with growth hormone supplementation has responded with improved growth.

Anemia does not often respond to supplementation with erythropoietin or renal transplantation. However, it is possible that erythropoietin has a protective effect on the endothelia.

Because of the T-cell defect, individuals with SIOD usually require milder immunosuppressive therapy for bone marrow transplantation than those undergoing transplantation for other diseases.

Studies of mitochondrial function and nitrous oxide production have not detected any impairment; therefore, empiric treatments addressing such etiologies would be expected to have little effect [Lücke et al 2005b, Lücke et al 2006b].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SLC39A14 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination for dystonia, parkinsonism, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech

Assessment for physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy

Evaluation of swallowing and nutritional status

Brain MRI, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation

Assessment of whole-blood manganese levels, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Symptomatic treatment. Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices.

Support by a speech and language/feeding specialist and nutritionist is indicated to assure adequate nutrition and to reduce the risk of aspiration. When an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required to prevent aspiration pneumonia.

Note that symptomatic treatment with L-dopa and antispasticity medications including benzodiazepines, baclofen, and botulinum toxin has been attempted with limited success. There has been partial but poorly sustained response to trihexyphenidyl at high doses of 20 mg/day and intrathecal baclofen of 1,500-2,000 µg/day in two older sibs reported by Tuschl et al [2016].

Chelation therapy. Disodium calcium edetate, which primarily promotes the urinary excretion of manganese, was given intravenously (20 mg/kg/dose) twice daily for five days each month to a female age five years with SLC39A14 deficiency [Tuschl et al 2016]. After six months of treatment, neurologic manifestations improved and the child regained the ability to walk.

In contrast, treatment of a female age 17 years with advanced disease (severe generalized dystonia with prominent oromandibular involvement, contractures, and scoliosis) did not affect disease progression as she continued to deteriorate with worsening tremor and stiffness. Hence, it is likely necessary to initiate chelation treatment early in the disease course.

It is anticipated that chelation therapy will need to be lifelong.

Potential adverse effects of disodium calcium edetate chelation therapy include thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, nephrotoxicity, hepatoxicity, hypocalcemia, and trace metal and vitamin deficiencies [Lamas et al 2012]. Monitoring includes the following:

Complete blood count

Assessment of renal function including urinalysis assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose.

Assessment of liver function

Measurement of the concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate

Measurement of the concentrations of trace metals (manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium)

Assessment of iron status

Treatment may need to be discontinued if:

White blood count is <3.5x109/L

Neutrophil count is <2.0x109/L

Platelet count is <150x109/L

>2+ proteinuria is detected on more than one occasion (with no evidence of infection)

The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent early death and reduce morbidity in SLC39A14 deficiency, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. For each affected individual, the benefits of clinical treatment need to be carefully weighed against the risk of adverse effects.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

Routine monitoring of:

Height and weight using age and gender appropriate growth charts;

Swallowing and diet to assure adequate nutrition;

Ambulation and speech;

Whole-blood manganese levels and brain MRI to assess treatment response and disease progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Environmental manganese exposure (i.e., contaminated drinking water, occupational manganese exposure in welding/mining industries, contaminated ephedrone preparations)

High manganese content of total parenteral nutrition

Foods very high in manganese, including: cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower seeds

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing of apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of an affected individual for the familial SLC39A14 pathogenic variants allows early identification of sibs who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SLC6A3-related dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome (DTDS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic assessment of the movement disorder

Ophthalmology assessment of vision and eye movements

Evaluation of caloric intake and feeding by a nutritionist

Speech and language therapy assessment of communication and swallowing

Physiotherapy evaluation of postural issues and tone

Occupational therapy to provide suitable aids for communication, mobility, and home adaptations

Hip and spine x-rays to evaluate for hip dislocation and spinal deformity

Orthopedic review of any fixed contractures / joint dislocations

Pediatric physician-led care for evaluation of general issues such as drooling, gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, disturbed sleeping, and pressure sores

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach to the long-term management of this progressive disorder is optimal [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015].

As first principle, risk factors that exacerbate the movement disorder should be avoided, including patient discomfort, poor body positioning, and pain (e.g., from constipation, urinary retention, pressure sores, undetected fractures). Early referral for nasogastric feeding or percutaneous gastrostomy is appropriate if oral feeding becomes problematic.

Treatment for the palliative control of symptoms includes the following [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015]:

Tetrabenazine and benzodiazepines may be useful in controlling chorea and dyskinesia in early stages of the disease. Chloral hydrate may also help during exacerbations or to aid sleep.

Dystonia is more difficult to control and treatment often includes pramipexole and ropinirole as first-line agents (as few patients respond to levodopa/carbidopa and any response is usually modest and not sustained).

Adjuncts, such as the anticholinergic trihexyphenidyl, are often needed. Baclofen, gabapentin, and clonidine may also be tried for severe dystonia.

Benzodiazepines and chloral hydrate can be useful for exacerbations of dystonia or status dystonicus. Although the role of atypical tranquilizers (e.g., zopiclone) is not yet established, they have been used successfully in individual cases.

Surgical interventions such as intrathecal baclofen and deep brain stimulation have been used on rare occasions late in the disease course when dystonia is severe; therapeutic benefit is limited [Kurian et al 2009].

Optimum management of tone with medical therapies and regular physiotherapy evaluation reduce risk of contracture development. Focal botulinum toxin may be considered for emerging limb contractures and to prevent hip dislocation.

For the treatment of vomiting, anti-emetics such as the anti-serotoninergic agents (e.g., ondansetron) potentially have fewer side effects than other agents.

Treatment of status dystonicus. Standard protocols are used in an intensive care setting. Anesthetic agents, GABA-ergic medication (including GABA-A receptor agonists such as benzodiazepines, GABA-enhancing medications such as gabapentin or phenobarbitone, and GABA-B receptor agonists like baclofen), further anticholinergics, and alpha adrenergic agents such as clonidine may be used. For severe life-threatening or medically intractable status dystonicus, intrathecal baclofen and pallidal deep brain stimulation may be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Consider influenza vaccine, prophylactic antibiotics, and chest physiotherapy for patients prone to chest infections especially during winter months

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Evaluation every six to 12 months for early evidence of hip dislocation and/or spinal deformity

Regular swallowing assessment to evaluate risk for aspiration

Regular assessment by a dietitian/nutritionist to ensure adequate caloric intake

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although dopamine agonists are used as first-line treatment of dystonia in SLC6A3-related DTDS, bromocriptine and pergolide are generally avoided due to increased risk of pulmonary, retroperitoneal, and pericardial fibrosis.

Drugs with anti-dopaminergic side effects (e.g., some antihistamines, sedatives, and dimenhydrinate) may exacerbate the movement disorder.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with special attention to growth parameters, congenital anomalies, and neurologic findings (hypotonia/hypertonia, seizures)

Developmental assessment

Ophthalmologic evaluation for strabismus, cataracts, and functional eye problems

Cardiac evaluation (ECG and echocardiogram) for congenital defects

Musculoskeletal evaluation for delineation of syndactyly, polydactyly, abnormalities of tone, and need for ankle-foot orthoses (AFOs) or other orthotics

Genitourinary examination for anomalies of external genitalia in males and females

Evaluation for functional problems of the gastrointestinal system by history and, if indicated, studies for pyloric stenosis and gastroesophageal reflux. Particular attention should also be given to stooling pattern, abdominal distention, or other signs of possible bowel obstruction, particularly in children with a more severe phenotype, because of their risk for Hirschsprung disease.

Nutritional assessment for feeding problems and poor weight gain

Possible MRI or other cranial imaging to evaluate for holoprosencephaly and/or other brain anomalies

Renal ultrasound evaluation for renal anomalies

Hearing evaluation for either sensorineural or conductive hearing loss

Laboratory evaluation including glucose and electrolytes (for adrenal insufficiency), serum concentrations of amino transferases and bilirubin (for cholestatic liver disease), and testosterone in males

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Cholesterol Supplementation

Devising a treatment strategy for SLOS has been difficult as all factors contributing to the clinical phenotype are not yet known with certainty. It is likely that both low cholesterol levels and elevation of the cholesterol precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC contribute to many of the clinical findings in affected individuals. Therefore, treatment strategies to date have focused on supplying exogenous cholesterol (either as egg yolks or as crystalline cholesterol in either an oil-based or aqueous suspension) in an attempt to raise cholesterol levels and secondarily decrease the levels of the precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC. In general, affected individuals with a more severe biochemical defect require larger doses of cholesterol.

It should be emphasized that dietary studies on cholesterol supplementation have not been conducted in a randomized fashion.

There are multiple reports of dietary cholesterol treatment for SLOS [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997, Linck et al 2000, Chan et al 2009]. Improved growth [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997], reduced photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001, Starck et al 2002a], and increased nerve conduction velocity [Starck et al 2002a] have been objectively documented. However, dietary therapy does not appear to increase the levels of cholesterol in CSF to effect therapeutic effects [van Rooij et al 1997]. There is objective evidence that cholesterol supplementation may alleviate skin photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001]. Additional studies have shown improved tone and achievement of ambulation as well as developmental cognitive and behavioral changes [Irons et al 1997, Tierney et al 2000, Tierney et al 2001]. However, these studies did not have well-defined clinical outcome measures [Svoboda et al 2012].

Nonetheless, cholesterol supplementation should be considered in all individuals with SLOS because it may result in clinical improvement and has minimal side effects [Elias et al 1997, Nwokoro & Mulvihill 1997, Battaile & Steiner 2000].

Other Treatments

Referral to appropriate early intervention and physical/occupational/speech therapies is often required for identified disabilities.

Many infants have difficulty with suck and/or swallow and may require gastrostomy for feeding and support of a nutritionist to help monitor caloric intake and growth. Infants with severe feeding problems generally require the insertion of gastrostomy tubes and/or the use of hypoallergenic, elemental formulas. Because children with SLOS have low muscle mass, careful monitoring of weight gain and growth is necessary so that overconsumption of calories does not lead to obesity.

For those with frequent vomiting or apparent gastroesophageal reflux, a diagnosis of pyloric stenosis should be considered and treated as in the general population. Gastrointestinal reflux and/or constipation require treatment by a gastroenterologist.

Neonatal cholestatic liver disease often resolves with cholesterol and/or bile acid therapy.

Surgical repair may be required for cataracts, ptosis, and/or strabismus.

Syndactyly of hands and/or feet and/or polydactyly may require surgical repair.

Orthopedic management of the early hypotonia and later hypertonia includes the use of AFOs and other orthotics, as well as physical and occupational therapy.

Tendon release surgery or Botox® therapy may be indicated in older children with significant hypertonia.

Dental management can be challenging. Proper positioning, choice of dental devices, and sedation techniques need to be considered [Muzzin & Harper 2003].

Recurrent otitis media may require tympanostomy tube placement.

Photosensitivity can be severe and many children cannot tolerate any exposure to sunlight; others can tolerate varying periods of exposure if properly clothed and protected with a UVA- and UVB-protection sunscreen.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

In severely affected individuals, treatment with stress steroids in doses customarily used for children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see 21-Hydroxylase-Deficient Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia) is recommended during periods of illness, stress, or prolonged decrease in oral intake [Bianconi et al 2011].

Anesthetic problems including muscular rigidity and malignant hyperthermia have been reported [Choi & Nowaczyk 2000]. Airway management during anesthesia may be challenging; use of a laryngeal mask airway has been successful [Leal-Pavey 2004, Matveevskii et al 2006].

Surveillance

Routine health supervision by a physician familiar with SLOS, its complications, and its treatment includes the following:

History, physical examination, and monitoring of growth parameters, with the frequency to be determined by the severity of the child's condition

Age-appropriate developmental assessment at least twice a year until age three years and annually thereafter

Nutritional assessment at least every three to four months until age two years and twice yearly thereafter

Monitoring of cholesterol, serum concentration of 7-DHC, and serum amino transferases (ALT and AST) every three to four months in the first few years of life and twice yearly thereafter

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Treatment with haloperidol, which has a high affinity for the DHCR7 substrate binding site, may exacerbate the biochemical sterol abnormalities in individuals with SLOS and cause an increase in symptoms. It is likely that other drugs in this class will cause the same change in sterol levels [Kelley & Hennekam 2000]. Other psychotropic drugs shown to elevate 7DHC are trazodone and aripiprazole (Abilify®) [Hall et al 2013]. Thus, one must weigh the benefit of such medications against the potential negative side effects. As many individuals with SLOS do require psychotropic medications, close monitoring of clinical signs/symptoms and serum concentration of 7-DHC is recommended.

Photosensitivity can be severe and extended periods of sun exposure should be avoided, as severe sunburn can occur with only limited exposure; however, limited sun exposure is possible for some affected individuals as long as protective clothing is worn and a sunscreen with UVA and UVB properties is used.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

All sibs should be tested by measurement of 7DHC concentration in plasma or amniotic fluid (prenatally). In cases of borderline 7DHC concentration, molecular genetic testing is indicated. Caution must be exercised in interpreting elevated 7DHC concentration in individuals treated with haloperidol, aripiprazole, and tradozone [Hall et al 2013].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No current guidelines exist for the management of pregnant women with SLOS, as to date only one affected woman with a successful pregnancy has been identified [Ellingson et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

Jira et al [2000] used the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor simvastatin to treat two affected individuals for 14 and 23 months, resulting in normalization of cholesterol levels and a decrease of plasma precursors by 28% and 33%. Improvement in the precursor/cholesterol ratio in the cerebrospinal fluid was also found. Morphometric parameters improved in both individuals, and no adverse side effects were observed. However, these studies were not reproduced by subsequent investigations by Haas et al [2007] and Chan et al [2009].

Starck et al [2002b] treated two affected individuals with simvastatin, cholesterol supplementation, and bile acids and found reduction in absolute and relative serum concentration of 7-DHC. However, in one of these individuals, simvastatin was discontinued after hepatotoxic side effects and increased photosensitivity were observed.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

For more severely affected infants with SLOS, the issues of surgical management of congenital anomalies such as cleft palate, congenital heart disease, and genital anomalies need to be considered as they would be in any other infant with a severe, usually lethal disorder.

Reassignment of sex of rearing for infants with a 46,XY karyotype and female genitalia may not always be appropriate because most will have early death, and the process of gender reassignment can be highly disruptive to a family already coping with the difficult issues of having a child with a genetic disorder characterized by life-threatening medical complications.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy (XL-SMA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Nutrition/feeding

Determine if caloric intake is adequate.

Determine if dysphagia and/or fatigue during feeding are present [Iannaccone 2007]; consider swallowing evaluation, especially if aspiration is suspected [Wang et al 2007].

Determine if gastrostomy tube placement and fundoplication are indicated.

Respiratory function

Assess respiratory rate, work of breathing, presence of paradoxic breathing, chest wall shape, and skin perfusion.

Perform baseline pulmonary studies to determine extent of restrictive airway disease and cough efficiency.

Perform sleep evaluation to assess for sleep-disordered breathing including nocturnal hypoventilation and oxygen desaturation [Wang et al 2007].

Orthopedic evaluation to assess contractures

Neurologic evaluation to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management [Iannaccone 2007]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is similar to that for classic SMA type 0 and SMA type I, caused by mutation of SMN. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

Feeding/growth

If oral intake is not adequate, consider higher-calorie feeds and fat supplementation.

If weight gain is inadequate or the child cannot feed appropriately, consider nasogastric and possibly gastrostomy-tube placement.

Watch for swallowing dysfunction and consider a formal swallowing evaluation, especially if coughing or choking and/or recurrent pneumonias are evident as they may be signs of aspiration.

Manage gastroesophageal reflux disorder in the standard manner.

Manage constipation (resulting from weak abdominal musculature and poor motility) with diet (fiber and water content).

Respiratory

Provide rigorous pulmonary toilet, supplemental oxygen, and noninvasive ventilatory support.

Assist cough through mechanical devices or other means if the patient has ineffective cough.

Secretion mobilization may be achieved through chest physiotherapy and postural drainage.

Use oral suctioning as needed.

Use oximetry to monitor the patient’s oxygen exchange status [Wang et al 2007].

In some cases artificial ventilation and tracheostomy may be employed.

As in classic SMA, discuss "do not attempt to resuscitate" status with the family before respiratory failure occurs. This discussion may begin earlier, but is appropriate when abdominal breathing is present and/or the forced vital capacity is less than 30%. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy for further discussion of respiratory support in SMA.

Sleep. Perform a sleep study if sleep-disordered breathing is suspected. Manage accordingly.

Orthopedic. Orthopedic management and physical and occupational therapy are indicated to manage contractures and prevent development of further contractures related to muscle weakness.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Standard precautions against infection are appropriate.

Surveillance

The guidelines described below closely follow those presented in the consensus statement for standard care in spinal muscular atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Individuals with XL-SMA should be followed regularly by a physician familiar with this condition (e.g., a clinical geneticist). Other subspecialists involved in ongoing care include the neurologist, pulmonologist, orthopedist, physical and occupational therapists, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist as needed.

Affected children should be followed at least monthly until the severity and disease course are more clearly delineated. Affected children frequently die in infancy or early childhood; their clinical status should be followed closely to optimize management, and so that the family has a good understanding of the progression and can make informed decisions.

The following are indicated on a routine basis:

Neurologic evaluations to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management

Evaluation by a pulmonologist for evidence of progression of restrictive airway disease

Monitoring of caloric intake and weight, linear growth, head circumference, and growth velocity

Monitoring for scoliosis and kyphosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), the following evaluations are recommended.

Nutrition/feeding assessment

Time required to complete a feeding

Evidence of fatigue during a feeding/meal

Weight plotted on standard growth curves

Respiratory function assessment

Normal breathing pattern versus abdominal breathing pattern

Forced vital capacity (FVC); in children older than age four years, the hand-held spirometer is accurate. When FVC is above 40%, decompensation during respiratory infection is less likely than when FVC is less than 40%.

Sleep assessment. Consider a sleep study if the child snores during sleep or awakes fatigued in the morning.

Activities of daily living. Assess equipment needed for independence, such as a power-chair and other equipment in the home to improve the quality of life for the affected individual and the caregiver.

Orthopedic evaluation. Evaluate for development of contractures, scoliosis, and hip dislocation.

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of children with SMA starts with the diagnosis and classification into one of the five categories. A consensus document on the diagnosis and treatment of children with SMA has been developed [Wang et al 2007] (full text).

Health Issues Specific to SMA

Nutrition. Bulbar dysfunction is universal in SMA I and gastrostomy should be considered early in the course of the disease. The bulbar dysfunction eventually becomes a serious problem for persons with SMA II and only very late in the course of disease for those with SMA III. Gastrointestinal dysmotility results in constipation, delayed gastric emptying, and potentially life-threatening gastroesophageal reflux.

Pulmonary. Children with SMA I and II, and more rarely type III, have progressive decline in pulmonary function. Formal consultation with a pulmonologist familiar with SMA is indicated. Guidelines for assessment and intervention are published as part of the Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Options for management (depending on family preference) include no respiratory support, noninvasive ventilation, and tracheotomy with mechanical ventilation. These options should be discussed with the parents/care providers before respiratory failure occurs. The type of respiratory support is dependent on the individual’s respiratory status, quality-of-life goals, and reduction in respiratory complications. Palliative care, with or without noninvasive ventilator support, is an option for the most severely affected individuals.

Indications for noninvasive ventilation in SMA include hypoventilation, as demonstrated by decreased oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry or obstructive sleep apnea. Noninvasive ventilation has been shown to improve sleep breathing parameters in SMA I and II [Petrone et al 2007]. Noninvasive ventilation with BiPAP is commonly used in SMA as it may improve chest wall and lung development and is proposed to reduce lung infections and pulmonary comorbidity in SMA. Tracheotomy for chronic ventilation is an option that can be discussed with individuals and their families; however, it is controversial, especially in SMA I.

Airway clearance can be addressed with a mechanical in-exsufflator in conjunction with suctioning and chest physiotherapy, especially in the setting of acute illness. Use of mechanical in-exsufflation in the treatment of children with neuromuscular diseases, including children with SMA, appears to reduce pulmonary complications [Chatwin et al 2003, Miske et al 2004].

Scoliosis occurs frequently in individuals with SMA II. Surgical repair should be considered based on progression of the curvature, pulmonary function, and bone maturity. Use of spinal orthosis prior to surgical intervention is common; however, there is insufficient evidence that spinal orthotics alter scoliosis.

Use of the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib (VEPTR) is a possible treatment for severe scoliosis. Chandran and colleagues described the use of VEPTR in 11 children with SMA types I and II who were followed for an average of 43 months after the initial surgery [Chandran et al 2011]. The average age at time of surgery was six years. No surgical complications were identified. Medical complications were seen in two affected individuals: postoperative pneumonia and anemia.

A newer technology involving magnetically controlled growing rods (MAGEC rods) allows for gradual outpatient distractions controlled by an external remote device. Early case reports for this device are becoming available, although experience is not specific to SMA [La Rosa et al 2017].

Hip dislocation is another orthopedic concern in SMA. A retrospective review of a large series of affected individuals suggests that asymptomatic hip dislocation does not require surgery [Sporer & Smith 2003].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Comprehensive care for individuals with SMA should be provided according to the published Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007]. See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Individuals with SMA are evaluated at least every six months; weaker children are evaluated more frequently.

At each visit nutritional state, respiratory function, and orthopedic status (spine, hips, and joint range of motion) are assessed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

No therapy for SMA is currently available, however a number of compounds have been studied and newer approaches (including some directed at increasing full-length SMN protein from SMN2 and gene replacement therapy) are being actively investigated.

Small-Molecule Therapy Approaches

Increasing SMN protein production. Candidate molecules have been identified through cell-based high-throughput screening assays and include histone deacetylase inhibitors, aminoglycosides, and quinazolone derivatives.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are small molecules that have been shown to increase SMN expression and protein levels in the cytoplasm and nuclei of cells from the SMA mouse model as well as in human fibroblasts and lymphocytes [Chang et al 2001, Brichta et al 2003, Sumner et al 2003, Andreassi et al 2004, Brahe et al 2005]. However, clinical trials of HDACIs (including phenylbutyrate and valproic acid) have shown no difference in functional outcome measures compared with placebo [Mercuri et al 2007, Swoboda 2010].

Another molecule, hydroxyurea, a non-HDACI, was also found to increase SMN levels in SMA cell lines, but this compound failed to show improvement in a clinical trial [Chen et al 2010]. Salbutamol, a β-adrenergic agonist, also increases SMN protein in SMA fibroblasts [Angelozzi et al 2008]. Clinical experience to date is limited to two open-label studies of salbutamol/albuterol which have reported improved motor outcomes [Kinali et al 2002, Pane et al 2008]; no randomized, placebo-controlled trials have been performed to date.

Quinazolone derivatives are another class of molecules identified through cell-based high-throughput screening programs. These compounds increased SMN2 promoter activity, altered SMN mRNA levels or mRNA splicing patterns, and increased SMN protein levels and nuclear gem numbers in cells derived from affected individuals [Jarecki et al 2005]. Further, delivery of these compounds to SMA mice significantly increased the mean life span (i.e., by ~21%-30%) [Butchbach et al 2010].

Neuroprotective and Other Approaches

Other small molecules that have been tested but did not show proven benefit in SMA include: gabapentin [Miller et al 2001], creatine [Wang et al 2007], and riluzole [Russman et al 2003]. Olesoxime (TRO19622), a novel neuroprotective molecule, is currently under investigation in SMA (NCT02628743). Finally, a novel troponin activator (CK-2127107) is currently in a Phase II trial for SMA (NCT02644668).

RNA-Based Therapy Approaches

Therapeutic approaches in this category aim to alter SMN2 splicing to increase the proportion of transcripts containing exon 7 and thus increase full-length SMN protein. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are single-stranded RNA molecules specifically designed to target complementary sequences in the SMN2 transcript leading to inclusion of exon 7. An antisense oligonucleotide (ASO), ASO-10-27, corrected SMN2 splicing and restored SMN expression in mice motor neurons after intracerebroventricular injection [Hua et al 2011]. Systemic administration of ASO-10-27 robustly rescued severe SMA mice much more effectively than intracerebroventricular administration; subcutaneous injections extended the median life span 25-fold. Encouraging pre-clinical data in SMA mouse models has subsequently led to a number of current clinical trials. Phase I and II open-label studies in SMA types I-III have shown that this drug could be delivered directly to the cerebral spinal fluid via lumbar puncture in this population with acceptable tolerability (NCT01494701, NCT01703988, NCT01839656). Thus, Ionis Pharmaceuticals has since completed enrollment for two Phase III trials of the ASO ISIS-SMNRx for the treatment of infants with SMA I (NCT02193074) and children with SMA II (NCT02292537). Results of these trials are not yet available. Finally, a trial in presymptomatic infants with genetically diagnosed SMA with this compound is also underway (NCT02386553).

At least two other SNM2 splicing modifiers are currently in clinical trials in SMA, including Novartis Pharmaceuticals LMI070 (NCT02268552) and Roche RG7916 (NCT02633709). Results of these trials are not yet available.

Gene Therapy

Gene replacement therapy with viral delivery of SMN1 is also under investigation in SMA. Foust and colleagues demonstrated that IV delivery of adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) carrying SMN1 on postnatal day 1 to SMA mice led to a normal life span (>400 days) compared with 16 days in the untreated mice [Foust et al 2010]. Based on these results, a Phase I trial of AAV9 containing SMN1 (AVXS-101), delivered intravenously to infants with type I SMA, was undertaken (NCT02122952).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete review of systems at the time of diagnosis

Physical and neurologic examination

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for possible renal/urologic anomalies (~20% of individuals with SMS), including urologic workup if a history of frequent urinary tract infections exists

Echocardiogram to evaluate for possible cardiac anomalies (<45% of individuals with SMS); follow up depending on the severity of any cardiac anomaly identified

Spine radiographs to evaluate for possible vertebral anomalies and scoliosis (~60%)

Routine blood chemistries, qualitative immunoglobulins, fasting lipid profile (evaluation for hypercholesterolemia), and thyroid function studies

Ophthalmologic evaluation with attention to evidence of strabismus, microcornea, iris anomalies, and refractive error

Comprehensive speech/language pathology evaluation

Assessment of caloric intake, signs and symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), swallowing abilities, and oral motor skills with referral as warranted for full diagnostic evaluation

Otolaryngologic evaluation to assess ear, nose, and throat problems, with specific attention to ear physiology and palatal abnormalities (clefting, velopharyngeal insufficiency)

Audiologic evaluation at regular intervals to monitor for conductive and/or sensorineural hearing loss

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation, including assessment of motor, speech, language, personal-social, general cognitive, and vocational skills

Early evaluation by physical and/or occupational therapists

Sleep history with particular attention to sleep/wake schedules and respiratory function. Sleep diaries may prove helpful in documenting sleep/wake schedules. Evidence of sleep-disordered breathing warrants a polysomnogram (overnight sleep study) to evaluate for obstructive sleep apnea.

EEG in individuals who have clinical seizures to guide the choice of antiepileptic agents. For those without overt seizures, EEG may be helpful to evaluate for possible subclinical events in which treatment may improve attention and/or behavior; a change in behavior or attention warrants reevaluation.

Neuroimaging (MRI or CT scan) in accordance with findings such as seizures and/or motor asymmetry

In individuals with SMS documented to have larger deletions extending into 17p12:

Specific screening for adrenal function

Detailed assessment and attention to peripheral neurologic function in individuals with SMS with large deletions involving PMP22, which is associated with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsy (HNPP)

Assessment of family support and psychosocial and emotional needs to assist in designing family interventions

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations

From early infancy, referrals for early childhood intervention programs, followed by ongoing special education programs and vocational training in later years

Therapies including speech/language, physical, occupational, and especially sensory integration:

During early childhood, speech/language pathology services should initially focus on identifying and treating swallowing and feeding problems as well as optimizing oral sensorimotor development.

Therapeutic goals of increasing sensory input, fostering movement of the articulators, increasing oral motor endurance, and decreasing hypersensitivity are needed to develop skills related to swallowing and speech production.

The use of sign language and total communication programs, such as computer assisted devices and tablets, as adjuncts to traditional speech/language therapy is felt to improve communication skills and also to have a positive impact on behavior. The ability to develop expressive language appears dependent on the early use of sign language and intervention by speech/language pathologists.

Atypical patterns of sensory processing may become more prominent with increased age. Insight about the vulnerabilities and relative strengths in patterns of sensory processing may aid caregivers of individuals with SMS in adapting activity demands, modifying the environment, and facilitating appropriate and supportive social interactions. In addition, the potential for more problematic or atypical behaviors with increased age underscores the need for early and ongoing intervention and caregiver education. [Hildenbrand & Smith 2012].

A comprehensive behavior support plan for home and school should be considered as soon as problem behaviors arise, typically starting in early elementary school. A structured school program with one-on-one support and curricula matched to the known cognitive and behavioral profile of SMS can be effective in addressing the needs of these students.

The combination of intellectual disability, severe behavioral abnormalities, and sleep disturbance takes a significant toll on parents and siblings. Parents report high rates of depression and anxiety, and family stress is significantly higher in families of people with SMS than in those of children with nonspecific developmental disabilities [Hodapp et al 1998, Foster et al 2010]. Family support services and resources should be included as essential components of a holistic management plan for people with SMS.

Use of psychotropic medication to increase attention and/or decrease hyperactivity. No single regimen shows consistent efficacy [Laje et al 2010a]. Based on an extensive review of psychotropic medication use in a large cohort of individuals with SMS (n=62), use of polypharmacy and/or serial trials with minimal effectiveness was observed. Benzodiazepines obtained the lowest mean efficacy score in the ‘‘slightly worse’’ range, suggesting that use of these drugs may be detrimental to individuals with SMS [Laje et al 2010a].

Behavioral therapies including special education techniques that emphasize individualized instruction, structure, and routine to help minimize behavioral outbursts in the school setting

Therapeutic management of the sleep disorder. Sleep management in SMS remains a challenge for physicians and parents. No well-controlled treatment trials have been reported:

Early anecdotal reports of therapeutic benefit from melatonin taken at bedtime remain encouraging, providing variable improvement of sleep without reports of major adverse reactions. Dosages should be kept low (≤3 mg). However, melatonin dispensed over the counter is not regulated by the FDA; thus, dosages may not be exact. No early and controlled melatonin treatment trials have been conducted. A monitored trial of four to six weeks on melatonin may be worth considering in affected individuals with sleep disturbance.

A single uncontrolled study of nine individuals with SMS treated with oral β-1-adrenergic antagonists (acebutolol 10 mg/kg) reported suppression of daytime melatonin peaks and subjectively improved behavior [De Leersnyder et al 2001]. This treatment, however, did not restore nocturnal plasma concentration of melatonin.

A second uncontrolled trial by the same group [De Leersnyder et al 2003] combined the daytime dose of acebutolol with an evening oral dose of melatonin (6 mg at 8pm) and found that nocturnal plasma concentration of melatonin was restored and nighttime sleep improved with disappearance of nocturnal awakenings. Parents also reported subjective improvement in daytime behaviors with increased concentration. Contraindications to the use of β-1-adrenergic antagonists include asthma, pulmonary problems, some cardiovascular disease, and diabetes mellitus.

Prior to beginning any trial, the child's medical status and baseline sleep pattern must be considered.

Enclosed bed system for containment during sleep

Respite care and family psychosocial support to help assure the optimal environment for the affected individual

Monitoring of hypercholesterolemia (recognized in >50% of individuals with SMS); treatment with diet or medication as indicated

Treatment with corrective lenses as indicated for ophthalmologic abnormalities

Treatment of recurrent otitis media with tympanostomy tubes as needed

Auditory amplification if hearing loss is identified

Management of seizures in accordance with standard practice

Treatment of cardiac and renal anomalies and scoliosis in accordance with standard medical care. While growth hormone treatment has been reported [Itoh et al 2004, Spadoni et al 2004], controlled studies have not evaluated its effectiveness.

Surveillance

Recommended annually:

Multidisciplinary team evaluation (including physical, occupational, and speech therapy evaluations and pediatric assessment) to assist in development of an individualized educational program (IEP). Periodic neurodevelopmental assessments and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric consultation can be an important adjunct to the team evaluation.

Thyroid function, including free T4 and TSH

Fasting lipid profile

Routine urinalysis to evaluate for occult urinary tract infections

Monitoring for scoliosis

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Otolaryngologic follow up for assessment and management of otitis media and other sinus abnormalities

Audiologic evaluation to monitor for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss annually or as clinically indicated

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In at least one case, a teenage female with SMS was documented to have a serious adverse event taking Strattera® (atomoxetine hydrochloride) with extreme escalation of behaviors and aggression leading to hospitalization. Significant changes in her sleep pattern were also documented. Care should be taken to track sleep parameters and behavior with this medication.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

To date, there are no published cases of individuals with SMS who have had children.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Pharmacologic intervention should be considered on an individual basis with recognition that some medications may exacerbate sleep or behavioral problems and may cause weight gain.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Intellectual disability (ID) assessment using standardized neuropsychological tests to determine overall level of cognitive function as well as relative levels of performance and verbal skills. These assessments help guide recommendations for educational resources and special therapies.

Neuropsychological assessment (visual, speech, or motor function)

Bone density assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan to determine the degree of osteoporosis and the need for and response to calcium supplements

Assessment of seizures, including EEG if seizures are suspected. The type of seizures may determine the selection of anticonvulsant.

Clinical genetics consultation

MRI of the brain to assess abnormal calcification (which has been noted in a few individuals and occurs in the absence of calcium supplementation)

Treatment of Manifestations

Speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy may be helpful. Some individuals have performed appropriately in special education programs, learned to follow commands, and held simple jobs [Arena et al 1996]. In contrast, others showed no improvement of psychomotor skills with special education [Becerra-Solano et al 2009].

Calcium supplementation has slightly improved bone mineral density in a few patients [Becerra-Solano et al 2009]. The mechanism of decreased bone mineral density is not well understood. Calcium supplementation should be started once decreased bone mineral density is noted.

Seizures have shown varying responses to anti-seizure medications [Arena et al 1996, de Alencastro et al 2008]. Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and clobazan have been used successfully to control seizures in some individuals.

Surveillance

Because of the osteoporosis, individuals with SRS are at increased risk for fractures and should be investigated for factures if medically indicated.

While receiving calcium supplementation, patients should be monitored regularly for ectopic calcification with endocrine tests (including calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and hormone levels) and radiographs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasias, the following evaluations are recommended:

Formal audiologic evaluation

Neurologic evaluation for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of increased intracranial pressure and/or proptosis

Assessment of the necessity for surgical correction of syndactyly in individuals with sclerosteosis

Radiographic and imaging studies

Dental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

The bones in sclerosteosis are thick and dense; surgical intervention may be difficult and prolonged. Standard neurosurgical instruments may not be sufficient (i.e., drill bits may be too short and power tools may be damaged by the dense bone) [du Plessis 1993]. In addition, bone regrowth occurs and may cause recurrence of symptoms.

Management is based on surgical decompression of the entrapped cranial nerves that can cause recurrent facial paralysis similar to Bell's palsy (from age two years onwards). Trigeminal nerve decompression can help if facial pain is severe.

Craniectomy is required if intracranial pressure becomes elevated (from age five years onwards but usually in young adulthood). In South Africa this procedure is undertaken at an increasingly younger age.

Middle ear surgery to correct conductive hearing loss and the provision of hearing aids may be helpful. Brain stem implantation of electrodes is indicated if there is obliteration of the internal auricular canal and damage to the auditory nerve.

Spinal cord decompression may occasionally be needed in adulthood to alleviate backache.

Surgical correction of syndactyly may be necessary in early childhood in order to improve function and cosmetic appearance in those with sclerosteosis.

Mandible reduction may be performed for cosmetic reasons or if mouth closure is impaired as a result of overgrowth of the mandible. Tooth extraction may be difficult. Management by an orthodontic or craniofacial team is recommended.

Surveillance

Annually from infancy onwards for the following:

Audiologic assessment

Assessment for increased intracranial pressure and medullary compression

Neurologic and otologic examination for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Dental and orthodontic evaluation of tooth malalignment and malocclusion on an individual basis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The following are appropriate:

Clinical appraisal and lateral skull radiograph as indicated

Molecular genetic testing of the parents if the SOST mutations have been identified in the proband

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Surgery for proptosis has not been successful [De Villiers & du Plessis 1995].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Sotos syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]:

A thorough history to identify known features of Sotos syndrome: learning difficulties, cardiac and renal anomalies, seizures, and scoliosis

Physical examination including cardiac auscultation, blood pressure measurement, and back examination for scoliosis

Investigations to detect abnormalities before they result in significant morbidity/mortality:

In children in whom the diagnosis has just been established, echocardiogram and renal ultrasound examination

In adults in whom the diagnosis has just been established, renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal damage from quiescent chronic vesicoureteral reflux

Referral for audiologic assessment. Conductive hearing loss may occur at an increased frequency in Sotos syndrome; thus, the threshold for referral should be low.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

When clinical problems (e.g., cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, scoliosis, seizures) or difficulties with learning/behavior/speech are identified, referral to the appropriate specialist is recommended.

If MRI has been performed and ventricular dilatation demonstrated, shunting should not usually be necessary as the "arrested hydrocephalus" associated with Sotos syndrome is typically non-obstructive and not associated with raised intracranial pressure. If raised intracranial pressure is suspected, investigation and management in consultation with neurologists and neurosurgeons would be appropriate.

Some children in North America have been prescribed methylphenidate with varying success; in Europe, behavioral management strategies are more commonly used, again with varying success.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in individuals with vesicoureteral reflux.

Surveillance

Regular evaluation by a general pediatrician is recommended for younger children, individuals with many medical complications needing coordination of medical specialists, and families requiring more support than average [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007].

The clinician may wish to evaluate older children/teenagers and those individuals without many medical complications less frequently.

The following are appropriate at the clinical evaluation:

Thorough history to identify known clinical sequelae of Sotos syndrome

Cardiac auscultation

Blood pressure measurement

Examination for curvature of the spine

Urine dipstick to assess for quiescent urine infection

Referral to an ophthalmologist if strabismus or other problem with vision is suspected

Referral for audiologic assessment if hearing is a concern or if the child has had many upper respiratory tract infections

Referral to the appropriate clinical specialist if problems are identified

Note: Cancer screening is not recommended. (1) The absolute risk of sacrococcygeal teratoma and neuroblastoma is low (~1%) [Tatton-Brown et al 2005b, Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]. This level of risk does not warrant routine screening, particularly as screening for neuroblastoma has not been shown to decrease mortality and can lead to false positive results [Schilling et al 2002]. (2) Wilms tumor risk is not significantly increased and routine renal ultrasound examination is not indicated [Scott et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Preeclampsia occurs at a slightly higher frequency in women carrying a fetus with Sotos syndrome, careful monitoring in at-risk pregnancies is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SOX2-related eye disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination by an experienced pediatric ophthalmologist

High-resolution cranial MRI for brain/pituitary malformations, optic nerve/chiasm/tract assessment

Endocrinologic evaluation to include corticosteroid, gonadotrphin, growth hormone, and thyroid function tests to assess pituitary function

Baseline neurodevelopmental assessment

Audiometry

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Visual impairment. The general management of visual impairment is not specific to anophthalmia or microphthalmia (see Anophthalmia/Microphthalmia Overview). Care includes:

Early referral to an experienced multidisciplinary team

Consideration of use of expanders to stimulate growth of the orbit and periorbital tissues. Because accurate assessment of visual function is necessary, optically clear expanders should be used.

Referral to special educational services for visually impaired infants

Other

Referral to endocrinologist for growth or hypogonadism concerns

Referral to physiotherapist if any evidence of motor impairment exists

Referral to special educational services for neurodevelopmental problems as needed

Consideration of use of melatonin for regulation of circadian rhythm if sleep pattern is abnormal

Parent/caregiver training in seizure management

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Many neonates can have an adequate MRI without general anesthesia using the “feed and wrap” method. In this case, assess morning cortisol levels prior to any subsequent anesthetic if this MRI reveals pituitary hypoplasia. If an anesthetic is required before adequate intracranial imaging is available, an endocrinologic evaluation is indicated.

Surveillance

The following measures are suggested:

Annual hearing test

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference every three to six months during childhood

Neurodevelopmental assessment annually for the first five years of life

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 11 (SPG11), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuropsychological testing to assess the cognitive impairment and decline

Neuro-urologic examination for those with sphincter disturbance

Electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific drug treatment or cures exist for SPG11.

Care by a multidisciplinary team that may include a general practitioner, neurologist, medical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Symptomatic treatment to reduce pyramidal hyperactivity in the lower limbs includes the following:

Physiotherapy for stretching of the spastic muscles to prevent contractures

Anti-spastic drugs such as baclofen and tizanidine

Botulin toxin and intrathecal baclofen, which can be considered when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling

When sphincter disturbances become a problem, urodynamic evaluation should be performed in order to adapt treatment and monitor follow up. Anticholinergic drugs are indicated for urinary urgency.

Psychiatric manifestations should be treated in accordance with standard practice.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Follow up of sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction and infection.

Early regular physiotherapy helps to prevent contractures.

Surveillance

Specialized outpatient clinic evaluations are suggested every six months to adjust medication and physical rehabilitation.

Brain MRI can be used to follow the atrophy of the corpus callosum, cerebellum, and brain stem, and to monitor increases in the size and intensity of white matter hyperintensities.

Regular electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP) are recommended to follow the extent of the disease.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with BSCL2-related neurologic disorders, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and deep tendon reflex

EMG with NCV

Complete family history

Molecular genetic testing

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment remains symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, medical geneticists, and physical and occupational therapists.

Physiotherapy is appropriate.

Orthopedic treatment includes orthopedic shoes and calipers (polypropylene devices that fit between the thighs and hold the legs and hips in a balanced position for standing, used in conjunction with crutches or a walker) to stabilize gait. Foot deformities are corrected by surgical treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Currently, no treatment for BSCL2-related neurologic disorders that reverses or slows the natural disease process exists.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early regular physiotherapy can prevent contractures to a certain extent.

Surveillance

Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, muscular atrophy, and deep tendon reflexes by a neurologist is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Troyer syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Height

Occipitofrontal circumference (OFC)

Speech and language development with attention to possible dysarthria and tongue dyspraxia

Gross motor and fine motor skills

Neurologic examination with attention to evidence of pyramidal and/or extrapyramidal movement disorders, distal amyotrophy, hyperreflexia

School performance

Emotional status, including presence or absence of emotional lability

Skeletal abnormalities and skeletal x-rays as needed

Brain MRI

EMG

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for spasticity is presently limited to reducing muscle spasticity through exercise and medication, especially Lioresal®, which is given either orally or via intrathecal pump. Dosages need to be individualized as some patients have mainly weakness with less spasticity (and thus do not benefit from large doses), while others have significant spasticity and require high doses. Tizanidine, dantrolene (see, however, Agents/Circumstances to Avoid), and Botox® have also been useful in reducing muscle spasticity.

It is recommended that affected individuals participate in daily physical therapy designed to:

Maintain and improve muscle flexibility and range of motion (stretching exercises);

Improve muscle strength (through resistance exercise);

Maintain walking reflexes (walking on a slowly moving treadmill with arm supports or walking in a swimming pool); and

Improve cardiovascular fitness.

These recommendations are based on the experience of approximately 200 persons with hereditary spastic paraplegia, who nearly unanimously reported benefit from daily physical exercise [Fink 2003].

Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics as needed are appropriate.

Oxybutynin is helpful in reducing urinary urgency.

Antidepressants or mood stabilizers can be prescribed to manage emotional lability.

See also Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Provide good nursing care and physiotherapy during disease progression; monitor for dysphagia to reduce risk of aspiration.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Specialized outpatient evaluations every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation

Cognitive testing

Repeat skeletal survey

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 3A (SPG3A), the following evaluations may be indicated:

Orthopedic evaluation in persons with early onset of SPG3A who have developed musculoskeletal complications including scoliosis or foot deformities

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation in children with early onset of disease

Urologic evaluation in persons with prominent urinary bladder hyperactivity

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies in persons with associated axonal neuropathy or neurogenic pain in the lower extremities caused by possible lumbo-sacral radiculopathy secondary to lumbar hyperlordosis and degenerative vertebral changes

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Therapy for spasticity, distal weakness, and urinary bladder dysfunction, the primary manifestations of SPG3A, is symptomatic.

Spasticity can be treated with:

Oral baclofen or tizanidine

Chemodenervation with botulinum A or B toxins; may be tried in those who do not tolerate oral antispasticity medications

Intrathecal baclofen pump; a good alternative for patients who improve on oral baclofen but cannot tolerate a therapeutic dose because of systemic adverse effects

Each of the above therapies should be combined with intensive physical therapy focused on stretching and strengthening exercises.

The role of surgical therapy for spasticity (including hamstring and heel cord lengthening and release of the adductor longus) remains unknown, but such treatment should be considered if contractures appear. See also Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Distal weakness, typically affecting foot dorsiflexion, can be ameliorated by ankle-foot orthoses; referral to orthotic services may be helpful.

Urinary urgency can be treated with anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Musculoskeletal abnormalities including muscle tendon contractures, scoliosis, and foot deformities are the secondary complications most likely to occur, resulting from long-standing spasticity and weakness. Intense and regular therapy for spasticity, including physiotherapy, can delay and minimize the appearance of these complications. The higher incidence of orthopedic problems in patients with SPG3A may be related to early age of onset and these patients should be followed by an orthopedist if problems are present.

Urinary bladder incontinence can be a secondary complication of a neurogenic bladder and urologic care may be needed.

Patients with advanced disease may experience falls with a risk of traumatic injury. A walking aid (cane, walker, or wheelchair) may need to be considered in patients experiencing falls.

Surveillance

There is no consensus regarding the frequency of clinical follow-up visits, but every person with HSP should be reevaluated once or twice a year to identify new complications early and to initiate aggressive therapy as indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The use of regional anesthesia, such as spinal or epidural anesthesia, during delivery in affected women with spinal cord involvement has traditionally been avoided due to the theoretic risk of exacerbating the degree of weakness and spasticity. However, several cases of successful regional anesthesia in affected individuals with hereditary spastic paraplegia have been reported [Thomas et al 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 4 (SPG4), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuro-urologic examination is advised for individuals who have sphincter disturbances.

Whether neuropsychological testing should be performed to assess the cognitive impairment frequently reported in individuals with SPG4 remains unclear. So far, no consensus exists on the type of tests that should be performed, the timing of the tests, and the purpose. Considering that cognitive impairment is often absent or is detectable only by neuropsychological testing, one should be wary of increasing the burden of individuals with SPG4, and probably only recommend further testing when required by the affected individual.

Electrophysiologic investigations may be advisable in case of pain and/or edema in the lower limbs to evaluate for associated neuropathy. Neuropathy (not a feature of SPG4 per se) may occur in individuals with SPG4 for other reasons and should be investigated and adequately treated. Because of the underlying HSP the neuropathy may remain undiagnosed if routine investigations are not conducted.

Spinal MRI examination to exclude any additional degenerative disorder can be considered if unusual symptoms or pain are present.

A thorough examination for associated restless legs syndrome (RLS) also appears to be warranted [Sperfeld et al 2007].

Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

Care by a multidisciplinary team that includes a general practitioner, neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Symptomatic treatment includes use of the following:

Antispastic drugs for leg spasticity

Anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs for urinary urgency

Regular physiotherapy for stretching of spastic muscles. Stretching should be done manually at all levels (hips, knees, ankles) and preceded by heat conditioning.

Botulinum toxin and intrathecal baclofen can be proposed when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling. One open-label study with botulinum toxin injections showed an increase in gait velocity in persons with HSP after six months [Rousseaux et al 2007].

Urodynamic evaluation should be performed early in all affected individuals complaining of urgency or other problems, such as voiding difficulties, urine retention, and/or frequent urinary infections. Such symptoms should be monitored and treated according to individual needs and disease evolution. At the present time there is no consensus on treatment of sphincter disturbances (both urinary and anal) and management remains therefore symptomatic [Braschinsky et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Follow-up of the sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction.

Early regular physiotherapy can prevent contractures to a certain extent. Intensive and early physiotherapy delays the development of symptoms related to spasticity and prolongs the ability to walk [Author, personal observation]. In children orthopedic treatment and botulinum toxin injections may also contribute to better ambulatory function. More systematic studies are, however, needed to confirm these observations.

Surveillance

Specialized outpatient evaluations are suggested every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

A double-blind crossover trial with gabapentin did not show improvement of spasticity in persons with SPG4 [Scheuer et al 2007].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 7 (SPG7), evaluation by a multidisciplinary team that includes a general practitioner, neurologist, clinical geneticist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific drug treatments or cures exist for SPG7.

Drugs to reduce spasticity and muscle tightness include baclofen, tizanidine, dantrolene, and diazepam — preferably administered one at a time.

Management of spasticity by intrathecal baclofen or intramuscular botulinum toxin injections may be an option in selected individuals [Young 1994].

A combination of physical therapy and assistive walking devices are often used to reduce contractures, provide support, and promote stability.

Occupational therapy is often helpful in managing activities of daily living.

Surveillance

Annual neurologic evaluation can help identify potential complications of spasticity that develop over time (e.g., contractures).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In an SPG7 mouse model using intramuscular viral delivery of the gene to correct some of the defects, Pirozzi et al [2006] observed an improvement of neuropathologic changes and mitochondrial morphology, described by Ferreirinha et al [2004], in the peripheral nerves of paraplegin-deficient mice. This approach may offer hope for future treatment strategies.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 8 (SPG8), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Urodynamic evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No cures or specific drug treatments exist for hereditary spastic paraplegia. An approach to management of spasticity is reviewed by Young [1994]:

Daily regimen of physical therapy directed toward improving cardiovascular fitness, maintaining and improving muscle strength and gait, and reducing spasticity is recommended.

Physical therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics are often used.

Antispasmodic drugs (e.g., baclofen, BOTOX®, dantrolene, tizanidine), used one at a time, are usually helpful, especially early in the disease course. Baclofen can be tried first, and can be used with an intrathecal pump in some cases. The entire therapeutic range of doses in all four drugs is used. The drugs are administered before sleep if nocturnal cramps are problematic, otherwise three to four times per day. These drugs alleviate symptoms by decreasing cramps and making leg muscles less tight, which can facilitate walking. It usually takes a few days for their effects to become evident. No significant toxicity limits their use.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Bladder function should be routinely monitored to avoid urinary tract infections.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular neurologic examinations (1-2 per year) to evaluate disease progression and avoid complications of spasticity, including joint contractures

Referral to a urologist for urodynamic testing and follow-up when symptoms appear

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive spondylocostal dysostosis (AR SCDO), the following are recommended:

Assessment of respiratory function, especially if tachypnea and/or feeding difficulties suggest the possibility of respiratory insufficiency

Evaluation for other (e.g., renal and cardiac) anomalies

Evaluation of a male child for the presence of inguinal hernia

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In the majority of individuals treatment is conservative because the vertebral and rib malformations cause progressive difficulties:

Respiratory support, including intensive care as needed, to treat acute respiratory distress and chronic respiratory failure

Routine treatment of inguinal herniae

Surgical intervention as needed if scoliosis is significant. External bracing, for example by use of an expandable prosthetic titanium rib [Ramirez et al 2010], may be attempted but experience is limited.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most significant secondary complication is chronic respiratory failure caused by reduced lung capacity, which can result in pulmonary hypertension and cardiac failure. Expert management of these clinical problems is indicated.

Surveillance

Growth, development, respiratory function, and spinal curvature should be monitored.

The parents/care providers of young males need to be alert for the signs of inguinal hernia and its potential complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Virtually all individuals with SCDO have relative truncal shortening, and some have generalized short stature. For affected women pregnancy may give rise to exaggerated intra-abdominal pressure problems, though there is no published research on this issue. As the spine is distorted there are likely to be concerns with offering spinal and/or epidural anesthesia. However, spinal anesthesia has been successfully administered [Dolak & Tartt 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with sepiapterin reductase deficiency (SRD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic consultation

Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy evaluations depending on severity of manifestations

Neuropsychological evaluation depending on the severity of manifestations

Social services consultation depending on the severity of manifestations

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Therapy is aimed at correcting central nervous system (CNS) neurotransmitter deficits.

Recommended treatments are based on the few reported cases in the literature and extrapolation from strategies employed in treatment of other neurotransmitter disorders.

While the medications discussed below reduce manifestations of SRD, response can range from complete resolution to partial improvement. These medications most consistently correct motor abnormalities while in some cognitive manifestations remain more refractory.

Often, medications must be prescribed “off-label” without established pediatric dose ranges [Friedman et al 2012]:

L-dopa (0.1-16 mg/kg/day) in combination with 10%-25% carbidopa (or another peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor) is the main therapy to correct CNS dopamine deficiency. Optimal therapeutic level is determined by clinical response. Note: (1) Dose-related dyskinesias may occur [Abeling et al 2006, Neville 2007, Arrabal et al 2011, Friedman et al 2012]; they can be eliminated in most instances with reduced dosage or addition of a dopamine agonist to reduce fluctuations in dopaminergic stimulation [Lohmann et al 2012]. (2) Gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea may be reduced by increasing the proportion of administered carbidopa. (3) Although not reported, it is theoretically possible that individuals with SRD receiving high-dose L-dopa could develop cerebral folate deficiency and require supplementation with folinic acid (as has been observed in L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase deficiency [Brun et al 2010]).

5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) (1-6mg/kg/day) also in combination with carbidopa to correct CNS serotonin deficiency has shown additional clinical benefit in some.

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4; sapropterin dihydrocloride) may in theory be of benefit, although none was reported in four patients treated for only a short time [Friedman et al 2006, Friedman et al 2012]. Note that it is difficult to achieve adequate CNS levels of BH4 due to limited transport across the blood brain barrier.

Other agents used when L-dopa/5HTP/carbidopa are not tolerated or sufficiently effective which have shown benefit in single or small numbers of patients include:

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (selegeline)

Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline)

Melatonin

Dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, pramipexole)

Anticholinergics

Methylphenidate

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy may improve or maintain function.

Surveillance

Data are insufficient to determine how frequently CSF levels of dopamine and serotonin metabolites should be evaluated and whether these levels should be used to adjust medication doses. Practices range from at least annual assessment of CNS neurotransmitter metabolites to adjustment of neurotransmitter precursor therapy based solely on clinical manifestations.

Because clinical manifestations are more difficult to assess in children, it would seem prudent to evaluate CSF neurotransmitter metabolites two to four times yearly in children younger than age two years and at least yearly in children younger than age ten years.

Note: Plasma prolactin levels may inversely correlate with CNS dopamine levels but are neither a sensitive nor specific marker [Leuzzi et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2003, Concolino et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although adverse events with specific agents have not been reported in persons with SRD, several should be avoided on a theoretic basis including:

Sulfa drugs, which impair BH4 biosynthesis by inhibiting sepiapterin reductase [Haruki et al 2013]

Methotrexate, which inhibits dihydropteridine reductase, an enzyme involved in BH4 regeneration [Woody & Brewster 1990]

Nitrous oxide, which may impair folate metabolism [Wyatt & Gill 1999]

Neuroleptics and other dopamine antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

While no data on outcomes are available, it is appropriate to use molecular genetic testing for the SPR pathogenic variants identified in the proband and/or analysis of CSF neurotransmitter metabolites and pterins to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as soon as possible those who would benefit from early initiation of treatment to correct CNS dopamine and serotonin deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No pregnancies have been reported to date in women with SRD.

Based on reports that suggest that L-dopa may be advantageous during pregnancy in women with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT-GCH1), it would seem prudent for women with SRD to continue L-dopa therapy during pregnancy [Trender-Gerhard et al 2009, Watanabe & Matsubara 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuroimaging (MRI)

EEG

Developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of SSADH deficiency is most often symptomatic, directed at the treatment of seizures and neurobehavioral disturbances.

Seizures. Antiseizure medications employed for the treatment of SSADH deficiency tend to be broad spectrum, although valproate is avoided when possible because of inhibition of potential residual enzymatic activity [Shinka et al 2003]. Vigabatrin, an irreversible inhibitor of GABA-transaminase, inhibits the formation of succinic semialdehyde [Matern et al 1996]. However, vigabatrin has shown inconsistent results [Howells et al 1992, Gropman 2003], suggesting that it is not effective at inhibiting peripheral GABA-transaminase, leading to a peripheral supply of 4-hydroxybutyric acid to the brain and thus decreasing its own efficacy. Brain MRI signal changes, particularly prominent in the thalamus and basal ganglia, have been seen in infants treated with relatively high doses of vigabatrin [Pearl et al 2009c].

However, reports of uncontrolled, nonblinded trials of vigabatrin in two affected children described a decrease in plasma GHB concentrations and clinical improvement (specifically in verbal communication) in one child age eight years [Casarano et al 2012] and slow clinical improvement (although not unexpected based on natural history) in a child age 2.5 years [Escalera et al 2010].

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Methylphenidate, thioridazine, risperidal, fluoxetine, and benzodiazepines have been used for the treatment of increased anxiety, aggressiveness, and inattention [Gibson et al 2003].

Beneficial non-pharmacologic treatments include physical therapy directed at developing strength, endurance, and balance; occupational therapy for improvement of fine motor skills, feeding, and sensory integration; and speech therapy [Gropman 2003].

Surveillance

Regular neurologic and developmental assessments are indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Valproate is generally contraindicated as it may inhibit residual SSADH enzyme activity [Shinka et al 2003]. However, Vanadia et al [2013] reported an individual with SSADH deficiency who had refractory epilepsy after possible limbic encephalitis. The refractory epilepsy was finally controlled with magnesium valproate. One year after initiation of magnesium valproate therapy, the affected individual remained seizure free and had marked behavioral improvements, including decreases in aggression, coprolalia, and non-recognition of danger. In addition, the EEG demonstrated improved background organization.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Biomarkers have been studied with plans for utilization in clinical trials. Positron emission tomography (PET) with [11C]flumazenil (FMZ), a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist, showed reduced binding in cortical, basal ganglia, and cerebellar regions of interest versus controls consistent with downregulation of GABA receptors [Pearl et al 2007]. Transcranial magnetic stimulation similarly showed downregulation of GABAergic activity in affected individuals versus controls [Pearl et al 2009a]. A single case of improvement in gait, coordination, and energy was reported as an abstract in a 30-month-old male administered 200 mg/kg/day of taurine [Saronwala et al 2008]. However, an open-label study of eighteen individuals with SSADH deficiency treated with taurine did not show significant improvement in adaptive behavior scores. This study was assigned a class IV level of evidence because it did not involve a control group [Pearl et al 2014].

SGS-742, a GABA-B receptor antagonist, demonstrated in the murine model a significant effect on electrocorticography when compared with topiramate [Pearl et al 2009a]. Liver-mediated gene therapy in the mouse model did lead to reductions in GHB levels in liver, kidney, serum, and brain extracts [Gupta et al 2004]. A clinical trial of SGS-742 is currently enrolling (ClinicalTrials.gov).

Recent data demonstrated that administration of rapamycin to an SSADH-deficient mouse model reduced mTOR activity, reduced the elevated numbers of mitochondria in the liver and brain (due to improved mitophagy), and normalized aberrant antioxidant levels; mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin may lead to the treatment of many diseases, including SSADH [Lakhani et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Animal experiments utilizing the murine model have demonstrated partial efficacy involving the amino acid taurine, vigabatrin, and GABAB and GHB receptor inhibitors [Gupta et al 2004].

A murine trial has demonstrated some efficacy of the ketogenic diet [Nylen et al 2008], although the mechanism of the observed changes (and thus the potential for success in a human trial) is unknown [Knerr & Pearl 2008].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Stickler syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of palate by a craniofacial specialist

Baseline ophthalmologic examination

Baseline audiogram

Directed history to elicit complaints suggestive of mitral valve prolapse (MVP), such as episodic tachycardia and chest pain. If symptoms are present, referral to a cardiologist should be made.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Craniofacial. Infants with Robin sequence need immediate attention from specialists in otolaryngology and pediatric critical care, as they may require tracheostomy to ensure a competent airway. It is recommended that evaluation and management occur in a comprehensive craniofacial clinic that provides all the necessary services, including otolaryngology, plastic surgery, oral and maxillofacial surgery, pediatric dentistry, orthodontics, and medical genetics.

In most individuals, micrognathia tends to become less prominent over time, allowing for removal of the tracheostomy. However, in some individuals, significant micrognathia persists, causing orthodontic problems. In these individuals, a mandibular advancement procedure is often required to correct the malocclusion.

Ophthalmologic. Refractive errors should be corrected with spectacles.

Individuals with Stickler syndrome should be advised of the symptoms associated with retinal detachment and the need for immediate evaluation and treatment when such symptoms occur.

Audiologic. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview. Otitis media may be a recurrent problem secondary to palatal abnormalities. Myringotomy tubes are often required.

Joints. Treatment of arthropathy is symptomatic and includes using over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications before and after physical activity.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with mitral valve prolapse may need antibiotic prophylaxis for certain surgical procedures.

Surveillance

Annual examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is appropriate.

Follow-up audiologic evaluations are appropriate every six months through age five years, and annually thereafter.

While the prevalence of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) among affected individuals is unclear, all individuals with Stickler syndrome should be screened for MVP through routine physical examination. More advanced testing (e.g., echocardiogram) should be reserved for those with suggestive symptoms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Affected individuals should be advised to avoid activities that may lead to traumatic retinal detachment (e.g., contact sports).

At present, no prophylactic therapies to minimize joint damage in affected individuals exist. Some physicians recommend avoiding physical activities that involve high impact to the joints in an effort to delay the onset of the arthropathy. While this recommendation seems logical, there are no data to support it.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because of the variable expression of Stickler syndrome [Faber et al 2000], it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband as well as other at-risk relatives in order to identify those who warrant ongoing evaluation (see Surveillance). Evaluation can be done in one of two ways:

By documenting medical history and performing physical examination and ophthalmologic, audiologic, and radiographic assessments. The examination of childhood photographs may be helpful in the assessment of craniofacial findings of adults, since the craniofacial findings characteristic of Stickler syndrome may become less distinctive with age.

By molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known

It is recommended that relatives at risk in whom the diagnosis of Stickler syndrome cannot be excluded with certainty be followed for potential complications.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with sitosterolemia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, if not measured at the time of diagnosis

Determination of the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas (tendon and tuberous)

Depending on the age of the patient, cardiology consultation to evaluate for atherosclerosis and cardiac valve abnormalities with consideration of coronary arteriography as needed

Complete blood count with smear to look for platelet abnormalities and/or thrombocytopenia

Evaluation for possible hemolysis/ hemolytic anemia

Monitoring liver function (e.g., albumin, ALT, AST, ALP, bilirubin) [Miettinen et al 2006]

Evaluation for arthralgias and/or arthritis

If splenomegaly is significant, consultation with a hematologist and gastroenterologist

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment aims to reduce plasma concentration of plant sterols to as close as possible to normal concentrations (i.e., <1 mg/dL), to control plasma concentration of cholesterol, and to prevent xanthoma formation and/or reduce the size and number of xanthomas.

Historically, treatment strategies included dietary restriction of intake of both animal- and plant-based sterols, ileal bypass surgery, and/or hepatic transplantation [Salen et al 2004, Wang et al 2004, Miettinen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010]. Some of these treatments have only been partially effective.

Current treatment therapies focus on the following:

A diet low in shellfish sterols and plant sterols (i.e., avoidance of vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, seeds, avocados, chocolate, and shellfish) in conjunction with ezetimibe or other medications

The sterol absorption inhibitor: ezetimibe (10 mg/d) [Salen et al 2004, Salen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Musliner et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010], which alone may be sufficient

Bile acid sequestrants such as cholestryramine (8-15 g/d) which may be considered in those with incomplete response to ezetimibe

Treatments should begin at the time of diagnosis. When tolerated, the combined treatments can decrease the plasma concentrations of cholesterol and sitosterol by 10% to 50%. Often existing xanthomas regress.

Partial ileal bypass surgery (i.e., shortening of the ileum) has been used to increase intestinal bile acid loss. Partial or complete ileal bypass surgery in persons with sitosterolemia has resulted in at least 50% reduction of plasma and cellular sterol and stanol levels [Nguyen et al 1988, Nguyen et al 1990].

Arthritis, arthralgias, anemia, thromobocytopenia, and/or splenomegaly require treatment, the first step being management of the sitosterolemia, followed by routine management of the finding (by the appropriate consultants) as needed.

Sitosterolemia does not respond to standard statin treatment.

Surveillance

Monitor plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, and the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas [Kidambi & Patel 2008] at least every six to 12 months.

Monitor platelet count for thrombocytopenia, CBC for evidence of hemolytic anemia, and liver enzymes for elevation beginning at the time of diagnosis with the frequency determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.

In those with longstanding untreated sitosterolemia, surveillance for atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease is indicated, with the level of monitoring determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Margarines and other products containing stanols (e.g., campestanol and sitostanol), which are recommended for use by persons with hypercholesterolemia, are contraindicated in those with sitosterolemia as they can exacerbate plant stanol accumulation [Connor et al 2005].

Note: Foods with high plant sterol content including shellfish, vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, avocados, and chocolate should be taken in moderation due to increased intestinal absorption of plant sterols in those with sitosterolemia [Bhattacharyya & Connor 1974].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk relatives either through measurement of plasma concentrations of plant sterols or through molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known) allows early institution of treatment and surveillance to optimize outcome.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Guidelines for the management of women with sitosterolemia during pregnancy have not been established.

While ezetimibe is indicated as therapy for individuals with sitosterolemia, no studies have been published on the fetal effects of ezetimibe when used during human pregnancy. Therefore, ezetimibe should be used with caution during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Asymptomatic individuals identified by molecular genetic testing in research studies are treated to maintain near-normal plasma plant sterol concentrations. Early treatment before xanthomas or other manifestations are present may prevent clinical manifestations.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation

Epilepsy consultation (if not done at the time of initial assessment)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Global developmental delay, cognitive dysfunction and intellectual disability. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech-language therapy can be beneficial.

Seizure management is symptomatic. The most commonly used AEDs were phenobarbital, valproic acid, and vigabatrin. Clobazam, zonisamide, lamotrigine, and oxcarbamazepine have also been used.

In single cases, a response to vigabatrin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, or valproic acid and levetiracetam has been reported [Hamdan et al 2009, Deprez et al 2010, Saitsu et al 2010, Mignot et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Barcia et al 2014, Romaniello et al 2014, Keogh et al 2015, Romaniello et al 2015, Dilena et al 2016, Yamamoto et al 2016].

In more than 20% of affected individuals two or more AEDs were used in combination.

About 25% of affected individuals were refractory to AED therapy.

In approximately 20% of affected individuals, seizures were controlled with one or more than one combined anti-seizure medication. In individuals who became seizure free, AEDs were discontinued between one month and 5.5 years after treatment began [Deprez et al 2010, Romaniello et al 2015, Sampaio et al 2015]. The longest seizure-free period documented following discontinuation of AEDs was approximately 11 years [Deprez et al 2010].

In about 1% of affected individuals the ketogenic diet was used for seizure management. Response to the ketogenic diet was either slight or none [Saitsu et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013].

Epilepsy surgery was the treatment of choice in two affected individuals: one became seizure free following corpus callosotomy [Otsuka et al 2010]; the other had a significant reduction in seizure frequency following resection of focal cortical dysplasia [Weckhuysen et al 2013].

Other neurologic findings

Severe dystonia, dyskinesia, or choreoathetosis can be treated with monoamine depleters or dopaminergic agents.

Hypotonia may lead to feeding difficulties and associated recurrent aspiration pneumonia which may require G-tube placement.

Behavior disorders can be managed symptomatically with behavioral therapies by psychologists or behavior therapists.

Surveillance

There are no published guidelines for surveillance of individuals diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy. The following assessments and investigations can be performed as needed:

Neuropsychological assessment

EEG

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SUCLA2-related mtDNA depletion syndrome, the following evaluations need to be performed (if not already done as part of the initial diagnostic evaluation):

Comprehensive neurologic examination and developmental/cognitive assessment. The following diagnostic modalities can be used to assess the degree of neurologic involvement:

Neuroimaging (preferably brain MRI) to establish the degree of central nervous system involvement

EMG to assess myopathy

EEG if seizures are suspected

Audiology evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination

Nutritional evaluation and swallowing assessment for feeding difficulties and growth failure

Physical examination for the back and joints for kyphoscoliosis and joint contractures

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in neurology, audiology, child development, gastroenterology, nutrition, and clinical genetics. Treatments include the following:

Physical therapy to help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures

Standard treatment with antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Nutritional support by a dietitian and the use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings to address feeding difficulties and failure to thrive

Chest physiotherapy, aggressive antibiotic treatment of chest infections, and artificial ventilation (including assisted nasal ventilation or intubation and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator) for respiratory insufficiency

Bracing for scoliosis and kyphosis

Blepharoplasty for significant ptosis

Hearing aids and/or cochlear implantation for sensorineural hearing loss

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Routine developmental and neurologic assessment

Periodic nutritional and growth assessment

Periodic hearing evaluation

Periodic ophthalmologic examination

Routine physical examination of back and joints for kyphoscoliosis and joint contractures

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SUCLG1-related mtDNA depletion syndrome the following evaluations are recommended:

Comprehensive neurologic examination and developmental/cognitive assessment. The following diagnostic modalities can be considered to assess the degree of neurologic involvement:

Brain MRI (if not performed during the diagnostic evaluation) to establish the degree of central nervous system involvement

EEG if seizures are suspected

Echocardiogram to assess for cardiomyopathy

Liver function tests including transaminases, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile.

Audiology evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination for evidence of ptosis and/or strabismus

Nutritional evaluation and swallowing assessment for feeding difficulties and growth failure

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in neurology, audiology, child development, gastroenterology, cardiology, nutrition, and clinical genetics. Treatments include the following:

Physical therapy to help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures

Standard treatment with antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Nutritional support by a dietitian and the use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings to address feeding difficulties and failure to thrive

Chest physiotherapy, aggressive antibiotic treatment of chest infections, and artificial ventilation (including assisted nasal ventilation or intubation and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator) for respiratory insufficiency.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hepatopathy, when present, require standard management by cardiologists and hepatologists, respectively.

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the needs of the child:

Developmental and neurologic assessment

Nutritional and growth assessment

Echocardiogram

Liver function tests

Hearing evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A group of mtDNA depletion syndromes is caused by defects in genes encoding proteins involved in maintenance of the mitochondrial deoxyribonucleotide pool. Because in vitro experimental studies have demonstrated improved mtDNA content following deoxyribonucleotide supplementation, this could potentially be a treatment for some mtDNA depletion syndromes [Cámara et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with SYNE1-related autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA1):

Brain MRI to assess for cerebellar atrophy

Nerve conduction studies to rule out a peripheral neuropathy

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with ARCA1 should be followed by a neurologist and eventually a physiatrist as well.

As the disease progresses, individuals need walking aids such as a cane, a walker, and ultimately a wheelchair.

Surveillance

Yearly evaluation by a neurologist or physiatrist to prescribe walking aids is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

People with ARCA1 should be advised to avoid employment that may put them at risk of falls or that may require a high degree of physical dexterity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No pregnancy complications have been reported.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with inherited systemic hyalinosis, the following evaluations should be considered:

Complete nutritional evaluation, including evaluation for intestinal malabsorption

Evaluation for immune deficiency

Because hyalinosis of the heart has been reported, consideration of echocardiogram

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Pain

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates help control pain. Agents such as gabapentin should be considered.

Gentle handling may reduce pain that is worsened with movement. Splinting of affected joints may provide comfort.

When passive movement of joint contractures is painful, physiotherapy should be carried out with care; in some cases physiotherapy is not tolerated because of pain.

Consultation with a pain management specialist may be helpful. Palliative care may be an option in severe cases.

Failure to thrive

Early consideration should be given to nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feeding.

Nutrition should be tailored for the possibility for malabsorption or lymphangiectasia.

A nutritionist should follow affected individuals.

Protein-losing enteropathy

Chronic diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy with subsequent edema are treated with hydration and albumin infusions; an effective long-term treatment is lacking.

The effectiveness of dietary therapies with intestinal lymphangiectasia is not known.

Skin nodules, gingival thickening, and lesions of the mouth. Lesions that obstruct the airway or interfere with oral intake are particularly problematic; surgical excision is an option that has been used, but lesions may recur.

Dermatitis. Intertriginous, perianal, and neck areas appear to be particularly prone to dermatitis and should be treated appropriately.

Perianal masses may be excised, but may recur.

Joint contractures. Contractures are typically progressive. Treatment of contractures with physiotherapy should be performed with care because of pain.

Immune system/Infections

Infections are treated based on the site of infection and causative agent.

An immunology evaluation should be considered given the possibility of impaired cellular immune responses and immunoglobulin levels [Klebanova & Schwindt 2009].

Other. Given the chronic nature of this disorder in an individual with normal intelligence, family counseling should be considered in order to develop coping strategies for both the patient and the immediate family.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesiologists should be aware of the diagnosis given the difficulty of endotracheal intubation and management in some affected individuals as a result of anatomy and gingival thickening [Pollard et al 2008, Qasem et al 2012]. Significant complication with anesthesia has been reported [El-Kamah & Mostafa 2009].

Surveillance

Routine nutritional assessment is appropriate.

Periodic assessment for gastrointestinal malabsorption may aid in optimizing nutritional status.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The role of surgery in management of lesions is unclear since lesions appear to recur.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with thrombocytopenia absent radius (TAR) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Platelet count if this has not been completed

Orthopedic evaluation of both upper and lower limbs

Echocardiography to assess for cardiac anomalies

Evaluation of renal structure and function

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment for thrombocytopenia is platelet transfusion as needed. Bone marrow transplantation is generally not indicated, given the transient nature of the thrombocytopenia.

The use of central venous catheters as an alternative to venipuncture has been suggested to reduce the pain associated with repeated procedures [Coccia et al 2012].

Orthopedic intervention is indicated to maximize function of limbs, with such intervention including prostheses, orthoses, adaptive devices, and surgery [McLaurin et al 1999, Al Kaissi et al 2015].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Avoidance of cow’s milk lessens the severity of gastroenteritis and reduces exacerbations of thrombocytopenia (in older children).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Frequent transfusion with platelets can lead to alloimmunization and increased risk of infection. It is therefore recommended that platelet transfusion in older individuals not be done until platelet counts fall below a particular threshold (10/nL). Note: The threshold for platelet transfusion in newborns is unknown.

Surveillance

Platelet count is indicated whenever evidence of increased bleeding tendency (bruising, petechiae) occurs.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid cow’s milk to reduce the severity of gastroenteritis and associated thrombocytopenia (in older children).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Fewer than ten pregnancies have been reported in women with TAR syndrome. Almost all develop thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. In one, corticosteroids appeared to be fairly successful in treating the thrombocytopenia [Bot-Robin et al 2011]. In one pregnant woman with TAR syndrome, exacerbation of her thrombocytopenia preceded the development of preeclampsia.

Other considerations during pregnancy include potential difficulties with administration of regional anesthetics (given potential difficulties with vascular access) and difficulties accessing the airway for general anesthesia [Wax et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with TARDBP-related ALS (or any other form of ALS), the following evaluations are recommended:

EMG/NCS to document the regions of involvement

Pulmonary function testing to detect and stage respiratory involvement

Speech and swallowing evaluation if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present, to direct care to minimize risk of aspiration and to initiate augmentative communication strategies for possible loss of verbal communication

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to determine what adaptive devices are needed to maximize function

Nutritional evaluation

Screening for depression and need for psychosocial support

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of TARDBP-related ALS is identical to that of ALS resulting from other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 2009a, Miller et al 2009b].

Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine.

Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan.

Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands.

Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression.

Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for TARDBP-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use [Miller et al 2007].

Note: See Author Notes, Miller Laboratory for a link to investigative reports on accurate assessments of the risks and benefits of specific proposed therapies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement.

Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures.

Early initiation of noninvasive ventilation has been shown to prolong survival [Farrero et al 2005].

Surveillance

Monitoring of the forced vital capacity and other parameters of ventilation should be performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation.

Routine screening for depression at clinic visits is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Long-term use of minocycline, which was studied in a randomized-controlled trial in individuals with ALS, was associated with worse outcomes [Gordon et al 2007].

Excessive exercise to the point of inducing fatigue in already weakened muscles is cautioned against by many practitioners based on experience.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Although no current clinical trials are specifically designed to target TARDBP-related ALS, many ongoing trials address the broader category of ALS.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hexosaminidase A deficiency, the following are recommended:

Complete history and physical examination, including ophthalmologic examination

Family history, including ethnicity

Referral to a pediatric neurologist and/or ophthalmologist

Treatment of Manifestations

For the most part, treatment for Tay-Sachs disease is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious disease, protecting the airway, and controlling seizures.

Seizure control can usually be achieved using conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as benzodiazepines, phenytoins, and/or barbiturates. However, seizures are progressive and change in type and severity; thus, over time changes in the dose or type of AEDs may be necessary for optimal seizure control.

For older individuals with adult-onset hexosaminidase A deficiency who have psychiatric manifestations, conventional antipsychotic or antidepressant therapy may be used; but the clinical response is unpredictable and generally poor.

Treatment with lithium salts and electroconvulsive therapy has been reported to be beneficial, at least in ameliorating for a period the episodes of psychotic depression.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As the child with the acute infantile form (Tay-Sachs disease) becomes more debilitated and disabled, good bowel management becomes essential. Good hydration, food additives, stool softeners, laxatives, and other measures should be employed to avoid severe constipation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Early experimental intravenous enzyme replacement trials were unsuccessful, as the large molecular weight enzyme did not cross the blood-brain barrier [reviewed in Desnick & Kaback 2001].

Central nervous system enzyme replacement or neuronal-corrective gene therapy are experimental considerations [Matsuoka et al 2011, Tsuji et al 2011].

A clinical trial used HEX A inhibitors to reduce the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipid precursors to GM2 ganglioside. Although one such agent, N-deoxynojirimycin, showed some efficacy with the non-CNS neuronal storage disorder, type I Gaucher disease [Pastores et al 2005], no improvement was observed in a trial of substrate reduction therapy for individuals with adult-onset GM2 gangliosidosis [Shapiro et al 2009].

Preclinical studies for individuals with later-onset Tay-Sachs disease are underway to evaluate pharmacologic chaperone therapy using an immuno sugar that is an active site inhibitor of HEX A activity [Clarke et al 2011]. Since residual enzyme activity is very low (but detectable), chaperone therapy is designed to rescue newly synthesized mutant enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum before they are removed for degradation and to deliver them to the lysosome where they may function [Rountree et al 2009].

For studies of pathogenesis and preclinical evaluation of various therapeutic strategies, animal models are available. A genetically engineered mouse model of infantile hexosaminidase A deficiency (TSD) has been constructed and can be used to evaluate innovative treatment modalities. Recently, a sheep model of TSD with HEX A deficiency was identified in which affected animals progressively accumulate GM2 ganglioside, have neurologic pathology, and experience a neurodegenerative clinical course [Torres et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The poor response to tricyclic antidepressants and phenothiazines has been attributed to the observation that these drugs inhibit HEX A enzymatic activity in vitro and induce lysosomal lipidosis in fibroblasts and accumulation of lipids in experimental animals in vivo.

Several attempts have been made at purified enzyme replacement therapy for children with acute infantile hexosaminidase A deficiency; none has been successful.

Cellular infusions and even bone marrow transplantation have been attempted, with no evidence of benefit.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TBC1D24-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

DOORS syndrome

Clinical genetics consultation, including dysmorphology examination

Neurology consultation

Audiology consultation

Otolaryngology consultation

Ophthalmology consultation

Dental consultation

Heart ultrasound

Renal ultrasound examination

FIME, PME, EIEE16, and TBC1D24-related nonsyndromic deafness syndromes (DFNA65 and DFNB86). One should consider some of the above evaluations depending on the clinical signs since the clinical overlap of all TBC1D24-related conditions has not yet been fully studied.

Treatment of Manifestations

Deafness. Consider hearing aids or cochlear implants as needed for hearing loss (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview). Cochlear implants at age one have been beneficial in one individual with DOORS syndrome [Campeau et al 2014].

Developmental delay. Early educational intervention, physical, occupational and speech therapy is recommended because of the high risk for motor and cognitive delay.

Seizures. Symptomatic pharmacologic management is warranted, as no controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different antiepileptic drugs in TBC1D24-related disorders.

The management of epilepsy in many genetic epilepsies is complex; general recommendations from the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence are available online.

Renal anomalies. Refer to an urologist or nephrologist as indicated.

Heart defects. Manage according to the anomalies detected.

Surveillance

Neurology evaluation with EEGs are appropriate, depending on seizure frequency and/or progression of clinical manifestations.

Perform yearly audiologic evaluation to assess for possible progression of hearing loss and/or the efficacy of hearing aids.

Yearly dental evaluation is appropriate.

Individuals with epilepsy, irrespective of cause, should have periodic ECGs as interictal and ictal abnormalities may predispose to sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Heterozygotes for a TBC1D24 pathogenic variant causing autosomal dominant deafness, DFNA65, should avoid excessive ambient noise as it may exacerbate hearing loss.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing for the familial TBC1D24 pathogenic variant(s) in older and younger sibs of a proband is appropriate in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment of seizures and/or deafness.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Polyhydramnios is often noted in DOORS syndrome [James et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Hearing. Hearing evaluation as soon as the diagnosis of TBS is suspected (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Kidneys. Renal ultrasound examination and routine laboratory tests for renal function

Heart. Baseline evaluation by a cardiologist including an echocardiogram

Eyes. Ophthalmology examination to evaluate for ocular features of TBS and atypical finding of Duane anomaly.

Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated:

Imperforate anus. Immediate surgical intervention is required.

Hearing loss. Significant impairment requires early treatment, typically with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Thumb malformations. Severe malformations of the hands may require surgery (e.g., removal of additional thumbs).

Renal. Impaired renal function requires continuous monitoring, hemodialysis, and possibly kidney transplantation.

Heart defects. Congenital heart defects may require surgery or medical treatment by a cardiologist.

Surveillance

Annual hearing evaluation is indicated.

Renal function should be regularly monitored in all individuals with and without renal anomalies, even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications that cause renal or otic toxicity should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical evaluation for physical features, hearing problems, renal disease, and heart defects can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an infant diagnosed with Treacher Collins syndrome, the following assessments are recommended:

The airway for evidence of choanal atresia/stenosis and/or micrognathia and glossoptosis predisposing to obstruction of the oropharynx

The palate for clefts

Swallowing function

Hearing through formal audiologic examination (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Ophthalmologic evaluation with attention to extraocular movement, corneal exposure, and visual acuity

If hearing loss is documented during the first six months of life, a craniofacial CT scan (axial and coronal slices) can be performed to document the anatomy of the head and neck and the external auditory canal, middle ear, and inner ear.

Assessment for dental anomalies should be made when teeth have erupted.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of each individual and preferably done by a multidisciplinary craniofacial management team that typically comprises a medical geneticist, plastic surgeon, head and neck surgeon, otolaryngologist, oral surgeon, orthodontist, audiologist, speech pathologist, and psychologist.

Major management issues can be stratified by three age groups and graded for severity [Hayashi et al 2007, Thompson et al 2009]:

Birth to 2 years: airway and feeding difficulties

3 years to 12 years: speech therapy and integration into education system

13 years to 18 years: orthognathic surgery

Procedures for surgical intervention for the airway, if needed, are standard, primarily for improving the respiratory function or restoring patency of the nostrils and distraction of the mandible [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006, Jayasekera 2007]. If a diagnosis of TCS is suspected prenatally, airway management at birth should be considered [Morillas et al 2007]. Management of the airway in neonates typically includes special positioning of the infant or tracheostomy. With proper management, life expectancy approximates that of the general population.

Gastrostomy may be needed to assure adequate caloric intake while protecting the airway [Marszalek et al 2002].

Bone conduction amplification, speech therapy, and educational intervention are indicated for treatment of hearing loss. The bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA) is an alternative for individuals with ear anomalies [Marres 2002].

Craniofacial reconstruction is often necessary [Posnick 1997, Zhang et al 2009]. Generally, bone reconstruction precedes soft tissue corrections. Reconstruction can prevent the progression of facial asymmetry. Recommendations by Posnick [1997] for reconstruction include the following:

Repair of cleft palate, if present, at age one to two years [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006]

Zygomatic and orbital reconstruction when the cranio-orbitozygomatic bony development is complete (~age 5 to 7 years)

Maxillomandibular reconstruction

Type I (mild) and type IIA (moderate) malformation: age 13 to 16 years

Type IIB (moderate to severe malformation): at skeletal maturity

Type III (severe malformation): age six to ten years

Orthognathic procedures are typically indicated before age 16 years.

Misaligned teeth often require orthodonture.

Nasal reconstruction, if needed, should follow orthognathic surgeries.

External ear reconstruction should be performed after age six years and should precede reconstruction of the external auditory canal or middle ear.

External auditory canal and middle ear reconstruction should be performed for affected individuals with bilateral microtia and/or narrow ear canals.

Coloboma of the lower eyelid may be treated with botulinum toxin and subsequent surgery, if necessary [Warner et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Surgical outcome may be improved with incorporation of stem cells in therapeutic treatment of craniofacial abnormalities, particularly in bone and cartilage; however, such surgery is experimental and controversial [Trainor et al 2009].

Suppression of p53 during embryogenesis, also controversial, may prevent neurocristopathies [Jones et al 2008, Trainor et al 2009]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in a newborn diagnosed with thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of respiratory status by respiratory rate and skin color; arterial blood gases may be helpful in infants who survive the immediate postnatal period.

Assessment of the presence of hydrocephaly or other central nervous system abnormalities by CT or MRI

Medical genetics consultation and genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

Management concerns are limited to the parents' desire for extreme life-support measures and provision-of-comfort care for the newborn.

Newborns require respiratory support (with tracheostomy and ventilation) to survive.

Anesthesia management concerns are described by Thompson et al [2011] and include:

Intubation with the cervical spine in a neutral position using a flexible fiber-optic scope

Utilization of evoked potential monitoring (somatosensory evoked potentials [SEPs] and motor evoked potentials [MEPs]) during the procedure to evaluate safety during intraoperative manipulations

Avoidance of volatile anesthetic agents and muscle relaxants which could affect the evoked potential recordings

Other measures:

Medication to control seizures, as in the general population

Shunt placement, when hydrocephaly is identified

Suboccipital decompression for relief of craniocervical junction constriction

Hearing aids, when hearing loss is identified

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of neurologic status on physical examination

Orthopedic evaluation upon the development of joint contractures or joint hypermobility [Wilcox et al 1998]

Audiology assessment

CT to evaluate for craniocervical constriction in long-term survivors if respiratory insufficiency is potentially the result of compression of the brain stem at the craniocervical junction

EEG for seizure activity

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

When TD has been diagnosed prenatally, potential pregnancy complications include prematurity, polyhydramnios, malpresentation, and cephalopelvic disproportion caused by macrocephaly from hydrocephalus or a flexed and rigid neck. Cephalocentesis and cesarean section may be considered to avoid maternal complications.

Management of an affected pregnancy is directed by the level of parental desire for heroic life-saving measures and is often highly center-specific. It can be addressed on three levels:

Maternal. Surveillance for cephalopelvic disproportion, polyhydramnios, and/or preterm labor; avoidance of emergency C-section for fetal distress

Fetal. Surveillance for malpresentation, periodic prenatal ultrasound monitoring of head circumference, MRI for fetal lung volume, and/or fetal stress testing

Familial. Establishment of a perinatal plan for assessment, care, and/or withdrawal of care after delivery

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.After an individual has been diagnosed with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF), the following evaluations should be considered as a means of identifying associated anomalies:

X-ray evaluation for vertebral anomalies

Echocardiogram

Renal ultrasound examination

Treatment of Manifestations

Initial postnatal intervention, aimed at minimizing the risk of aspiration pneumonia, typically includes the elimination of oral feeds, placement of a suction catheter to allow continuous drainage of secretions, and elevation of the head of the bed to minimize reflux [Clark 1999]. Intravenous (IV) glucose and fluids should be provided; supplemental oxygen should be administered as needed. When intubation cannot be avoided, a possible complication is the collection of air in the stomach, which in severe cases can only be removed by gastrostomy.

Surgical repair consists of closure of the TEF and anastomosis of the esophageal segments [Sharma & Duerksen 2012]. Surgical repair may need to be delayed in infants with low birth weight, pneumonia, or other major congenital anomalies. When surgical repair is delayed, infants may be treated with parenteral nutrition, gastrostomy tube placement, and upper pouch suctioning until they become surgical candidates.

The most common complications after surgical repair include leakage at the site of the anastomosis, recurrent fistula, structure formation, and gastroesophageal reflux [Clark 1999, Sharma & Duerksen 2012, Kronemer & Snyder-Warwick 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.Tetra-amelia syndrome is usually diagnosed prenatally. Based on the few published reports, assessment of the clinical manifestations in a fetus diagnosed with tetra-amelia syndrome by ultrasonography should include careful assessment of all organs and body structures that are known to be affected in tetra-amelia syndrome.

Treatment of Manifestations

In nearly all reported cases, the pregnancy was terminated on diagnosis of tetra-amelia syndrome or infants died shortly after birth as a consequence of other malformations including pulmonary hypoplasia. Data on the management of tetra-amelia syndrome therefore do not exist.

It should be noted that (complete) absence of all extremities is principally not incompatible with life. Persons without extremities depend on extensive, life-long assistance with most daily activities. They would require specifically designed wheelchairs with assistive electronic technology and input control devices operated by head, chin, or tongue movements. Other individualized ambulatory devices may be indicated.

Should individuals with tetra-amelia syndrome survive, management depends on the presence and severity of associated malformations and may involve multiple interdisciplinary surgical interventions and the support of several medical disciplines.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with familial transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic assessment including baseline nerve conduction studies

Evaluation of the heart:

Echocardiogram, the most useful noninvasive test for cardiac amyloidosis, for visualization of ventricular wall thickness, ventricular septal thickness, and hyperrefractile myocardial echoes (so called "granular sparkling appearance")

Electrocardiogram (ECG) to evaluate for characteristic findings of cardiac amyloidosis including low voltage in the standard limb leads and QS pattern in the right precordial leads with or without conduction blocks

Myocardial technetium-99m-pyrophosphate scintigraphy to visualize amyloid deposition in heart [Ikeda 2004]

Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the brain and spinal cord to evaluate CNS amyloidosis [Mitsuhashi et al 2004]

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Evaluation of renal function

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Carpal tunnel release surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome

Vitrectomy for vitreous involvement

Cardiac pacemaker implantation for second-degree or third-degree AV block and sick sinus syndrome.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX). The only effective therapy for the neuropathy of familial TTR amyloidosis is orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX), which removes the main production site of the amyloidogenic protein. Successful OLTX results in rapid disappearance of variant TTR protein from the serum and thus halts the progression of peripheral and/or autonomic neuropathy. It has been shown by pre- and postoperative sural nerve biopsy that myelinated nerve fibers regenerate after OLTX [Ikeda et al 1997].

Recommended clinical criteria for OLTX in individuals with TTR amyloid polyneuropathy [Takei et al 1999, Adams et al 2000] include the following:

Age younger than 60 years

Disease duration less than five years

Either polyneuropathy that is restricted to the lower extremities or autonomic neuropathy alone

No significant cardiac or renal dysfunction

As of the end of June 2010, 1913 individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis, approximately 90% of whom were heterozygous for the Val30Met variant, had undergone liver transplantation (www.fapwtr.org/ram_fap.htm) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003, Herlenius et al 2004, Stangou & Hawkins 2004]. The five-year survival rate was significantly higher in individuals with the Val30Met variant than in those with other pathogenic variants (80% vs 57%, p=0.001) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003]. The most common causes of postoperative death were cardiovascular events (29%) and septicemia (26%) [Ikeda et al 2003].

Poor outcomes of transplanted individuals based on ten years' experience [Ikeda et al 2003] include:

Poor nutritional condition (mean body mass index <600)

Severe polyneuropathy (Norris score <55/81)

Permanent urinary incontinence

Marked postural hypotension

A fixed pulse rate

OLTX is not effective in the non-neuropathic forms of familial TTR amyloidosis (i.e., cardiac amyloidosis, leptomeningeal amyloidosis, and familial oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis [FOLMA]).

Cardiomyopathy was reported to progress after OLTX in some individuals with specific pathogenic variants other than Val30Met (Ala36Pro, Glu42Gly, and Ser77Tyr) (see Table 5) [Dubrey et al 1997, Stangou et al 1998, Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. It is presumed that amyloid cardiomyopathy may accelerate after OLTX by progressive deposition of wild-type TTR on a template of amyloid derived from variant TTR [Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. Therefore, it is critical to assess the severity of cardiac amyloidosis when considering OLTX [Coutinho et al 2004, Juneblad et al 2004].

Individuals with leptomeningeal involvement may not be candidates for liver transplantation because amyloidogenic TTR variants that cause intracranial amyloid deposits are considered to be derived from the choroid plexus.

Vitreous opacities may also progress after OLTX, possibly as the result of de novo production of variant TTR in the retinal epithelium.

Note: Because liver involvement in familial TTR amyloidosis is minimal, the liver of an individual with familial TTR amyloidosis can be grafted into an individual with liver cancer or end-stage liver disease (so-called "domino" liver transplantation). Since 1995, more than 330 domino liver transplantations have been performed. Several individuals who had received a liver graft from heterozygotes with familial TTR amyloidosis developed symptomatic systemic TTR amyloidosis [Stangou et al 2005, Goto et al 2006, Barreiros et al 2010, Lladó et al 2010, Obayashi et al 2011, Adams et al 2011]

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiac pacing for persons with familial TTR amyloidosis with conduction block helps prevent sudden death.

Surveillance

Serial nerve conduction studies can be used to objectively monitor the course of the polyneuropathy.

Serial electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level can be used to monitor the course of cardiomyopathy and conduction block.

Modified body mass index (mBMI) can be used to monitor nutritional status.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Since most individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis have decreased temperature and pain perception, affected individuals should not use local heating appliances, such as hot-water bottles, which can cause low-temperature burn injury.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, it is appropriate to offer clinical diagnostic evaluations to identify those family members who will benefit from early treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Strategies of potential molecular therapies for familial TTR amyloidosis include the following [Saraiva 2002, Ando 2003, Sekijima et al 2008]:

Inhibition of synthesis of variant TTR

Stabilization of variant TTR

Inhibition of aggregation of amyloidogenic intermediates

Disruption of insoluble amyloid fibrils

Drugs that stabilize the TTR tetramer and prevent dissociation into monomers and drugs that disrupt TTR amyloid fibrils into amorphous materials have been designed [Saraiva 2002, Miller et al 2004, Almeida et al 2005].

Phase I and II clinical trials of diflunisal showed that diflunisal increased serum TTR stability in persons with familial TTR amyloidosis beyond the level of normal controls without adverse effects. A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled multicenter/multinational clinical trial is currently underway to determine whether diflunisal will alter the progression of familial TTR amyloidosis [Sekijima et al 2006, Tojo et al 2006]. This study is currently fully enrolled; results are anticipated in December, 2012.

Recently, tafamidis(Vyndaqel®), a small molecule that binds TTR tetramer selectively and potently, has been developed as a TTR kinetic stabilizer to ameliorate familial TTR amyloidosis. In a dose escalation Phase I study in healthy volunteers, tafamidis was found to be safe and well tolerated. In addition, tafamidis showed strong TTR stabilization effects in plasma of study participants. Phase II/III studies of tafamidis showed efficacy in delaying peripheral neurologic impairment compared with individuals treated with placebo. In addition, tafamidis resulted in improved nutritional status (modified body mass index, mBMI) of the study participants.

Based on these findings, the European Commission approved tafamidis for the treatment of familial TTR amyloid polyneuropathy in adult individuals with stage 1 symptomatic polyneuropathy in November 2011. Tafamidis will be available by prescription in Europe in early 2012.

Inhibition of variant TTR mRNA expression by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) [Love et al 2010] and antisense oligonucleotide [Benson et al 2006] is also under investigation.

In July 2010, Alnylam pharmaceuticals initiated dosing in a Phase I human clinical study with siRNA. The Phase I study was designed as a randomized, placebo-controlled, single-dose escalation study in individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis. The administration of siRNA(ALN-TTR01) resulted in statistically significant reductions in serum TTR protein levels in affected individuals. Lowering of serum TTR protein was found to be dose dependent, rapid, and durable after just a single dose.

Isis pharmaceuticals is currently evaluating oligonucleotide targeting of TTR amyloidosis (ISIS-TTRRx) in a Phase I study.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Plasma exchange, affinity column binding with a monoclonal antibody, and use of a special column with affinity for TTR were considered as possible methods for elimination of amyloidogenic TTR from the blood circulation. Serum TTR levels decreased significantly immediately after treatment, but then returned to the same levels as before treatment because of the rapid turnover of TTR. Therefore, these methods were concluded not to be effective for familial TTR amyloidosis.

4’-iodo-4’-deoxydoxorubicin (IDOX) has been reported to bind to several types of amyloid and lead to the catabolism of amyloid in deposits. In a multicenter clinical trial, IDOX was administered to persons with AL amyloidosis; however, no obvious benefit could be detected.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis (TFR2-HHC), the following are recommended (based on recommendations for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis):

Liver biopsy for evaluation of abnormal liver function tests and establishing prognosis when serum ferritin concentration is greater than 1000 ng/mL and/or when hepatomegaly is present [Guyader et al 1998]

Serum concentration of gonadotropins (FSH and LH) to assess pituitary function. Depending on the results, a GnRH stimulation test may be necessary.

Serum concentration of testosterone to assess testicular function; serum concentration of estradiol to assess ovarian function

Radiographs of the affected joint(s) to assess persistent arthralgia or arthropathy

Cardiac evaluation (ECG and echocardiography) for all symptomatic individuals and those with severe iron overload (ferritin >1000 ng/mL)

Screening for diabetes mellitus by fasting serum glucose concentration and oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)

Treatment of Manifestations

The following recommendations are based on guidelines proposed for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis in Europe [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text) and an expert review [Adams & Barton 2010]. However, it should be emphasized that since TFR2-HHC is rare and may progress differently from HFE-associated hemochromatosis, individual treatment is important.

Individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration should be treated by the same protocol as for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.

Therapeutic phlebotomy. Periodic phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective way to remove excess iron. Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is weekly phlebotomy; however, twice weekly phlebotomy may be useful initially to accelerate iron depletion. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the serum ferritin concentration is 100 ng/mL or lower. Serum ferritin concentration should be measured following each phlebotomy or every other phlebotomy [Adams & Barton 2010]:

Once the serum ferritin concentration is approximately 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

If the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or higher despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, phlebotomies need to be spaced further apart.

Note: Although experience is limited because of the small number of affected individuals identified worldwide, it should be noted that transferrin saturation remains high in TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis when serum ferritin concentration is low (<50 ng/mL), even after intensive phlebotomy [Girelli et al 2011; Camaschella & Roetto, unpublished observation].

Maintenance therapy. The goal is to maintain serum ferritin concentration around 50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation below 50%. Phlebotomy to prevent reaccumulation of iron is performed about every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. Iron chelators such as subcutaneous desferrioxamine are used as a first choice in case of concomitant anemia [Riva et al 2004] or cardiac dysfunction.

Note: At present, oral iron chelators are not available to treat hemochromatosis. However, a phase I/II trial has been completed with daily administration of deferasirox in persons with newly diagnosed HFE-HHC with iron overload and without evidence of liver cirrhosis. The trial demonstrated that treatment is feasible, safe, and effective; side effects were mostly related to the GI tract [Phatak et al 2010].

Treatment of clinical complications

Cirrhosis should be treated and followed up as in other conditions. Although cirrhosis is not reversible by phlebotomy, individuals with cirrhosis benefit from iron removal in that it reduces the risk of hepatocellular cancer.

Hypogonadism is irreversible and requires lifelong hormone replacement therapy in males and females. Use of gonadotropins has successfully restored fertility and induced pregnancy in women who have been treated for other forms of hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy requires nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and is barely influenced by phlebotomy. In some cases, joint replacement has been performed.

Cardiac failure is treated with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, cardiac glycosides, and iron chelation by intravenous or subcutaneous deferioxamine.

Diabetes mellitus may require lifelong insulin treatment. Iron removal may improve control of diabetes mellitus but cannot reestablish normal glucose metabolism.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In affected individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration, prevention of primary manifestations is accomplished by weekly phlebotomy to deplete iron stores (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

Once the serum ferritin concentration is around 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

Although hepatocellular carcinoma has not been reported in individuals with TFR2-associated hereditary hemochromatosis, surveillance for its development should be performed in persons with cirrhosis by monitoring liver ultrasound examinations and serum concentrations of alpha-fetoprotein, as in persons with cirrhosis with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron

Mineral supplements

Excess vitamin C

Uncooked seafood (because of the risk of infection from microorganisms thriving under conditions of excess iron)

For those with hepatic involvement, alcohol intake should be restricted because it increases iron absorption and is toxic to the hepatocytes.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives to allow early diagnosis and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with hemochromatosis do not need treatment during pregnancy because the fetal utilization of maternal iron effectively reduces the mother’s iron load during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an affected individual, the following are recommended:

Growth parameters

Developmental assessment

Neurologic evaluation and EEG to assess possible seizures

Orthopedic evaluation to assess for possible developing scoliosis or pectus deformities

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment is appropriate:

Physical, occupational, and speech therapies, if necessary

Medications, such as anticholinergics, L-DOPA, carbamazepine, or lioresol, for the treatment of dystonia

Glycopyrolate or scopolamine to improve drooling

Standard anticonvulsant medication to control seizures, if present

Placement of permanent feeding tube to avert malnutrition

Note: Thyroid hormone treatment with replacement doses during childhood has no beneficial effect. However, combined treatment with high doses of levothyroxine (L-T4) and propylthiouracil (PTU), which inhibits deiodinase 1, has been shown to ameliorate the hypermetabolic state, with beneficial effects on body weight and heart rate, as seen in several affected individuals [Wémeau et al 2008, Visser et al 2013]. See also Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Appropriate measures include the following:

Braces to prevent joint contractures and orthopedic surgery, if necessary

Diet restrictions to prevent aspiration

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor scoliosis or joint problems

Ongoing developmental assessments

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aspiration of food should be avoided to prevent pneumonia.

Administration of L-T4 or L-T3 alone can exacerbate the high serum T3 levels and the resulting hypermetabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In a recent report, two unaffected heterozygous pregnant women with unaffected fetuses were treated with L-T4 in the second half of pregnancy [Ramos et al 2011]. It is unclear if this had any effect, either beneficial or detrimental, on the fetus. Of note, many unaffected heterozygous mothers have given birth to normal unaffected children without any prenatal treatment.

Therapies Under Investigation

Diiodothyropropionic acid (DITPA), a thyroid hormone analog that does not require MCT8 for transfer into cells, has been evaluated as a treatment in both a mouse model of Mct8 deficiency and in humans with MCT8-specific thyroid hormone cell-membrane transporter deficiency [Di Cosmo et al 2009, Verge et al 2012]. DITPA therapy was given to four affected children with subsequent improvement in the hypermetabolic state; however, no significant neurologic improvement was obtained with this therapy. Consideration is being given to DITPA treatment during pregnancy, however such treatment has not been used to date, and there is no information on whether it will be effective.

Recently another analog TETRAC (3, 3’, 5, 5’-tetraiodothyroacetic acid) has been tested in mice with Mct8 deficiency [Horn et al 2013]. TETRAC treatment was able to promote TH-dependent neuronal differentiation in some brain areas but was ineffective in suppressing TRH (thyrotropin releasing hormone) in the hypothalamus. The efficacy of TETRAC therapy may vary among distinct neuronal populations or among different genes that are controlled by TH in a positive or negative manner. However, peripheral tissue thyrotoxicity in Mct8-deficient mice was not significantly ameliorated by TETRAC therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) deficiency, the following are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Clinical examination to assess the severity of motor disturbances

Evaluation for associated psychiatric symptoms or cognitive impairments

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

In individuals with TH deficiency, initial use of a levodopa (combined with a decarboxylase inhibitor) dose of 0.5-3 mg/kg (body weight)/day, divided into three to six doses, has been recommended [Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Pons et al 2013]. Nevertheless, it is possible that even at the lowest initial dosage recommended (i.e., 0.5 mg/kg/day), some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency (see Table 2) will develop intolerable dyskinesias [Zafeiriou et al 2009, Pons et al 2013].

When tolerated, the dose of levodopa can be increased gradually. However, with the exception of those with mild TH-deficient DRD (see Table 2), it is often difficult to increase levodopa doses smoothly in affected individuals due to the risk of developing severe dyskinesias. In such individuals, combined administration of levodopa and selegiline (a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, which inhibits dopamine degradation) has been recommended [Dionisi-Vici et al 2000, Häussler et al 2001, Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Leuzzi et al 2017].

As reported in compound heterozygotes for GCH1 pathogenic variants [Furukawa et al 2004a], amantadine (an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist) can suppress dopa-induced dyskinesias, which develop at initiation of levodopa therapy, in some individuals with TH deficiency [Pons et al 2013].

Mild form (TH-deficient DRD). Individuals demonstrate complete responsiveness of symptoms to levodopa treatment. Such an excellent response without any motor adverse effects of chronic levodopa therapy for more than 30 years has been confirmed in some individuals with TH-deficient DRD [Swaans et al 2000, Schiller et al 2004].

Severe form (TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay). Individuals show a marked response to levodopa. However, in contrast to TH-deficient DRD, the responsiveness is generally not complete and/or it takes several months or even years before full effects of treatment become established. Some individuals with the severe form of TH deficiency are hypersensitive to levodopa and are prone to intolerable dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa therapy; this hypersensitivity necessitates use of very low initial doses of levodopa [Grattan-Smith et al 2002, Yeung et al 2006, Clot et al 2009, Doummar et al 2009, Yeung et al 2011].

Very severe form (TH-deficient progressive infantile encephalopathy). Individuals are extremely sensitive to levodopa. Accordingly, treatment with levodopa is often limited by severe dyskinesias. Some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency develop intolerable dyskinesias even at doses of 0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg/day levodopa and no or only minimal improvement is observed [de Lonlay et al 2000, Hoffmann et al 2003, Zafeiriou et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of TH-deficient DRD; thus, levodopa treatment from early infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations in this mild form of TH deficiency.

Levodopa therapy from early infancy may prevent manifestations of some symptoms and signs in TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay; however, no levodopa trials in the early postnatal period of infants with this type of TH deficiency and biallelic TH pathogenic variants have been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Additional side effects associated with peak-dose levodopa include gastroesophageal reflux, vomiting, or significant suppression of appetite leading to poor growth. Although these problems may be most evident in the first few weeks of onset of levodopa treatment, close monitoring of symptoms and ongoing adjustment of levodopa dosing in conjunction with appropriate supportive intervention as needed help in management.

Surveillance

Examination by a movement disorder specialist in pediatric or adult neurology at least several times yearly is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The prokinetic agent Reglan®, commonly used for treatment of bowel dysmotility, is contraindicated in individuals with TH deficiency because of its antidopaminergic activity. Use of Reglan® or related antidopaminergic agents, including some antipsychotic medications, could result in a dystonic crisis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment.

Evaluations include:

Clinical examination to identify mild dystonic and/or parkinsonian symptoms or unexplained gait disorders;

Molecular genetic testing if the TH pathogenic variants have been identified in the family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Timothy syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Electrocardiogram

Echocardiogram

Developmental and neurologic assessment

Orthopedist consulation for skeletal abnormalities

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Note: All medical procedures requiring anesthesia should be performed with caution (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Long QT interval

Beta-blockers. While most individuals with Timothy syndrome are treated with beta-blockers to maintain QT interval stability and thereby prevent ventricular tachyarrhythmia, no data concerning the effectiveness of beta-blockers are available. Verapamil and ranolazine have been reported effective in case reports. However, no cohort-based analysis of the efficacy of pharmacologic therapy is available.

Pacemaker. To control 2:1 AV block and resultant bradycardia, a pacemaker can be placed with general success within the first days of life.

Implants. The implantable cardioverter defibrillator is most important in preventing sudden cardiac death in individuals with Timothy syndrome. An implant should be considered in every individual with confirmed diagnosis as soon as body weight allows the procedure (as determined by the treating clinician).

Congenital heart defects. Standard treatment is indicated.

Respiratory infections. Standard treatment (antibiotic therapy, steroids) is indicated. The possibility of reduced immune response should be considered.

Surgical release of syndactyly. Standard treatment is indicated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Arrhythmias in Timothy syndrome must be prevented with the standard therapy described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesia is a known trigger for cardiac arrhythmia in individuals with Timothy syndrome. Therefore, any surgical intervention must be performed under close cardiac monitoring. Because clinical experience with Timothy syndrome is scarce, all compounds used for general anesthesia should be regarded as potentially dangerous.

Prevention of extracardiac complications (including use of appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis/therapy before surgical intervention) must always be considered.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of serum glucose concentrations, especially in individuals treated with beta-blockers, which may mask hypoglycemic symptoms

A complete cardiac evaluation based on the status of the individual patient

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

All drugs reported to prolong QT interval (CredibleMeds®)

Drugs and dietary practices that could lead to hypoglycemia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the CACNA1C pathogenic variants found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Pharmacologic therapies under investigation to shorten ventricular repolarization, restore one-to-one conduction, and reduce the risk of arrhythmias include sodium channel blockers and calcium channel blockers. Although verapamil has been used in one case [Jacobs et al 2006] and the partial effectiveness of sodium channel blockers mexiletine and ranolazine has been reported for two patients [Shah et al 2012, Gao et al 2013], no data are available to support their routine use in Timothy syndrome.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurology consultation with comprehensive neurologic examination

Developmental evaluation

Occupational therapy assessment, including oromotor functions such as chewing and swallowing

Physical therapy consultation

Consultation with a pediatric pulmonologist to evaluate pulmonary function

Brain MRI in patients with encephalopathy or seizures

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Currently there is no definitive treatment. Management should involve a multidisciplinary team.

Feeding difficulties should be managed aggressively, including use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube when the risk of aspiration is high.

Physical therapy can help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures. A physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) specialist can be helpful for individuals with walking difficulty. As mobility becomes increasingly restricted, the use of a wheelchair should be considered.

Early referral to a pediatric pulmonologist is recommended for assessment of pulmonary function and the need for chest physiotherapy to improve pulmonary function and reduce the risk of pulmonary infection. Pulmonary infection should be treated urgently in a standard manner to prevent deterioration in pulmonary function capacity. Once the patient becomes ventilator dependent due to respiratory compromise, chest physiotherapy can help reduce the risk of pulmonary infection.

Surveillance

Although no clinical guidelines are available, treating physicians should consider the following:

Beginning in infancy: periodic neurodevelopmental assessment and speech/language evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist

Soon after diagnosis is established:

Routine assessments of nutritional status, weight gain, and growth parameters

Routine pulmonary function tests, including assessment of blood gases, to monitor for respiratory insufficiency (alveolar hypoventilation and chronic hypercapnia)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and support needs of an individual diagnosed with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS), the following should be evaluated.

For TRPS I and TRPS II

Measurement of height

Developmental assessment, at younger age for both TRPS I and TRPS II as the distinction may clinically not yet be possible. At an older age, only for TRPS II

X-rays of hands, feet, pelvis, and hip, if symptomatic

If evidence of osteopenia on x-ray, further investigation of bone mineral density and metabolism may be warranted

Dental examination for supernumerary teeth

Cardiac evaluation (once)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

For TRPS II only

Review of osteochondromas by an orthopedic specialist for evidence of functional limitation

Evaluation of vison and hearing as is recommended in all persons with intellectual disability of any cause

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of TRPS is principally supportive.

Ectodermal Features

Hair. Practical advice on hair care and the use of wigs can be beneficial.

Dental. Extraction of supernumerary teeth can be considered [Kantaputra et al 2008, Lubinsky & Kantaputra 2016].

Skeletal

Short stature. In those with short stature and proven growth hormone deficiency, human growth hormone therapy may be considered; however, reported results vary. Treatment has infrequently led to an increase in growth velocity [Riedl et al 2004, Stagi et al 2008, Sarafoglou et al 2010, Sohn et al 2012].

Note: When the growth pattern of a child with TRPS is below the normal range for age and sex and is of concern to the family, growth hormone stimulation tests can be performed. If the result is subnormal, GH therapy may be considered [Marques et al 2015] despite reported variable results.

Hands. In a single report resection arthrodesis with tension band osteosynthesis stabilized painful ulnar dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints in digits with cone-shaped epiphyses [Brenner et al 2004]. Of note, no follow-up or other similar reports are available.

Joint pain. Regular simple analgesia (e.g., NSAID or other non-opiates) is the mainstay treatment for joint pain.

Physiotherapy may aid mobility. Exercise is to be encouraged, but high-impact or contact sports may pose a risk to those with already impaired mobility. Patients may require support with mobility at school and work.

Occupational therapy can benefit many fine-motor tasks and mechanical aids such as electric can openers may ameliorate problems caused by joint anomalies.

Prosthetic hip implantation should be considered in those with severe hip dysplasia. Prosthetic hip implantation may be required as early as age 30 years. Such prostheses may require multiple revisions due to their limited life span. Obtaining functional improvement through prosthetic joint surgery can be challenging given the presence of damage to other joints – either in the form of TRPS-related osteoarthritis-like changes or secondary to long-term compensatory stress.

Osteopenia. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with TRPS I and bone fragility [Macchiaiolo et al 2014].

Other. Peer support and (if indicated) psychological counseling can be beneficial for individuals who are self-conscious about their physical differences.

For TRPS II Only

Exostoses. In case of clinical problems such as pain, restricted range of motion, or nerve compression, resection of exostoses should be considered [Payne et al 2016, Hereditary Multiple Osteochondromas].

Surveillance

For TRPS I and TRPS II

Monitor linear growth in childhood

Routine developmental assessments in childhood

For TRPS II only. X-ray evaluation of osteochondromas when symptomatic and at the end of puberty (when normal growth of osteochondromas has ceased) to provide a baseline for comparison with any future enlargement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary trimethylaminuria, it is recommended that the urinary ratio of trimethylamine (TMA) N-oxide to total TMA on a normal diet be determined. The general rule is that the lower the ratio the more severe the disorder:

Ratios of 70%-89% are classified as mild.

Ratios lower than 70% are classified as severe.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is also recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

Strategies for the treatment of primary trimethylaminuria summarized below are covered in detail in Cashman et al [2003] and in "best-practice" guidelines [Chalmers et al 2006] (full text).

Restriction of dietary trimethylamine and its precursors. In some instances the disorder can be successfully managed by dietary restriction of precursors of trimethylamine. This is particularly true of "mild" or moderate forms of primary trimethylaminuria. Affected individuals respond differently to different forms of dietary restriction; thus, urinary excretion of trimethylamine and trimethylamine N-oxide should be monitored to identify the most effective dietary regimen for an individual.

Choline. One of the most important dietary sources of trimethylamine is choline. Dietary choline is absorbed through the small intestine; however, when the absorptive capacity of the small intestine is overloaded, gut bacteria metabolize choline into trimethylamine, which is readily absorbed into the blood stream.

Foods rich in choline include eggs, liver, kidney, peas, beans, peanuts, soya products, and brassicas (Brussels sprouts, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower) as well as rapeseed products such as oil and flour. Nutritionally balanced, choline-restricted diets suitable for the treatment of trimethylaminuria have been developed [Busby et al 2004].

Affected individuals should avoid lecithin (an important dietary source of choline) and lecithin-containing fish oil supplements.

Trimethylamine N-oxide. Affected individuals should avoid eating seafood (fish, cephalopods, and crustaceans) because of its high content of trimethylamine N-oxide, which is reduced to trimethylamine in the human gut. Babies with trimethylaminuria who are breastfed after their mothers have eaten seafood may develop a fishy odor.

Note: Freshwater fish have a lower content of trimethylamine N-oxide and thus are not a problem.

Other. Milk obtained from wheat-fed cows may have significant amounts of trimethylamine and thus should be avoided.

In addition to being a source of trimethylamine precursors, brassicas (Brussels sprouts, broccoli, cabbage, and cauliflower) contain indoles, which may inhibit FMO3 enzyme activity and thus increase urinary excretion of trimethylamine [Cashman et al 1999]. Intake of such vegetables should be restricted.

Use of acid soaps and body lotions. Trimethylamine is a strong base (pKa 9.8). Thus, at pH 6.0, less than 0.02% of trimethylamine exists as the volatile free base. The use of soaps and body lotions with a pH close to that of normal skin (pH 5.5-6.5) helps retain secreted trimethylamine in a less volatile salt form that can be removed by washing.

Sequestering of trimethylamine produced in the gut. When taken as dietary supplements, activated charcoal (750 mg 2x/day for 10 days) and copper chlorophyllin (60 mg 3x/day after meals for 3 weeks) decrease the concentration of free trimethylamine in the urine [Yamazaki et al 2004].

Suppression of intestinal production of trimethylamine. A short course of antibiotics to modulate or reduce the activity of gut microflora, and thus suppress the production of trimethylamine, is effective in some cases [Fraser-Andrews et al 2003, Chalmers et al 2006]. Such treatment may be useful when dietary restriction needs to be relaxed (e.g., for important social occasions), or when trimethylamine production appears to increase (e.g., during menstruation, infection, emotional upset, stress, or exercise). Three antibiotics with different target organisms have been used: metronidazole, amoxicillin, and neomycin. Neomycin appears to be the most effective in preventing formation of trimethylamine from choline [Chalmers et al 2006].

Enhancement of residual FMO3 enzyme activity. Supplements of riboflavin, a precursor of the FAD prosthetic group of FMOs, may help maximize residual FMO3 enzyme activity [Manning et al 2012]. Recommended intake is 30-40 mg 3-5x/day with food. Children given riboflavin should be monitored closely because excessive amounts may cause gastrointestinal distress.

Counseling. Affected individuals and their families benefit from counseling. Realization that the problem is the result of a recognized medical condition may help. As well as receiving dietary advice, affected individuals should be advised that the condition may be exacerbated during menstruation and by factors that promote sweating, such as fever, exercise, stress, and emotional upsets.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because choline is essential in the fetus and in young infants for nerve and brain development, it should not be over-restricted in infants, children, and pregnant or lactating women. Large amounts of choline are transferred to the fetus via the placenta and to the newborn infant via the mother's milk, thus potentially depleting maternal choline reserves. Dietary restriction of choline increases the requirement for folate, a methyl donor.

Dietary regimens should be planned and monitored to ensure that the daily intake of choline and folate meet recommendations for the age and sex of the individual [Institute of Medicine National Academy of Sciences USA 1998, Cashman et al 2003]. For adults, adequate daily intake of choline is 550 mg for males and 425 mg for females.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Foods with a high content of precursors of trimethylamine or inhibitors of FMO3 enzyme activity, including seafood (fish, cephalopods, and crustaceans), eggs, offal, legumes, brassicas, and soya products; avoid or eat in moderation.

Food supplements and "health" foods that contain high doses of the trimethylamine precursors choline and lecithin

Drugs that are metabolized by the FMO3 enzyme; for example, the antipsychotic clozapine; the monoamine oxidase B inhibitor deprenyl; the anti-histamine ranitidine; the anti-estrogen tamoxifen; and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories benzydamine and sulindac [Phillips et al 2007]. These compete for residual FMO3 activity. As well as exacerbating the condition, reduced metabolism of the drug may cause adverse effects.

Factors that promote sweating, such as exercise, stress, and emotional upsets

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment of manifestations. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the FMO3 pathogenic variants in the family are known;

If the familial FMO3 pathogenic variants are not known, molecular genetic testing may detect pathogenic variants.

Biochemical testing if the FMO3 pathogenic variants in the family are not known and/or molecular genetic testing fails to reveal a well-known pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Choline, which is essential for nerve and brain development in the fetus, should not be over-restricted in pregnant women.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome (TRMA), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Peripheral blood count and bone marrow analysis for evidence of megaloblastic anemia

Serum folate concentration, serum vitamin B12 concentration, and serum iron studies to exclude other entities

Hearing test

Fasting serum glucose concentration, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), and urinalysis to diagnose diabetes mellitus

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiography

Neuroimaging including brain MRI when clinically indicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Thiamine

Management focuses on lifelong use of pharmacologic doses (50-100 mg/day) of oral thiamine (vitamin B1) in affected individuals regardless of age.

High-dose thiamine supplementation:

Invariably improves the hematologic picture;

Did not prevent the development of hearing loss in infants with TRMA in some studies [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2009, Akın et al 2011]. The efficacy of high-dose thiamine in improving hearing or delaying hearing loss has been difficult to study and remains unclear.

May delay onset of diabetes mellitus, and may ameliorate diabetes mellitus in the short term and perhaps even for decades [Valerio et al 1998]. Insulin requirements are reduced with thiamine therapy in some cases [Neufeld et al 1997].

Has not been evaluated as a treatment for optic atrophy, cardiovascular abnormalities, or neurologic abnormalities associated with TRMA.

Additional Treatment

Red blood cell transfusion for severe anemia is indicated.

See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for treatment strategies for hearing loss. Treatment has included cochlear implant [Hagr 2014].

Diabetes, cardiovascular abnormalities, and neurologic disorders should be treated in the standard manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Complications secondary to poor glycemic control for diabetes or chronic anemia may occur. Ongoing management of the primary disease is essential.

Surveillance

The following are recommended at least yearly to monitor the efficacy of the oral thiamine therapy as well as disease progression:

Hematologic tests (CBC, reticulocyte count)

Hearing test

Assessment for glucose intolerance (fasting serum glucose concentration, OGTT, urinalysis)

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cardiac evaluation

Neurologic evaluation

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the SLC19A2 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Supplementation with pharmacologic doses of thiamine (vitamin B1) (25-75 mg/day compared to US RDA of 1.5 mg/day) is recommended as early as possible for at-risk sibs until their genetic status can be determined.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

While there are no published studies evaluating pregnancy outcome in affected women, good diabetic control prior to and during pregnancy is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TUBB4A-related leukodystrophy, the following evaluations are recommended [Van Haren et al 2015]:

Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist for evidence of developmental delay, spasticity, and extrapyramidal movement disorders

Assessment of developmental milestones and cognitive function

Assessment of functional disability and equipment needs by a physiotherapist

Assessment of speech (communication) and feeding (swallowing)

Audiologic assessment

Orthopedic evaluation for evidence of scoliosis and/or joint deformity, particularly in individuals with significant dystonia

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Although there is no curative treatment for TUBB4A-related leukodystrophies, quality of life can be improved in the following ways.

Spasticity that is functionally disabling can lead to joint contractures and scoliosis; both require physical therapy (stretching and positioning) and medical management. Oral GABA agonists such as baclofen and diazepam can be used. In some instances intrathecal baclofen pumps can be considered. For focal spasticity, intramuscular botulinum toxin may be helpful.

Dystonia can be managed with:

Baclofen or intramuscular botulinum toxin when associated with spasticity;

Trihexyphenidyl or tetrabenazine;

High doses of levodopa and carbidopa [Wakusawa et al 2006, Tonduti et al 2016].

When dystonia is refractory to medical management, a baclofen pump may be considered. Of note, to date deep brain stimulation has not been studied in TUBB4A-related leukodystrophy.

Swallowing dysfunction may result in use of a gastrostomy for feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration.

Dysarthria may warrant augmentative communication tools.

Anticonvulsant medications should be used when seizures are present.

Constipation, commonly due to neurologic dysfunction and poor intestinal motility, can be treated with diet, laxatives, and stool softeners.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease is common and should be considered in the evaluation of pain.

Functional ability can be improved by use of walkers or wheeled mobility devices and other necessary equipment.

Accommodations in school such as an individual educational plan are often needed. With such accommodations many children with the classic H-ABC phenotype perform at or near grade level for many years, although cognitive decline may be seen later.

Family support and advocacy groups can provide needed psychosocial support for affected individuals.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following recommendations – based on consensus – have been developed for all leukodystrophies [Van Haren et al 2015].

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation as required to prevent osteoporosis

Skin care and frequent repositioning to help prevent pressure sores in individuals with decreased mobility

Annual flu vaccination

Fall prevention strategies, adaptive equipment (e.g., wheelchairs and walkers), and physical therapy (to increase strength) to help prevent secondary injury

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Routine evaluations of swallowing and feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration, and nutrition to prevent malnutrition

At least yearly:

Medical evaluation including physical examination to assess weight and medications

Evaluations by specialists in occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, and rehabilitation medicine

Evaluation by orthopedists to assess for scoliosis and joint dislocation

Annual neurologic evaluation to assess symptoms and any emerging complications

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), the following evaluations are recommended by the International Tuberous Sclerosis Consensus Conference [Northrup et al 2013] (full text):

Medical history and physical examination, especially for features of TSC, including:

Detailed dermatologic inspection/exam

Detailed clinical dental inspection/exam

Screening for hypertension by obtaining an accurate blood pressure measurement

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, if not completed already, to assess for the presence of tubers, subependymal nodules (SENs), migrational defects, and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma

Baseline routine electroencephalogram (EEG)

If abnormal, especially if features of TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorder (TAND) are also present, follow up with a 24-hour video EEG to assess for subclinical seizure activity

During infancy, educate parents to recognize infantile spasms, even if none have occurred at the time of first diagnosis.

Evaluation for TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorder (TAND)

Complete ophthalmologic evaluation, including dilated funduscopy, to assess for retinal lesions and visual field defects

Echocardiogram in the pediatric age group (especially if age <3 years), if one has not been performed already

Electrocardiogram (ECG) in all ages to assess for underlying conduction defects

Baseline pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function testing and 6-minute walk test) and high-resolution chest computed tomography (HRCT), even if asymptomatic, in individuals at risk of developing LAM (typically females age ≥18 years). Adult males, if symptomatic, should also undergo pulmonary function testing.

MRI of abdomen to assess for presence of angiomyolipoma and renal cysts

Evaluation of renal function by obtaining a serum creatinine level to determine the glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs). Early identification of an enlarging giant cell astrocytoma permits medical therapy with mTOR inhibitors [Franz et al 2006, Krueger et al 2010], which may obviate the need for neurosurgical intervention in many individuals. However, neurosurgery may still be indicated when the size of the SEGA causes life-threatening neurologic symptoms.

Seizures. Early control of seizures is thought to prevent subsequent epileptic encephalopathy and reduce cognitive behavioral consequences [Muzykewicz et al 2009a, Bombardieri et al 2010]. The efficacy of different treatments for infantile spasms varies among individuals. Despite earlier studies suggesting the contrary, a retrospective review found that vigabatrin controlled infantile spasms in 73% of children with TSC [Camposano et al 2008] (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

The seizures in TSC may be resistant to polydrug therapy with anticonvulsants. A number of small studies have reported excellent results after epilepsy surgery [Avellino et al 1997, Baumgartner et al 1997, Weiner et al 1998, Romanelli et al 2002, Thiele 2004].

Jarrar et al [2004] found that unifocal-onset seizures and mild to no developmental delay at the time of surgery predict excellent long-term outcome.

Romanelli et al [2004] discussed the use of electroencephalographic techniques, functional neuroimaging, and invasive cortical mapping to aid the surgeon in evaluating options for surgical resection in individuals with TSC who have multifocal epileptogenic zones.

Kagawa et al [2005] found that increased radiolabeled alpha-methyl-L-tryptophan uptake on PET scans identifies epileptogenic tubers with 83% accuracy, thus enhancing successful epilepsy surgery.

Weiner et al [2006] used a three-staged bilateral surgical approach in 22 persons with TSC. They suggest that this approach can help identify both primary and secondary epileptogenic zones in young persons with multiple tubers.

Case reports and clinical trials assessing the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of intractable epilepsy in individuals with TSC have been published with encouraging results [Muncy et al 2009, Krueger et al 2013b]; additional trials are underway to confirm these preliminary findings.

Renal angiomyolipoma

For asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipoma measuring >4 cm in diameter or >3 cm and growing rapidly, treatment with an mTOR inhibitor is currently recommended as the most effective first-line therapy in the short term [Davies et al 2011, Bissler et al 2013]. The demonstrated tolerability to date is far preferable to the renal damage caused by angiomyolipoma progression or surgical and embolitic/ablative therapies, though studies are still needed to confirm long-term benefits and safety [Krueger et al 2013b].

Selective embolization followed by corticosteroids, kidney-sparing resection, or ablative therapy for exophytic lesions are acceptable second-line therapy for asymptomatic angiomyolipomas [Bissler et al 2002].

For acute hemorrhage, embolization followed by corticosteroids is more appropriate [Mourikis et al 1999]. Nephrectomy is to be avoided because of the high incidence of complications and increased risk for future renal insufficiency and end-stage renal failure, and the poor prognosis that results from chronic kidney disease.

Facial angiofibromas. Topical mTOR inhibitor formuations have been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of facial angiofibromas.

Cardiac rhabdomyomas. Previous standard of care for the treatment of newborns with cardiac rhabdomyomas resulting in life-threatening complications (i.e., outflow tract obstruction) was surgery. There have now been several reports of off-label use of mTOR inhibitors to treat cardiac rhabdomyomas in infants with TSC with encouraging results [Tiberio et al 2011, Dogan et al 2015, Goyer et al 2015, Mlczoch et al 2015]. These reports indicate that mTOR inhibitors may be a better alternative than surgery for clinically significant cardiac rhabdomyomas.

LAM affects almost exclusively women of childbearing age in whom estrogen is suspected to be involved in stimulating growth of smooth muscle cells in the lung. Medroxy-progesterone treatment and/or oophorectomy reduce the production of estrogen; however, response to treatment is highly individual. Oxygen therapy is necessary with impaired lung function. Persons with severe disease require lung transplantation.

Other trials have demonstrated efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for renal angiomyolipomas and LAM [Bissler et al 2008, McCormack et al 2011]. The FDA approved use of mTOR inhibitors for treatment of the lung issues in people with TSC (May 28, 2015).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For those on vigabatrin therapy, visual field testing at the onset of therapy, at three-month intervals for the first 18 months, and every six months afterward is recommended because of the risk for peripheral visual field restriction [Willmore et al 2009].

Surveillance

The following routine monitoring is recommended for individuals with TSC (adapted from Krueger et al [2013a], Table 3):

Central nervous system

Obtain MRI of brain every one to three years in asymptomatic (no symptoms referable to the central nervous system) individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to monitor for new occurrence of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). Those with asymptomatic SEGA in childhood should continue to be imaged periodically as adults to ensure that there is no growth.

In affected individuals with large or growing SEGA causing ventricular enlargement who are still asymptomatic, brain MRI scans should be performed more frequently and these individuals and their families should be educated regarding the potential for new symptoms.

Perform screening for TAND features at least annually. Perform comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key developmental points: infancy (0-3 years), preschool (3-6 years), pre-middle school (6-9 years), adolescence (12-16 years), early adulthood (18-25 years), and as needed thereafter.

Obtain routine EEG in individuals with known or suspected seizure activity. The frequency of routine EEG should be determined by clinical need.

Renal

Obtain MRI of the abdomen to assess for progression of angiomyolipomas and renal cystic disease every one to three years throughout the lifetime of the affected individual.

Assess renal function (including determination of GFR) and blood pressure at least annually.

Cardiac. In asymptomatic infants and children with documented cardiac rhabdomyomas, obtain an echocardiogram every one to three years until regression of the cardiac rhabdomyomas is documented. More frequent or advanced diagnostic assessment may be required for symptomatic individuals.

Pulmonary

Perform clinical screening (targeted history) for LAM symptoms, including exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath, at each clinic visit for women older than age 18 years or those who report respiratory symptoms. Counseling regarding smoking risk and estrogen use should be reviewed at each clinic visit for individuals at risk for LAM.

Obtain a high-resolution computed tomography (HCRT) of the lungs every five to ten years in asymptomatic individuals at risk for LAM who have no evidence of lung cysts on baseline HRCT. Individuals with lung cysts detected on HRCT should have annual pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function test and 6-min walk) and HRCT reduced to every two to three years.

Skin. Perform detailed clinical dermatologic inspection/exam annually.

Dental. Perform detailed clinical dental inspection/exam at minimum every six months and panoramic radiographs by age seven years, if not performed previously.

Ophthalmologic. Perform annual ophthalmologic evaluation in affected individuals with previously identified ophthalmologic lesions or vision symptoms at the baseline evaluation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following

Smoking

Estrogen use in adolescent and adult females

Nephrectomy (see Treatment of Manifestations, Renal angiomyolipoma)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, physical examination and imaging studies (skin examination, retinal examination, brain imaging, and renal ultrasound examination) to assess for the clinical features of TSC (see Diagnosis).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Many clinical trials are assessing the effect of drug therapy on the manifestations of TSC (see ClinicalTrials.gov).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a tubulinopathy, the following are recommended:

Pediatric neurology consultation including interpretation of MRI to provide as much prognostic information as possible; EEG if episodic clinical events of uncertain cause or suggestive of epilepsy are present

Evaluations by a physical therapist, occupational therapist, speech therapist, and developmental specialist in infancy and the preschool years because of the high risk of gross and fine motor delays, delayed speech and language development, and intellectual disability

Assessment of special educational needs

In the context of gross and fine motor delays and multiple disabilities, evaluation of:

Growth, feeding, and nutrition

Respiratory status

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Nerve conduction study (NCS) if progressive neuropathy is suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of children with multiple disabilities and medically refractory epilepsy is recommended for long-term management.

Supportive management, including an individualized therapy plan that includes physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy for oculomotor deficits and/or strabismus should begin at the time of diagnosis to ensure the best possible functionality and developmental outcome. Of note, it is appropriate to institute measures early on to manage potential complications of spasticity (i.e., joint contractures or reduced range of motion), which can increase the risk for decubitus ulcers as well as affect mobility and hygiene.

Failure to thrive in infants with the more severe brain malformations (i.e., lissencephaly, generalized polymicrogyria) is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, followed by gastrostomy tube placement as needed.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures based on the specific epilepsy type are indicated. In general, seizures should be treated promptly by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently worsens feeding and increases both the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed and the risk for pneumonia.

Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

For those with CFEOM, see detailed discussion of nonsurgical and surgical treatment (including extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery) in Congenital Fibrosis of the Extraocular Muscles.

For patients with severe cortical malformations (lissencephalies, polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia, microlissencephaly), it is usually appropriate to discuss the level of care to be provided in the event of a severe intercurrent illness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of a child diagnosed with tyrosinemia type I on the basis of newborn screening, the following evaluations are recommended (see Table 3):

CBC with platelet count

Serum concentration of electrolytes

Assessment of liver function (PT, PTT, AST, ALT, GGT, serum bilirubin concentration, alkaline phosphatase, and serum AFP).

For children ascertained on the basis of clinical symptoms (see Table 4; pdf), testing should include the evaluations listed above in addition to:

Baseline abdominal imagining by CT or MRI (with contrast) to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules (see Dubois et al [1996]) and renal size;

X-ray of wrist to document presence or absence of rickets.

Clinical genetics consultation is indicated for all affected individuals.

Treatment of Manifestations

Management guidelines have been published. US recommendations include Chinsky JM et al [in press]; European recommendations include de Laet et al [2013].

Acute management of liver failure. Children may require respiratory support, appropriate fluid management, and blood products for correction of bleeding diathesis.

Nitisinone (Orfadin®). 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoro-methylbenzyol) 1,3 cyclohexanedione (NTBC) blocks parahydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase (p-HPPD), the second step in the tyrosine degradation pathway, and prevents the accumulation of FAA and its conversion to succinylacetone (Figure 1).

Nitisinone should be prescribed as soon as the diagnosis of tyrosinemia type I is confirmed.

Nitisinone is generally prescribed at 1.0 mg/kg/day; individual requirements may vary. Dosage should be adjusted to maintain blood nitisinone levels between 40 and 60 µmol/L, which theoretically blocks more than 99% of p-HPPD activity. Rarely, an individual may require higher blood levels of nitisinone (70 µmol/L) to suppress succinylacetone excretion. As long as blood concentration of nitisinone is within the therapeutic range, urine succinylacetone does not need to be measured.

Nitisinone is typically given in two divided doses; however, because of the long half-life (50-60 hours), affected individuals who are older than one year and stable may maintain adequate therapy with 1x/day dosing [Schlune et al 2012].

Rare side effects of nitisinone have included: transient low platelet count and transient low neutrophil count that resolved without intervention; and photophobia that resolved with stricter dietary control and subsequent lowering of blood tyrosine concentrations.

Low-tyrosine diet. Nitisinone increases blood concentration of tyrosine, necessitating a low-tyrosine diet to prevent tyrosine crystals from forming in the cornea.

Dietary management should be started immediately upon diagnosis and should provide a nutritionally complete diet with controlled intakes of phenylalanine and tyrosine using a vegetarian diet with low-protein foods and a medical formula such as Tyrex® (Ross) or Tyros-1® (Mead Johnson).

Phenylalanine and tyrosine requirements are interdependent and vary from individual to individual and within the same individual depending on growth rate, adequacy of energy and protein intakes, and state of health. With appropriate dietary management, plasma tyrosine concentration should be 300-600 µmol/L, regardless of age; plasma phenylalanine concentration should be 20-80 µmol/L (0.3-1.3 mg/dL). If the blood concentration of phenylalanine is too low (<20 µmol/L), additional protein should be added to the diet from milk or foods.

Liver transplantation. Prior to the availability of nitisinone for the treatment of tyrosinemia type I, the only definitive therapy was liver transplantation.

Liver transplantation should be reserved for those children who (1) have severe liver failure at clinical presentation and fail to respond to nitisinone therapy or (2) have documented evidence of malignant changes in hepatic tissue [Bartlett et al 2014].

Transplant recipients require long-term immunosuppression. Mortality associated with liver transplantation in young children is approximately 10%.

Transplant recipients may also benefit from low-dose (0.1mg/kg/day) nitisinone therapy to prevent continued renal tubular and glomerular dysfunction resulting from persistence of succinylacetone in the plasma and urine [Bartlett et al 2013].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Treatment with nitisinone (Orfadin®) should begin as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because carnitine deficiency secondary to the renal tubular Fanconi syndrome can cause skeletal muscle weakness, serum concentration of carnitine should be measured so that carnitine deficiency, if identified, can be treated [Nissenkorn et al 2001].

Osteoporosis and rickets resulting from renal tubular damage are treated by correction of acidosis, restoring of calcium and phosphate balance, and administration of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D.

Surveillance

Frequent evaluation of the following parameters is typical in the management of individuals with tyrosinemia type I (Table 3) [CR Scott, personal recommendations].

Table 3. 

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

Evaluation

Initiation of Therapy (Baseline)

First 6 Months:

After 6 Months of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

After 2 Years of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

As Clinically Indicated

Monthly

Every 3 months

Tyrosinemia type I markers

Plasma concentration of methionine, phenylalanine, tyrosine

X

x

X

X

or X

Blood / urine succinylacetone

X

X(urine)

X

or X

Blood nitisinone concentration

X

X

X

or X

CBC

Hemoglobin, hematocrit, WBC, platelet count

X

X

X

X

or X

Liver evaluation

Serum AFP concentration

X

X

X

X

X

PT/PTT

X

X(until normal)

Bilirubin

X

ALT/AST/GGT

X

X(until normal)

X

Alkaline phosphatase

X

X(until normal)

X

X

CT or MRI 1

X

Renal studies

BUN / creatinine

X

Urine: PO4, Ca, Prot/Cr ratio

X

Skeletal evaluation

X-ray of wrist (for rickets)

X

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

1. 

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

For monitoring children diagnosed based on clinical presention, see Table 4 (pdf).

For alternative management recommendations, see de Laet et al [2013].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid inappropriate protein intake.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Prenatal testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs before birth.

Blood or urine succinylacetone analysis as soon as possible after birth if prenatal testing was not performed. This allows prompt initiation of treatment, as postnatal genetic testing results may not be available in a timely fashion.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, consideration of analysis for urine succinylacetone in healthy older sibs

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Little data exist on the use of nitisinone during human pregnancy. Speculation would assume that the pregnant woman remains safe from untoward events; however, the developing fetus may be at risk because of alterations in tyrosine metabolism.

At least two women have given birth to healthy infants while receiving therapeutic doses of nitisinone [Garcia Segarra et al 2010].

In one instance the affected mother gave birth to an unaffected infant who is reported to be healthy and developing normally at age 2.5 years [Garcia Segarra et al 2010, Vanclooster et al 2012].

In another instance, an affected woman gave birth to an affected child. The child is reported to have normal growth and development at age seven months [Garcia Segarra et al 2010]. The authors speculate that the affected child was protected from in utero liver damage by maternal treatment with nitisinone during pregnancy.

See www.mothertobaby.org for more information on medication exposure during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Prior to the availability of nitisinone, the only available non-transplant therapy was a diet limiting the availability of phenylalorine and tyrosine. Although modestly helpful, recurrent episodes of neurologic crises and progression of liver disease occurred. Average survival was less than age ten years.To establish the extent of muscle involvement in an individual diagnosed with Udd distal myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

CT and MRI identify affected muscles with high specificity.

EMG can help identify involved muscles but is much less accurate and less convenient for the affected individual.

Manual muscle force measurement can be used to help identify involved muscles but is even less specific than EMG.

Treatment of Manifestations

Usually no specific treatment is needed other than orthoses to counteract foot drop.

In individuals in their 40s and 50s with severe drop foot, tibial posterior tendon transposition can be performed to replace lost function of the anterior tibial muscle and long toe extensor muscles.

Surveillance

Disease progression and the need for rehabilitation and orthotic treatment should be evaluated by neurologic examination every one to four years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with UNC80 deficiency, the evaluations and referrals summarized in Table 4 (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) are recommended.

Table 4. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Organ System

Evaluation

Comment

Constitutional

Growth assessment incl height, weight, & head circumference

Eyes

Ophthalmologic eval

Gastrointestinal

Feeding eval

Musculoskeletal

Orthopedic eval

If club feet and/or scoliosis is present

Neurologic

EEG

If neurologic history suggests presence of seizures

Psychiatric

Psychiatric eval

If behavioral problems are present

Miscellaneous / Other

Psychoeducational and/or developmental evals (physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy evals) to assess developmental delays & facilitate appropriate interventions

Consultation w/clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency

Manifestation

Treatment

Ocular abnormalities (nystagmus/strabismus)

Ophthalmologic management

Oral feeding difficulties

G-tube feeding

Constipation

Standard management

Orthopedic abnormalities (club feet, scoliosis, joint contractures)

Braces and/or corrective surgery

Seizures

Antiepileptic drugs

Self-injurious behavior

Behavior modification therapy

Hypo/hypertonia, gross motor delays, sensory processing difficulties

Physical therapy, occupational therapy

Absent speech

Sign language instruction; consider alternate forms of communication

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, lifts, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Surveillance

Annual evaluation with the following specialists is appropriate:

Pediatrician for growth assessment

Neurologist to identify and manage seizures

Orthopedist for evaluation of contractures and back examination for scoliosis

Ophthalmologist for ocular manifestations and corrective therapy if needed

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with urofacial syndrome (UFS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Urinalysis and urine culture for occult or chronic infection

Assessment of renal function: serum creatinine concentration and/or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)

Urinary tract ultrasound examination

Micturating cystourethrogram

Uroflowmetry or urodynamic testing

Blood pressure measurement

Assessment of renal parenchymal damage: as indicated by the individual’s presentation, dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) isotope scan to visualize functional kidney parenchyma [Ochoa 2004, Aydogdu et al 2010, Stuart et al 2013]

Assessment of bowel voiding

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Urinary tract. No evidence base exists for treatment of the urinary tract abnormalities of UFS.

Urinary tract infections warrant rapid and complete treatment. Urosepsis should be treated as per the general population with antibiotic use directed by culture; antibiotic prophylaxis may also be considered.

Anticholinergic and α1-adrenergic blockers have been used in the medical management of urinary incontinence and bladder dysfunction [Aydogdu et al 2010, Stuart et al 2013].

Intermittent catheterization or vesicostomy to reduce residual urine volumes and achieve continence with a reduced risk of infections have been used.

Surgical management of hydroureteronephrosis and bladder augmentation to slow progression of renal impairment have been used; their efficacy is not known [Ochoa 2004, Stuart et al 2013].

Early recognition of renal impairment should initiate intensive management to prevent or slow progression. Renal impairment and hypertension are managed as per clinical status. Successful renal transplantation has been reported [Ochoa 2004].

Bowel. Constipation is managed as for the general population.

Surveillance

Monitor for evidence of urinary tract features including vesicoureteric reflux (VUR) and hydroureteronephrosis. Renal function should be monitored at intervals determined by urinary tract features at presentation and their subsequent progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Nephrotoxic substances contraindicated in individuals with renal impairment should be avoided if possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to examine sibs of an affected individual as soon as possible after birth to determine if facial and/or urinary tract manifestations of UFS are present to allow prompt evaluation of the urinary tract and renal function and prompt initiation of necessary treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although no guidelines for prenatal management of UFS exist, it seems appropriate to perform ultrasound examination of pregnancies at risk to determine if urinary tract involvement of UFS is present, as it may influence the timing and/or location of delivery (e.g., in a tertiary medical center that could manage renal/urinary complications immediately after birth).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Usher syndrome type I, the following evaluations are recommended:

Audiology. Otoscopy, pure tone audiometry, assessment of speech perception, and, in some individuals, auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE)

Vestibular function. Rotary chair, calorics, electronystagmography, and computerized posturography

Ophthalmology. Funduscopy, visual acuity, visual field (Goldmann perimetry), and electroretinography (ERG)

Clinical genetics. Consultation with a clincial geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hearing. Hearing aids are usually ineffectual in individuals with Usher syndrome type I because of the severity of the hearing loss.

Cochlear implantation should be seriously considered, especially for young children [Damen et al 2006, Pennings et al 2006, Liu et al 2008].

Communication skills may be optimized if all family members, as well as affected children, receive specialized training from educators of the hearing impaired.

Balance. Tunnel vision and night blindness can combine with vestibular areflexia to predispose affected individuals to accidental injury.

Well-supervised sports activities may help a person with Usher syndrome type I to compensate by becoming more adept at using the somatosensory component of the balance system.

Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management.

Communication by sign language and lip reading becomes increasingly difficult over time as the retinitis pigmentosa (RP) progresses. Vision loss may progress to the point that the individual with Usher syndrome type I can only communicate through tactile signing.

Surveillance

Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Competition in sports requiring acute vision and/or good balance may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Persons with Usher syndrome type I often become disoriented when submerged in water because they lack the sense of where 'up' is; they should therefore exercise caution while swimming.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the hearing of all sibs at risk for Usher syndrome type I as soon after birth as possible to allow early diagnosis and treatment of hearing impairment.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Hearing aids are usually ineffectual in individuals with Usher syndrome type I because of the severity of the hearing loss.

Vitamin A supplements. Although treatment with vitamin A palmitate may limit the progression of RP in persons with isolated RP and Usher syndrome type II, no studies have evaluated the effectiveness of vitamin A palmitate in individuals with Usher syndrome type I. Vitamin A is fat soluble and not excreted in the urine. Therefore, high-dose vitamin A dietary supplements should be used only under the direction of a physician because of the need to monitor for harmful side effects such as hepatotoxicity. Of note, the studies by Berson et al [1993] were performed on individuals older than age 18 years because of the unknown effects of high-dose vitamin A on children. High-dose vitamin A supplementation should not be used by affected pregnant women, as large doses of vitamin A (i.e., above the recommended daily allowance for pregnant or lactating women) may be teratogenic to the developing fetus.

Lutein supplements. Oral administration of lutein (20 mg/d) for seven months had no effect on central vision; however, long-term effects are unknown [Aleman et al 2001].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Usher syndrome type II (USH2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Audiology. Otoscopy, puretone audiometry, assessment of speech perception, and, in some individuals, auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE)

Vestibular function. Rotary chair, calorics, electronystagmography, and computerized posturography

Ophthalmology. Funduscopy, visual acuity, visual field (Goldmann perimetry), electroretinography (ERG)

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hearing. Hearing aids are helpful. Young children can benefit from early fitting of hearing aids and speech training to normalize language.

Environmental trauma (e.g., noise) or a genetic susceptibility (e.g., presbycusis) in addition to the congenital, stable deficit of USH2 may combine to produce severe-to-profound hearing loss in older individuals with USH2; in such individuals, cochlear implantation may be warranted.

Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management.

Tunnel vision and night blindness can increase the likelihood of accidental injury.

Surveillance

Routine auditory evaluation is recommended in order to detect changes that may require modifications to hearing aids.

Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended in order to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Competition in various sports requiring a full range of vision may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate all sibs at risk for Usher syndrome type II as soon after birth as possible to allow early support and management of the child and the family. Evaluations include:

Audiology. ABR, DPOAE

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

High-dose vitamin A supplementation should not be used by affected pregnant women, as large doses of vitamin A (doses above the RDA for pregnant or lactating women) may be teratogenic to the developing fetus (see Other).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Vitamin A supplements. Although treatment with vitamin A palmitate may limit the progression of RP in some persons, no formal studies have evaluated its effectiveness in Usher syndrome type II. Vitamin A is fat soluble and not excreted in the urine. Therefore, high-dose vitamin A should be used only under the direction of a physician because of the need to monitor for harmful side effects, such as hepatotoxicity. Of note, the studies by Berson et al [1993] were performed on individuals older than age 18 years because of the unknown effects of high-dose vitamin A on children.

Lutein supplements. Oral administration of lutein (20 mg/d) for six months had no effect on central vision; however, long-term effects are unknown [Aleman et al 2001].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic history and physical examination for evidence of CNS or peripheral nerve hemangioblastomatosis. A baseline brain and spine MRI is considered standard procedure.

Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal hemangioblastomas

Abdominal ultrasound examination after age 16 years. Suspicious lesions in the kidney, adrenal gland, or pancreas should be evaluated by more sophisticated techniques, such as CT scan or MRI.

Blood pressure determination, supplemented by measurement of urinary catecholamine metabolites after age five years to evaluate for pheochromocytoma

Audiologic evaluation for hearing loss associated with endolymphatic sac tumors

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No guidelines exist for the management of VHL lesions.

CNS hemangioblastoma

Most central nervous system hemangioblastomas can be surgically removed completely and safely [Lonser et al 2003].

Some advocate early surgical removal of both symptomatic and asymptomatic CNS lesions, while others follow asymptomatic lesions with yearly imaging studies.

Surgical intervention of cysts/syrinx in the spinal cord is recommended.

Preoperative arterial embolization may be indicated, especially for extensive spinal tumors.

The position of stereotactic therapy is still questionable [Oldfield 2015]. Gamma knife surgery may be useful with small solid tumors or those in inoperable sites [Asthagiri et al 2010, Simone et al 2011]. While this technique may reduce the size of the solid tumor, it does not appear to prevent cyst formation. In a study with nearly six years of follow up of 40 hemangioblastomas in 20 patients treated with stereotactic therapy, no progression was described in 33% [Asthagiri et al 2010]. Similar results are found when analyzing the natural history of the hemangioblastomas (25%) [Lonser et al 2014]. The unpredictable growth pattern makes it difficult to determine when to start stereotactic therapy, to avoid unnecessary intervention. A recent study demonstrates a local tumor control with stereotactic therapy of 93% after three years, 89% after five years, and 79% after ten years [Kano et al 2015]. Factors associated with tumor control are solid, smaller, VHL-associated lesions and higher margin dose. Thirteen of the 186 (7%) experienced complications, 11 patients needed steroid therapy and one person died of refractory peritumoral edema. Two patients required additional surgery.

Retinal hemangioblastoma

Most ophthalmologists favor prospective treatment of retinal (but not optic nerve) angiomas to avoid blindness, although spontaneous regression has occurred.

Therapeutic modalities used to treat retinal hemangioblastomas include diathermy, xenon, laser, and cryocoagulation, with variable degrees of success depending on the location, size, and number of lesions. Recurrent tumors have been noted, even after many years, but some may be new tumors in the same general area rather than recurrent disease.

External beam radiotherapy has been shown to be useful when standard therapy has not prevented progression [Raja et al 2004].

Renal cell carcinoma

Early surgery is the best option for renal cell carcinoma, although close monitoring is recommended for lesions smaller than 3 cm. Depending on the size and location of the tumor, nephron-sparing or partial nephrectomy may be possible without compromising survival [Grubb et al 2005].

Nephrectomy should leave the adrenal gland in situ, as is done in individuals with renal cell carcinoma who do not have a confirmed diagnosis of VHL. If contralateral pheochromocytoma occurs, the remaining adrenal gland will prevent or delay steroid replacement therapy.

Cryoablation is being increasingly used for small lesions or in individuals who are likely to require multiple surgical procedures [Shingleton & Sewell 2002].

Radio frequency ablation therapy is often applied to smaller tumors, particularly <3 cm [Best et al 2012]. However, smaller lesions treated with radio frequency ablation need frequent intervention [Joly et al 2011]. The major complication rate (need for a radiologic, surgical, or endoscopic intervention) for laparoscopic and percutaneous radio frequency ablation therapy was 7.3% and 4.3%, respectively [Young et al 2012].

Renal transplantation has been successful in individuals in whom bilateral nephrectomy has been necessary. It is imperative to evaluate any living related potential donor for VHL syndrome and to exclude those found to have VHL syndrome.

Pheochromocytomas

Pheochromocytomas should be surgically removed. Laparoscopic approaches have been shown to be effective.

Preoperative treatment with alpha-adrenergic blockade, and optional additional beta-adrenergic blockade for seven to ten days is appropriate even in individuals with no known hypertension.

Partial adrenalectomy could be considered. One long-term follow-up study (9.25 years) of 36 affected individuals showed no metastatic disease; ipsilateral recurrence after partial adrenalectomy was seen in three individuals (11%) [Benhammou et al 2010].

Partial adrenalectomy is also therapy of choice in children. In 10 VHL patients 18 successful operations were performed. After follow up (median 7.2 years), 2 patients developed a new tumor in the ipsilateral adrenal gland [Volkin et al 2012].

Pancreatic cysts and neuroendocrine tumors

Pancreatic cysts are common, but rarely influence endocrine function and generally do not require surgical removal.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors need to be differentiated from cysts and serous cystadenomas. Pancreatic tumors are usually slow growing and are not hormonally active, although they can cause metastatic disease. Surgery should be considered when there is a high risk of metastases suggested by one of the following prognostic criteria [Blansfield et al 2007]:

A tumor of ≥3 cm

A pathogenic variant in exon 3

A tumor with a doubling rate <500 days

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). Consideration of surgical removal of these slow-growing tumors must include discussion of the possible complication of total deafness. Early intervention with small tumors has been shown to preserve both hearing and vestibular function [Kim et al 2005, Friedman et al 2013]. Friedman et al described two patients (2/18) with postoperative decreased facial nerve function and three (3/18) patients with recurrent ELSTs (with a mean follow up of 67 months). Kim et al [2013] studied 31 patients with VHL with 33 resected ELSTs. Twenty-nine patients were symptomatic. After surgery, hearing was stabilized or improved in 97% of individuals, and tumor resection was complete in 91%. Complications occurred in three tumors: cerebrospinal fluid leakage in two (6%) and transient lower cranial nerve palsy in one (3%).

Epididymal or broad ligament papillary cyst adenomas. These generally do not require surgery, unless they are symptomatic or are threatening fertility.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize deficits such as hearing loss, vision loss, neurologic symptoms, and the need for renal replacement therapy.

Surveillance

Individuals with known VHL syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations but identified as having a VHL pathogenic variant, and first-degree relatives who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team familiar with the spectrum of VHL syndrome.

Annual evaluation starting at age one year for neurologic symptoms, vision problems or hearing disturbance

Annual examination starting at age one year for signs of nystagmus, strabismus, or white pupils

Annual blood pressure monitoring starting at age one year

Monitoring for complications is as follows:

CNS lesions. MRI of the brain and total spine every two years starting at age 16 years. Attention should be given to the inner ear/petrous temporal bone (for ELST) and the posterior fossa.

Visceral lesions. Annual abdominal ultrasound; MRI scan of the abdomen (kidney, pancreas and adrenal glands) every two years starting at age 16 years

Retinal angiomas. Annual ophthalmology evaluation with indirect ophthalmoscope starting at age one year

Pheochromocytoma. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines starting at age five years

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). The best way to detect ELST is unknown.

ELST presents as a mass on the posterior wall of the petrous part of the temporal bone and can be missed on standard MRI. MRI with contrast and high signal intensity with T1 (to detect hydrops), using thin slices of the internal auditory canal is recommended in symptomatic individuals. Butman et al [2013] found that FLAIR MRI is useful to find ELST-associated hydrops.

Butman et al [2013] described three pathophysiologic ways in which ELST can cause symptoms: optic capsule invasion, hemorrhage, and endolymphatic hydrops. Symptoms can be caused by all three mechanisms and hemorrhage or hydrops can be present even without any lesion being visible on MRI (<3 mm).

Audiology assessment every two to three years (annually if hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo is present) starting at age five years. Audiology can be used to detect (early) hearing loss. Binderup et al [2013b] described a male patient with demonstrable hearing loss by audiometric data whose ELST was only detectable with MRI more than one year later, after the patient already suffered from complete right-sided hearing loss. Results from a large study on audiometric data in individuals with VHL are pending.

While current medical surveillance guidelines do not address structured psychological support for individuals with VHL, their partners, and their family members, research suggests a distinct need for psychosocial support [Lammens et al 2010, Lammens et al 2011b].

Note: The surveillance guidelines established for VHL are not evidence based and rely on experiential reporting, largely from North America. Guidelines may vary somewhat depending on the local standard of care.

In the United States, the VHL Alliance has worked extensively with healthcare professionals to assemble guidelines which are generally accepted throughout the world [VHL Handbook]. Other guidelines originate from Denmark and the Netherlands. For example, Dutch guidelines recommend screening for ELST only on indication. In addition, examination by a primary care physician and assessment of metanephrine levels start at age ten years, while ophthalmologic examination begins at age five years.

Two recent studies evaluated tumor progression. In one study, new tumor development was compared to age and genotype [Binderup et al 2013b]. According to their results, surveillance for retinal angiomas is essential during teenage years and central nervous system hemangioblastomas is mainly important in adults. In the other study, the optimal lesion-specific age to start surveillance and the optimal screening interval per organ system was analyzed [Kruizinga et al 2013]. The optimal time to start metanephrine measurements is age five years; retinal screening in patients with VHL can start at age 12 years. For central nervous system hemangioblastomas and visceral lesions, starting age was in line with current surveillance guidelines. Furthermore, to attain a 5% detection rate, surveillance intervals for retinal tumors can be twice as long, and for the adrenal gland, four times as long.

Improved surveillance guidelines have increased the life expectancy of individuals with VHL by more than 16 years since 1990 [Wilding et al 2012]. Two studies evaluated the implementation of national surveillance guidelines in Denmark and the Netherlands. One study showed that more than 90% of the 84 affected individuals included reported that they were familiar with their national VHL surveillance guidelines. However, daily practice showed that 64% of those individuals had received information that was only partially consistent with the Dutch guidelines [Lammens et al 2011a]. In a Danish study, compliance and frequency of follow up was surprisingly low with regard to the national VHL guidelines for individuals with VHL and subjects at risk [Bertelsen & Kosteljanetz 2011]. These studies collectively suggest that correct implementation of surveillance guidelines through a doctor- and patient-oriented information campaign could have an immediate positive impact for individuals with VHL.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Tobacco products should be avoided since they are considered a risk factor for kidney cancer.

Chemicals and industrial toxins known to affect VHL involved organs should be avoided.

Contact sports should be avoided if adrenal or pancreatic lesions are present.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early recognition of manifestations of VHL syndrome may allow for timely intervention and improved outcome; thus, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk individuals (including children) for early manifestations of VHL syndrome is appropriate. The American Society of Clinical Oncology identifies VHL syndrome as a Group 1 disorder – a hereditary disease for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [Robson et al 2010] (full text).

If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used for early identification of at-risk family members to improve diagnostic certainty and reduce the need for screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant [Priesemann et al 2006].

If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is not known and/or at-risk individuals decline genetic testing for religious or financial reasons, continued screening for VHL lesions is warranted (see Surveillance).

The use of molecular genetic testing for determining the genetic status of presumably at-risk relatives when a family member with a clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome is not available for testing is not straightforward. Such test results need to be interpreted with caution. A positive test result signals the presence of a VHL pathogenic variant in the at-risk family member and indicates that the same molecular genetic testing method can be used to assess the genetic status of other at-risk family members. However, a negative test for a VHL pathogenic variant under such circumstances suggests one of the following possibilities:

The at-risk family member has not inherited a VHL pathogenic variant.

The familial VHL pathogenic variant may not be detectable by the assays used.

The clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member is questionable.

In this situation, the presumably at-risk family member has a small, but finite, residual risk of having inherited a pathogenic allele (i.e., VHL syndrome or other hereditary disorder). In counseling such individuals, careful consideration should be given to the strength of the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member, the relationship of the at-risk individual to the affected family member, the perceived risk of an undetected VHL (or other gene) pathogenic variant, and the potential need for some form of continued clinical surveillance.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Recommended medical surveillance for pregnant women with VHL is still debated. Research by the French VHL Study Group showed a significantly higher complication rate of hemangioblastomas in individuals with VHL who had had at least one pregnancy [Abadie et al 2010]. Another study concluded that pregnancy has a significant influence on cerebellar hemangioblastoma growth and causes an overall high complication rate (17%) [Frantzen et al 2012]. Intensified surveillance could therefore be recommended in a specialized medical center during preconception care and pregnancy. Special attention should be paid to pheochromocytoma and cerebellar hemangioblastoma. In another study pregnancy was not related with the development of new hemangioblastomas or hemangioblastoma/cyst growth [Ye et al 2012]. Their data suggest no extra precautions need to be taken during gestation. The VHL Handbook recommends MRI of the cerebellum without contrast at four months’ gestation.

Therapies Under Investigation

Certain VHL pathogenic variants fail to downregulate HIFα, leading to overexpression of downstream effectors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) which contribute to pathogenesis. Many experimental therapies target these misregulated signaling pathways. An intravitreal VEGF receptor inhibitor, ranibizumab, has been used with some success in individuals with retinal hemangioblastomas who have either failed local therapy or whose lesions are not amenable to local therapy [Wong et al 2008]. Intravitreal injections of bevacizumab, another VEGF inhibitor, have also been shown to be effective in treating retinal hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL [Hrisomalos et al 2010]. Stabilization of some (but not all) CNS hemangioblastomas has also been demonstrated [Madhusudan et al 2004].

A tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits the action of growth factor receptors, sunitinib, has had some utility in the rare unresectable malignant pheochromocytomas, but simple surgical excision is clearly preferable for these usually benign tumors [Jimenez et al 2009]. Sunitinib has also been shown to effectively treat clear cell renal cell carcinomas – but not hemangioblastomas – in patients with VHL [Jonasch et al 2011].

Checkpoint inhibitors such as antibodies targeting PD-L1 have shown promise in managing tumor load; however, these treatments have unknown toxicity in patients with VHL, who will likely have dozens to thousands of small subclinical lesions present throughout their body. .

Sardi et al [2009] reported three-year stabilization of previously progressive multifocal spinal hemangioblastomas with thalidomide.

Gene replacement therapy and other curative treatment approaches are still in the early developmental phases. No such treatment for VHL currently exists, although it will be exciting to follow the example set by other monogenic diseases causing blindness. Encouragingly, gene replacement therapy strategies have been used successfully for other diseases of the eye including Leber congenital amaurosis, retinitis pigmentosa, and Usher syndrome [Ashtari et al 2011, Trapani et al 2014, Deng et al 2015]. The medical and research communities are largely focused on ameliorating disease progression and on improvement of early detection methodology. Surgical techniques are rapidly improving and therapeutic options are broadening every year.

Premature termination codon 124 (PTC124), also known as ataluren, may benefit a subset of affected individuals in whom nonsense variants give rise to premature stop codons in the messenger RNA (mRNA) [Auld et al 2010]. There are three stop codons: UAA, UAG, and UGA. PTC124 promotes read-through of all three stop codons with different efficiencies. The highest read-through efficiency takes place at UGA, followed by UAG and then UAA. PTC124 has been successfully proven to promote read-through of nonsense variants in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), cystic fibrosis (CF), and Usher syndrome type 1C. Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials have shown no serious side-effects with PTC124 treatment, even after long-term use [Wilschanski et al 2011]. Preclinical investigation of PTC124 effects on VHL is ongoing.

Aminoglycosides such as gentamicin promote read-through of premature stop codons when they are supplied in high concentrations, but they have serious side effects.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VLCAD deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of baseline plasma (serum) creatine kinase (CK) concentration

Measurement of baseline liver transaminases

Cardiac echocardiography

Electrocardiogram

Clinical genetics consultation

Note: In the setting of acute disease, measurement of blood glucose concentration and blood ammonia concentration may be indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations

Frequently updated, succinct “emergency” care plans should detail the typical clinical issues (either those already experienced by the patient or those anticipated based on the diagnosis) and the importance of early management (e.g., use of IV glucose as an energy source, monitoring for cardiac rhythm disturbance, and monitoring of rhabdomyolysis), and avoidance of triggers (fasting, long-chain fats, and irritation of the myocardium) [Arnold et al 2009].

Cardiac dysfunction is reversible with early, intensive supportive care (occasionally including extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation) and diet modification. See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Individuals with the more severe forms are typically placed on a low-fat formula, with supplemental calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT). A variety of strategies for the low-fat diet are used, ranging from 13%-39% of calories as total fat, with an additional 15%-18% of calories supplied as MCT oil in those most strictly restricted for long-chain fats [Solis & Singh 2002].

Extra MCT has demonstrated benefit in older individuals with long-chain defects who have exercise intolerance. Gillingham et al [2006] demonstrated improved exercise tolerance in individuals given 0.5 g/kg lean body weight 20 minutes prior to exercise. [Behrend et al 2012].

Triheptanoin has been used in a few individuals with the goal of providing calories as well as providing anaplerotic carbons; however, the efficacy remains controversial. Formal clinical trials of triheptanoin are in progress (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Severe exercise (e.g., military training) has unmasked symptoms in previously asymptomatic adults [Hoffman et al 2006, Laforêt et al 2009], emphasizing that exercise should be guided by the individual’s tolerance level.

The use of carnitine supplementation is controversial [Arnold et al 2009]: consensus as to whether additional carnitine is detrimental or efficacious has not been established.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Acute rhabdomyolysis is treated with ample hydration and alkalization of the urine to protect renal function and to prevent acute renal failure secondary to myoglobinuria.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following:

Fasting, including periods of preparation and recovery from planned surgery or sedation [Vellekoop et al 2011]

Myocardial irritation (e.g., cardiac catheterization)

Dehydration (risk for acute tubular necrosis)

High-fat diet (long-chain fats) including ketogenic or carbohydrate-restricted diets for the purpose of weight loss. Careful weight reduction has been accomplished by restricting long-chain fats and calories, supplementing with calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), and limiting overnight catabolism with uncooked cornstarch [Zweers et al 2012]

Volatile anesthetics and those that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids such as propofol and etomidate [Vellekoop et al 2011]. However, the use of propofol for short duration procedures has been evaluated in individuals with LCHAD deficiency and not found to cause adverse events [Martin et al 2014].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, plasma or dried blood spot acylcarnitine analysis may not be sufficiently sensitive, and direct VLCAD assay of lymphocytes or FAO probe studies of cultured fibroblasts may be required.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

During pregnancy, placental and fetal β-oxidation may temporize or even improve maternal fatty acid β-oxidation [Mendez-Figueroa et al 2010]. However, labor and post-partum periods are catabolic states and place the mother at higher risk for rhabdomyolysis and subsequent myoglobinuria. A management plan for labor and delivery has been proposed by Mendez-Figueroa et al [2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

Triheptanoin is a source of 7-carbon fatty acids which may be superior to medium-chain triglycerides, in that they provide a 3-carbon chain to promote anaplerosis [Roe et al 2002].

Bezafibrate, a PPAR pan agonist, has been shown to increase VLCAD enzyme activity in vitro in fibroblasts cultured from individuals with ACADVL pathogenic missense variants [Djouadi et al 2005, Gobin-Limballe et al 2007]. It is not known whether this observation translates into reduction of clinical morbidity, and a small study published by Orngreen et al [2014] suggests that exercise tolerance does not improve in response to oral bezafibrate.

Dantrolene sodium, a muscle relaxant, may be useful as an adjunctive therapy in adult-onset rhabdomyolysis [Voermans et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VLDLR-associated cerebellar hypoplasia (VLDLR-CH), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Formal testing of cognitive function

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Physical therapy to promote ambulation

Occupational therapy to develop fine-motor skills required for activities of daily living

Educational support

Surveillance

Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with multiple cutaneous and mucosal venous malformations (VMCM), the following evaluations are recommended:

In an individual diagnosed with multiple cutaneous and mucosal venous malformations (VMCM), MRI of the affected area to evaluate extension into underlying tissue [Dompmartin et al 2010, Boon et al 2011, Boon & Vikkula 2012]

Medical genetics consultation

Biopsy is usually not necessary for diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Management depends largely on the size and location of the lesions. Treatment is required for any symptomatic VMCM lesion. Although sclerotherapy is the treatment of choice, sclerosing agents are not specific and can lead to ulceration if the VMCM is mucosal or involves the epidermis [Hammer et al 2001, Dompmartin et al 2010, Boon et al 2011]. Foam aethoxysclerol and bleomycin are preferentially used as sclerosing agents. Surgery gives a consistently better result if it is performed after sclerotherapy.

If lesions are painful and D-dimers are elevated, low molecular-weight heparin can be used to alleviate pain [Dompmartin et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If VMCM is associated with localized intravascular coagulopathy (LIC) (D-dimer level greater than twice the normal range), treatment with low molecular-weight heparin should be initiated before any surgery in order to avoid perioperative decompensation of LIC into disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).

Surveillance

Because VMCM lesions can increase in size over time and become painful or symptomatic, affected individuals should be reevaluated yearly or whenever symptoms arise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contraceptive pills with high estrogen levels should be avoided, as venous malformation lesions are estrogen dependent. Venous malformations can increase in size and become symptomatic, especially at initiation of estrogen-based contraception. (In some, but not all, instances, stabilization of a venous malformation lesion and diminution of pain may be observed after three months of contraceptive pill use.)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluating at-risk neonates by physical examination is appropriate in order to identify those who may benefit from early treatment.

Lesions arising after infancy usually stay small and therefore are rarely symptomatic. If no lesions are seen at birth, a second evaluation should be done around puberty.

If the TEK pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

During pregnancy, affected women may develop small new lesions; in addition, existing lesions may increase in size and become painful. If the D-dimer level is high, low molecular-weight heparin therapy may be used to alleviate pain.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of immune function including serum immunoglobulin levels, T- and B-cell numbers and percentages, and T-cell proliferative response to mitogens

More extensive immune testing for number of memory B and T cells and intracellular cytokine (IL2, IL4, IL6, and IFNγ) responses to stimulation, if available

Complete blood count

Assessment of hepatic function (including serum concentrations of aminotransferases, bilirubin, and albumin) and assessment for sequelae of portal hypertension (including anemia and thrombocytopenia)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

A clotting profile and a hepatic Doppler ultrasound examination should be undertaken prior to consideration of hepatic biopsy for a histologic diagnosis of hepatic veno-occlusive disease (hVOD). Evidence of impaired clotting and/or portal hypertension contraindicates hepatic biopsy.

Treatment of Manifestations

Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated via intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which should commence at the diagnosis of VODI or in presymptomatic sibs confirmed to have homozygous SP110 pathogenic variants. An appropriate dose is 0.4 g/kg every four weeks adjusting the dose to maintain a trough IgG level greater than 6 g/L.

Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis with cotrimoxazole pediatric suspension (5 mL = trimethoprim 40 mg and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg) should be ongoing in children with VODI who tolerate this medication. This may be administered as a single daily dose or as a single dose three days per week. The recommended dose is 5 mg trimethoprim per kg (0.625 mL/kg) or 150 mg/M2 (3.75 mL/M2).

Infections with specific agents should be treated with appropriate supportive care and antibacterials or antivirals.

Hepatic transplantation may be considered, but appears to have a high rate of complications in the VODI cohort studied to date (see Other).

Bone marrow transplantation.

Ganaiem et al [2013] reported that this may be an efficacious treatment modality with appropriate conditioning therapy (see Other).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Initiation of regular IVIG at the time of diagnosis to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Some evidence suggests that treatment of immunodeficiency early in VODI may reduce the risk for development or recurrence of hVOD.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate:

Regular surveillance of hepatic function, platelet count, and hemoglobin level in children with VODI as hepatic failure and portal hypertension may occur

Surveillance of serum and urine electrolytes as the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) may occur

Measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations prior to IVIG infusions

Broncho-alveolar lavage to diagnose Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral cultures or lung function studies as needed

Cerebrospinal imaging to diagnose leukodystrophy when clinically indicated

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Agents known to predispose to hVOD (e.g., cyclophosphamide and senecio alkaloids/bush teas) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband who are younger than age 12 months in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. The majority of children with VODI present before age six months; however, as one child presented at age 11 months, testing should be considered in sibs of a proband who are younger than age 12 months.

Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Serum immunoglobulins, full blood count and liver function tests at birth and repeated at six months if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

Penetrance is complete (i.e., 100%) in the individuals with VODI described to date; thus, molecular genetic testing of healthy at-risk sibs of a proband who are older than age 12 months is not recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For an affected pregnant woman, ongoing intravenous immunoglobulin to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate during pregnancy. There is evidence that early treatment of a baby known to be homozygous for pathogenic SP110 pathogenic variants may result in improved long-term outcomes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Hepatic VOD (hVOD) has been reported in the Australian cohort with VODI following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT); therefore, individuals with VODI are likely to have at least the population risk for hVOD following HSCT. The first successful HSCT was reported by Ganaiem et al [2013] suggesting that this may be an efficacious treatment modality with appropriate conditioning therapy. Ganaiem et al described a consanguineous Arab family with eight affected individuals; five individuals received HSCT, of which three were successful. All five individuals received matched sib or family member bone marrow (4 individuals) or peripheral stem cells (1 individual). All five individuals received conditioning with fludarabine and serotherapy and an alkylating agent (cyclophosphamide, busulfan, or treosulfan). The two individuals who died also received thiotepa, and following engraftment died with hVOD and multi-organ failure. One child has remained well for two years following uncomplicated HSCT in 2014. She was of consanguineous Lebanese background and presented at age four months with probable herpetic hepatitis which initially responded clinically to acyclovir, but then developed florid hVOD following a transfusion. She responded well to IVIG, prophylactic Bactrim™, and defibrotide. She was neurologically normal, but asymptomatic bilateral subdural hematomas were found on routine pre-transplant MRI despite a normal head ultrasound a week prior when coagulation studies and platelets had already normalized. At age six months she underwent an unrelated cord blood transplant with alemtuzumab, fludarabine, treosulfan and antithymocyte globulin conditioning. Defibrotide was prophylactically continued until two months post transplant. She remains neurologically normal and her MRI scan at age two years showed no anatomic abnormality [M Wong, personal communication].

In 2016, an Australian infant of consanguineous Lebanese background presented at age four months with Pneumocystis, CMV infection, and hVOD with hypogammaglobinemia. A homozygous SP110 pathogenic variant (c.642delC) was identified on molecular genetic testing. At age five months, after control of pneumonitis and hVOD, he received a haplo-identical paternal HSCT after depletion of α/β TCR and CD19+ cells. He received conditioning with fludarabine, treosulfan, and antithymocyte globulin. Defibrotide was given as hVOD prophylaxis. Two months post-transplant he was well and had engrafted without GVHD or recurrence of hVOD but with moderate CMV hepatitis. Defibrotide was able to be discontinued at day 60. Both the affected individual and donor were CMV positive prior to transplant. Seventy days following HSCT he developed seizures. MRI showed extensive abnormalities throughout the brain and spinal cord, including areas of edema and ring-like enhancing lesions. CT showed widespread calcifications. CMV retinitis was apparent and both CSF and vitreous were CMV PCR positive [T Cole, J Smart, and T Soosay Raj, personal communication].

Inclusion of defibrotide prophylaxis in the transplant regimen may improve survival. Omission of a second alkylating agent in the conditioning regimen may reduce the risk for transplant-related hVOD.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with von Willebrand disease (VWD), the following evaluations are recommended:

A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict severity and tailor treatment. Use of a bleeding assessment tool can facilitate standardized assessment [International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis 2011, Tosetto et al 2011].

A joint and muscle evaluation for those with type 3 VWD (musculoskeletal bleeding is rare in types 1 and 2 VWD).

Screening for hepatitis B and C as well as HIV if the diagnosis is type 3 VWD or if the individual received blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates before 1985.

Baseline serum concentration of iron and ferritin to assess iron stores, as many individuals with VWD (particularly women with menorrhagia) are iron deficient

Gynecologic evaluation for women with menorrhagia [Demers et al 2005]

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

See Nichols et al [2008] (full text) and Castaman et al [2013] (full text) for treatment guidelines.

Individuals with VWD benefit from referral to a comprehensive bleeding disorders program for education, treatment, and genetic counseling.

The two main treatments are desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]) and clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII (VWF/FVIII concentrate). Individuals with VWD should receive prompt treatment for severe bleeding episodes.

Desmopressin

Most individuals with type 1 VWD and some with type 2 VWD respond to intravenous or subcutaneous treatment with desmopressin [Castaman et al 2008, Federici 2008, Leissinger et al 2014], which promotes release of stored VWF and raises levels three- to fourfold. Intranasal preparations are also available.

Following VWD diagnosis, a desmopressin challenge is advisable to assess VWF response.

Desmopressin is the treatment of choice for acute bleeding episodes or to cover surgery.

Desmopressin has been used successfully to cover delivery in women with type 1 VWD and also for a proportion of pregnant women with type 2 VWD [Castaman et al 2010b] (see Pregnancy Management).

In persons who do not tolerate desmopressin or who have a poor VWF response, clotting factor concentrate is required.

Desmopressin is contraindicated in individuals with arteriovascular disease and in those older than age 70 years for whom VWF/FVIII concentrate is required.

Note: Because desmopressin can cause hyponatremia (which can lead to seizures and coma), fluid intake should be restricted for 24 hours following its administration to minimize this risk.

Intravenous Infusion of VWF/FVIII Clotting Factor Concentrates

In those who are non-responsive to desmopressin (i.e., VWF deficiency is not sufficiently corrected) and for those in whom desmopressin is contraindicated (see Treatment by VWD Type), bleeding episodes can be prevented or controlled with intravenous infusion of virally inactivated plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII [Federici 2007]. Such concentrates are prepared from pooled blood donations from many donors. Virus inactivation procedures eliminate potential pathogens.

Indirect Treatments

In addition to treatments that directly increase VWF levels, individuals with VWD often benefit from indirect hemostatic treatments, including:

Fibrinolytic inhibitors (i.e., tranexamic acid for treatment or prevention of bleeding episodes);

Hormonal treatments (i.e., the combined oral contraceptive pill for the treatment of menorrhagia).

Treatment by VWD Type

Type 1 VWD. Treatments that directly increase VWF levels (e.g., desmopressin or VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates) are usually only needed for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding, as with major trauma or surgery.

Indirect treatment with fibrinolytic inhibitors or hormones is often effective.

Type 2A VWD. Treatment with clotting factor concentrates is usually only required for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding episodes such as during surgery.

Responsiveness to desmopressin is variable and should be confirmed prior to therapeutic use.

Indirect treatments can be beneficial.

Type 2B VWD. Clotting factor concentrates are usually required to treat severe bleeding or at the time of surgery.

Treatment with desmopressin should be undertaken cautiously as it can precipitate a worsening of any thrombocytopenia. People with certain pathogenic variants associated with mild or atypical 2B VWD, however, do not appear to develop thrombocytopenia when exposed to desmopressin. [Federici et al 2009]

Indirect treatments (i.e., fibrinolytic inhibitors) can be useful.

Type 2M VWD. Because desmopressin response is generally poor, VWF/FVIII concentrate is the treatment of choice.

Type 2N VWD. Desmopressin can be used for minor bleeding, but because the FVIII level will drop rapidly (as FVIII is not protected by VWF), concentrate containing VWF as well as FVIII is required to cover surgical procedures.

Type 3 VWD. Treatment often requires the repeated infusion of VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates [Franchini et al 2007].

Desmopressin is not effective in type 3 VWD.

Indirect treatments may also be beneficial.

Pediatric Issues

Special considerations for the care of infants and children with VWD include the following:

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.

Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group.

VWF levels are higher in the neonatal period; thus, phenotypic testing for milder forms of VWD should be delayed until later in childhood.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Individuals with type 3 VWD are often given prophylactic infusions of VWF/FVIII concentrates to prevent musculoskeletal bleeding and subsequent joint damage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group.

Individuals with VWD should be vaccinated for hepatitis A and B [Nichols et al 2008, Castaman et al 2013].

Prevention of chronic joint disease is a concern for individuals with type 3 VWD; however, controversy exists regarding the specific schedule and dosing of prophylactic regimens. An international trial that investigated prophylactic treatment for symptoms including joint bleeding, nosebleeds, and menorrhagia concluded that rates of bleeding within individuals during prophylaxis were significantly lower than levels prior to prophylaxis [Berntorp et al 2010, Abshire et al 2013].

Surveillance

Individuals with milder forms of VWD can benefit from being followed by treatment centers with experience in the management of bleeding disorders.

Individuals with type 3 VWD should be followed in experienced centers and should have periodic evaluations by a physiotherapist to monitor joint mobility.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Activities with a high risk of trauma, particularly head injury, should be avoided.

Medications with effects on platelet function (ASA, clopidogrel, or NSAIDs) should be avoided as they can worsen bleeding symptoms.

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once the familial pathogenic variant(s) have been identified, at-risk relatives can be readily analyzed for the pathogenic variant(s) to allow early diagnosis and treatment as needed [Keeney et al 2008].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

VWF levels increase throughout pregnancy with the peak occurring in the third trimester. Nonetheless, pregnant women with VWD are at increased risk for bleeding complications and care should be provided in centers with experience in perinatal management of bleeding disorders [James & Jamison 2007, Varughese & Cohen 2007, James et al 2009].

Women with baseline VWF and FVIII levels of >30 IU/dL are likely to achieve normal levels by the time of delivery, whereas those with a basal level <20 IU/dL and those with baseline VWF:RCo/VWF:Ag ratio <0.6 are likely to require replacement therapy [Castaman et al 2013].

Although deliveries should occur based on obstetric indications, instrumentation should be minimized [Demers et al 2005].

Delayed, secondary postpartum bleeding may be a problem. VWF level rapidly returns to pre-pregnancy level following delivery [Castaman et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

Recombinant VWF is in clinical trials and is expected to be available for patient use in the near future. It may largely replace use of plasma-derived VWF, as has happened for FVIII and FIX recombinant products [Turacek et al 2010, Mannucci et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VPS35-related Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Perform neurologic examination including assessment of tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, postural reflexes, gait (propulsion, arm swing, stride length), and autonomic findings (e.g., orthostasis).

Assess cognitive function and psychiatric manifestations (e. g., hallucinations, delusions, depression, anxiety, sleep disorders).

Evaluate levodopa response.

Consider consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, the treatment of individuals with VPS35-PD does not differ from that of Parkinson disease in general. The following is a brief summary of recommended treatment for PD, based on extensive existing guidelines and recommendations for pharmacotherapy of motor and non-motor manifestations of PD as well as neurosurgical interventions for motor findings [Zesiewicz et al 2010, Oertel et al 2011a, Oertel et al 2011b, Seppi et al 2011, Ferreira et al 2013, Odin et al 2015, Trenkwalder et al 2015].

Pharmacotherapy. Drugs to treat motor manifestations include the precursor of dopamine, levodopa, in combination with a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa, benserazide), dopamine agonists, inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B), anticholinergics, and amantadine. A good levodopa response was seen in nearly all reported individuals with VPS35-PD.

General recommendations for treatment of Parkinson disease of unknown cause include the following:

To reduce or delay side effects (e.g., dyskinesias, hallucinations, impulse control disorder) of levodopa and dopaminergic medication, doses should not exceed the levels required for a satisfactory clinical response. In younger patients, dopamine agonists should be given a preference.

Dyskinesias can be treated with reduction of levodopa doses, use of dopamine receptor agonists, deep-brain stimulation, and continuous application of levodopa or apomorphine.

Patients treated with ergot-derived dopamine agonists require periodic echocardiograms. Ergot-derived dopaminergic drugs should be discontinued if fibrotic heart-valve changes are revealed [Antonini & Poewe 2007].

Deep brain stimulation to the subthalamic nucleus was repeatedly reported to be effective in the treatment of disabling motor fluctuations or dyskinesia in persons with VPS35-PD.

Other. Overall, effective treatment for neuropsychiatric and autonomic symptoms (which may be disabling) is limited. Atypical neuroleptic agents such as low-dose clozapine and reduction of dopaminergic therapy can decrease delusions and hallucinations. If depression occurs, it should be treated according to guidelines. Droxidopa may be used to treat orthostasis.

Patients also benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.

Surveillance

For VPS35-PD (as well as in Parkinson disease in general), follow-up clinical neurologic evaluations are recommended every three to 12 months (depending on the clinical scenario and the needs of the individual) to assess tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, gait, cognition, and neuropsychiatric symptoms as well as treatment effectiveness.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic drugs may increase the severity of parkinsonism in VPS35-PD (as in Parkinson disease in general). In general, atypical neuroleptics are less likely to exacerbate parkinsonism than typical neuroleptics. Other drugs that may induce or exacerbate parkinsonism include but are not limited to antidepressants, calcium channel blockers, valproate, lithium, and amiodarone [Bondon-Guitton et al 2011, Bohlega & Al-Foghom 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Reports addressing pregnancy management in women with VPS35-PD are not available. The effect of PD in general on pregnancy has not been well characterized, since pregnancy is uncommon in women with PD. While most reports indicate that disease manifestations worsen during pregnancy, improvement has also been described (for a review see Robottom et al [2008], Kranick et al [2010]).

No long-term outcome data exist for children born to mothers with Parkinson disease.

Levodopa crosses the placenta and some animal models have shown that high doses of levodopa administered during pregnancy may induce skeletal and visceral malformations; however, in more than 30 cases reported in the literature, levodopa treatment during human pregnancy did not result in adverse fetal outcome [Scott & Chowdhury 2005].

Amantadine should be avoided during pregnancy, if possible, since adverse pregnancy outcomes have been reported in rats.

Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given medication during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. See MotherToBaby to access further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an IRF6-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

In individuals diagnosed with VWS: evaluation for the characteristic features of PPS: knee contractures with webbing behind the knee, genital anomalies, syndactyly of the toes, and the pyramidal skin-fold on the nail of the hallux. Based on the findings referral to the following specialists may be considered:

Orthopedic surgery

Urology

Plastic surgery

Feeding and hearing evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with a cleft lip and/or palate should be evaluated and treated by a multidisciplinary team of specialists. The American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] has published parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies that can guide treatment of these patients. Click here for full text.

Management is supportive/symptomatic.

Cleft lip. Management is surgical, dental, and orthodontic.

Cleft palate. In addition to surgery, dentistry, and orthodontics, speech therapy and audiologic evaluation are usually needed. Otolaryngology evaluation is needed for management of middle ear effusions.

Lip pits. Surgery may be indicated for cosmetic purposes or for lip function. The lip pits may be connected to mucous-secreting glands and may be excised for this.

Eyelid and oral synechiae (ankyloblepharon and syngnathia, respectively) may require surgical excision.

Syngnathia often requires emergent release due to feeding and respiratory concerns and may require tracheotomy.

Popliteal pterygium. Management involves physical therapy and surgical and orthopedic intervention, as necessary.

Syndactyly may require surgery.

Abnormal genitalia may require surgery especially in the presence of cryptorchidism. The genital anomalies may result in infertility.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Timely treatment of otitis media secondary to eustachian tube dysfunction related to cleft palate is indicated to prevent secondary hearing loss. Some individuals may have pressure-equalizing tubes placed.

Evaluations by a speech-language pathologist can aid in determining if speech therapy or other interventions are appropriate for a child with secondary hearing loss.

Surveillance

The following surveillance guidelines are adapted from the American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies. Click here for full text.

Neonatal period and infancy

Weekly assessment of nutritional intake and weight gain during the first month of life

Otolaryngologic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development

Dental evaluation

Consultation with other specialists as applicable

Longitudinal evaluation and treatment

Audiologic evaluation as soon as possible in a neonate and again at the time of an infant’s first visit to a cleft clinic. The timing and frequency of follow-up evaluations should be based on the individual’s history of ear disease or hearing loss. Evaluations should be carried out routinely through adolescence.

Dental evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within six months of the first tooth erupting, no later than age 12 months. Routine dental evaluation should continue throughout life.

Otolaryngologic evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within the first six months of life. These evaluations should continue throughout adolescence.

Speech-language pathology evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic to provide parents with information about speech and language development. By age six months, infants should be seen for assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development. During the first two years of life, children should be evaluated at least twice, and then at least annually until age six years. After age six years, evaluations should be at least annually until after adenoid involution, and then at least every two years until dental and skeletal maturity.

Consultation with other specialists as applicable

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Offspring and/or sibs of an affected individual should be clinically examined for evidence of cleft palate including submucous cleft, lip abnormalities (pits or mounds), and the pyramidal skin-fold on the nail of the hallux, given the variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of VWS and PPS.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VCAN-related vitreoretinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline ophthalmologic examination including best corrected visual acuity, assessment of intraocular pressure, slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment, and biomicroscopy and indirect ophthalmoscopy of the posterior segment

Visual field examination

Photographic fundus documentation

Optical coherence tomography (OCT), if available. While not mandatory, OCT scan is useful to assess the vitreoretinal interface, quantify atrophic changes of the central retina, and evaluate for cystoid macular edema.

Electroretinogram

Orthoptic assessment

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Refractive error is corrected by spectacles or contact lenses.

Visually disabling cataract is treated by cataract surgery. Phacoemulsification and implantation of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag has become the widely adopted standard procedure; however, as emphasized by Edwards, cataract surgery in individuals with vitreoretinopathy and possibly preceding vitrectomy can be difficult and should be performed by an experienced surgeon [Miyamoto et al 2005, Edwards 2008].

Posterior capsule opacification after cataract surgery is treated with YAG laser capsulotomy.

Retinal breaks are treated with laser retinopexy or cryocoagulation if no retinal detachment is present.

Vitreoretinal surgery is indicated for retinal detachment, vitreoretinal traction involving the macula, or epiretinal membranes involving the macula.

Surveillance

Annual ophthalmologic examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to reduce morbidity by early diagnosis and treatment of ophthalmologic complications.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Ophthalmologic exam if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.The following are appropriate:

Referral to immunologist for management

Platelet count and size

T-cell subsets

Immunoglobulin levels

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment options vary based on the predicted disease burden in a particular individual.

Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome

[Buchbinder et al 2014]

Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The only curative treatment clinically available for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is allogeneic HCT. Affected males who receive HCT from a matched healthy sib or closely matched unrelated donor before their second birthday have a greater than 90% probability of being cured of the disorder [Moratto et al 2011, Shin et al 2012].

Currently, males with a WAS pathogenic variant who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS score 3-5), have markedly decreased WASP expression, and have a suitably matched donor are candidates for HCT. Myeloablative conditioning prior to transplantation is the most widely used approach, as reduced-intensity conditioning increases the risk of partial engraftment, which may not be curative [Moratto et al 2011]. Some symptoms (e.g., autoimmune disease) may take months to resolve following complete engraftment.

Since the phenotype of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome may evolve over time, optimal timing of transplantation is challenging. Individuals with absent intracellular WASP detection in hematopoietic cells are likely to develop Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, although a minority will exhibit the milder X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) phenotype throughout their life span. HCT before development of autoimmunity and malignancy is highly desirable, and younger age at transplant is associated with improved long-term outcome following HCT; however, the use of multiple chemotherapeutic agents necessary to achieve myeloablation presents a risk in young infants.

Individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who do not have a suitably matched donor but who experience life-threatening complications are candidates for gene therapy (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Eczema. Topical steroids are the mainstay of therapy. When chronic infections of the skin worsen eczema, antibiotics may be useful.

Infection. For those individuals with clinical signs or symptoms of infection, prompt evaluation and treatment is necessary. The initiation of empiric parenteral antibiotic treatment is necessary in the majority of individuals. The evaluation should be exhaustive until the source of the infection is uncovered. This may include invasive assessments, as cultures and isolation of the offending organism should be sought in order to guide therapy. If HCT is being considered, attention to the prevention and treatment of infectious complications is necessary to limit pre-transplant morbidity.

Autoimmune disease. Treatment usually consists of judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

X-Linked Thrombocytopenia (XLT)

The primary management of individuals with XLT (WAS score 1-2) remains controversial. Although long-term survival is excellent with conservative management of presenting symptoms, event-free survival is reduced by the substantial risk of severe, life-threatening or potentially debilitating complications [Albert et al 2010]. Serious bleeding episodes are generally restricted to the first 30 years of life. In contrast, the risk of developing autoimmune disease, malignancy, or a life-threatening infectious episode is rather constant throughout the individual’s lifetime. This persistent morbidity argues for HCT as a treatment option for such individuals. Given the excellent success in young children with classic Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, HCT may be considered a viable option for individuals with XLT if an HLA–identical donor can be identified. However, one needs to carefully weigh the advantage of a possible cure against the acute risks and long-term consequences of this procedure (e.g., risk of secondary malignancy, infertility). Thus, HCT in XLT needs to be decided on an individual basis.

X-Linked Neutropenia (XLN)

Treatment of XLN is with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and appropriate antibiotics.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations for discussion of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT).

Infection

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii (PCP) is indicated for infants with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as they are at risk of developing PCP. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy. Individuals with recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic use.

Intravenous immune globulin. Replacement therapy with IVIgG by age six months is administered every three to four weeks or subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis. IVIgG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies).

Routine childhood immunizations. Live vaccines should be avoided. Other “non-live” vaccinations can be given safely to individuals with a WAS-related disorder but may not generate protective levels of antibody.

Bleeding

Splenectomy. Splenectomy is palliative, and while it may be life-saving in an individual with severe bleeding, it does not prevent any of the other possible complications of the disorder [Mullen et al 1993]. In a survey of clinical immunologists performed by the European and Pan American Groups on Immunodeficiencies, respondents from centers treating the highest numbers of individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome did not recommend splenectomy [Conley et al 2003]. Because splenectomy significantly increases the risk of life-threatening infections in males with XLT [Albert et al 2011] as well as in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who subsequently undergo HCT [Ozsahin et al 2008], it should be used with caution.

Males who have had splenectomy must take antibiotics routinely for the rest of their lives because of the increased risk for overwhelming infection.

Platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions should be administered judiciously (e.g., for significant bleeding and surgical procedures).

Surveillance

Regular follow-up is indicated to monitor blood counts, adequacy of the IVIgG replacement therapy, and other potential complications.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Circumcision of an at-risk newborn male should not be undertaken in the presence of thrombocytopenia.

The use of over-the-counter medications should be discussed with a physician as some medications can interfere with platelet function.

When possible, elective surgical procedures should be deferred until after HCT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of newborn at-risk males is recommended before any elective procedure such as circumcision.

It is appropriate to test at-risk males so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

Rapid screening of at-risk males may be accomplished by WASP staining using flow cytometry.

Definitive testing is possible by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no evidence that C-section reduces the risk of morbidity and mortality in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy shows promise in the treatment of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, especially in severely affected males without an HLA-matched donor [Klein et al 2003, Qasim et al 2009, Boztug et al 2010]. However, initial attempts at gene therapy using a retroviral vector resulted in leukemic proliferation in several affected individuals.

More recent attempts using a lentiviral vector in two clinical trials are promising. In the first trial, Italian investigators showed improvement of platelet counts, immune function, and clinical manifestations of the disease in three individuals at one year or longer after gene therapy [Aiuti et al 2013]. In the second trial, six out of seven individuals treated in London and Paris also showed improvement of immune function and clinical manifestations six to 42 months after treatment, without evidence of clonal expansion [Hacein-Bey Abina et al 2015]. For reasons that are not yet clear, neither trial resulted in reconstitution of normal platelet numbers, although bleeding episodes significantly reduced in number and severity with individuals becoming independent from transfusion and need for thrombopoietin agonists. Thus far, no evidence of leukemic transformation has been reported with the use of the lentivirus vector [Aiuti et al 2013]. Based on these observations, it can be concluded that lentiviral-mediated gene therapy for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is feasible and can result in significant benefit for treated individuals. Clearly, however, long-term observation is warranted to confirm the superior safety of lentiviral gene transfer as an alternative treatment option for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant, the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Thorough history to identify clinical features associated with Weaver syndrome

Physical examination with particular attention paid to growth measurements and skeletal findings: camptodactyly (in the newborn period), scoliosis, and pectus deformities. The presence of an abdominal mass warrants immediate investigation.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to identify other family members who could be affected; where possible, measurement of parental heights

Treatment of Manifestations

Educational support. For individuals with developmental delay and/or learning disability, referral for learning/behavior/speech assessment and support may be indicated.

Camptodactyly. Occasionally toe camptodactyly may require surgical intervention. Physiotherapy may also be beneficial.

Ligamentous laxity. Physiotherapy may be of some benefit to those individuals experiencing joint pain secondary to ligamentous laxity.

Scoliosis. If scoliosis is present a referral to orthopedics for further evaluation and monitoring is appropriate.

If additional clinical issues are detected through the history and/or examination, the appropriate specialist referral(s) should be made.

Surveillance

Regular review by a pediatrician is recommended for young children with EZH2-related Weaver syndrome to monitor developmental progress, camptodactyly (for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia.

If scoliosis is present, monitor as per the orthopedic recommendations.

The clinician may wish to review less frequently older children/teenagers who do not have medical complications.

Current data suggest that there may be a slightly increased relative risk for the development of neuroblastoma in individuals with heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variants. Although the numbers are too small to quantify the absolute tumor risk, it appears to be low. In addition, given that neuroblastoma surveillance has been inconsistent with no data to support the modality of surveillance, screening interval or duration, the current recommendations include clinical vigilance and thorough investigation of any symptoms that may be tumor related.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In general, pregnancies in which the mother and/or fetus has a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant are uncomplicated. Families and their health care providers should be aware that an affected baby may be large so that appropriate delivery plans can be made; in addition, information about the EZH2-related overgrowth phenotype should be provided.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS), the following evaluations should be performed:

Complete ophthalmologic examination

Evaluation by a medical geneticist

Cardiac echocardiogram

Treatment of Manifestations

It is not possible to generalize the management of the ocular complications of WMS.

The medical treatment of glaucoma is difficult because of paradoxical response to miotics and mydriatics.

A peripheral iridectomy should be performed to prevent or relieve pupillary block [Chang et al 2002, Ritch et al 2003].

Lens extraction and/or trabeculectomy may be necessary in some persons with advanced chronic angle closure glaucoma [Harasymowycz & Wilson 2004].

Individuals with WMS were recently reported to have increased central corneal thickness, which needs to be considered in the diagnosis and follow-up of glaucoma because increased central corneal thickness may lead to overestimation of intraocular pressure by applanation tonometers [Razeghinejad & Safavian 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Airway management during anesthesia can be difficult in persons with WMS because of stiff joints, poorly aligned teeth, and maxillary hypoplasia [Dal et al 2003, Karabiyik 2003, Riad et al 2006].

Surveillance

Periodic ophthalmic examinations for early detection and removal of an ectopic lens can help decrease the possibility of pupillary block and glaucoma.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Use of ophthalmic miotics and mydriatics should be avoided as they can induce pupillary block.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The protein product of ADAMTS10 could be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of autosomal recessive WMS [Jones 2006].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Werner syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus by standard clinical assays including fasting glucose level, hemoglobin A1c, or oral glucose tolerance test

Lipid profile

Physical examination for cancers common in Werner syndrome (e.g., thyroid nodules, skin tumors)

Ophthalmologic examination including slit lamp examination

Skin examination for common findings, especially early ulcerations of the feet, with special attention to nail beds and soles of feet for lentiginous melanoma

Head MRI if neurologic symptoms including new-onset seizures, focal neurologic signs such as weakness or visual field defect, or symptoms such as diploplia or headache are present. These can be indicative of meningioma, a common neoplasm in Werner syndrome.

Assessment of coping and psychological fitness in light of prognosis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Infants with Werner syndrome are unaffected at birth; thus, no special precautions or investigations are recommended in the neonatal period.

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate:

Aggressive treatment of skin ulcers with standard or novel techniques [Yeong & Yang 2004]. Bosentan has been reported to be effective in the treatment of digital ulcers in individuals with systemic sclerosis, and its use has been recently reported to be beneficial in people with Werner syndrome [Matucci-Cerinic et al 2011, Noda et al 2011].

Control of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Favorable results have been reported with use of pioglitazone and sitagliptin [Durbin 2004, Yokote et al 2004, Watanabe et al 2013].

Use of cholesterol-lowering drugs if lipid profile is abnormal. Muscle atrophy is a potential complication.

Surgical treatment of ocular cataracts. Complications are common and specific techniques can optimize outcome [Ruprecht 1989, Shintani et al 1993].

Treatment of malignancies in a standard fashion

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To prevent secondary complications:

Lifestyle counseling for smoking avoidance, regular exercise, and weight control to reduce atherosclerosis risk

Excellent skin care, trauma avoidance, and examination to treat problems early

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus at least annually

Annual lipid profile

At least annual physical examination for malignancies common in Werner syndrome and other skin manifestations

Annual ophthalmologic examination for cataracts

Attention to symptoms of angina, or peripheral or cerebrovascular disease

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Smoking and excess weight increase the risk of atherosclerosis.

Trauma to the extremities should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Clinical examination including growth assessment, skin examination, and ophthalmology evaluation including slit lamp examination if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In one study of individuals with Werner syndrome, signs of hypogonadism were reported in 80%; however, approximately half of those had children and showed signs of hypogonadism after age 30 years [Goto 1997]. Reports in the medical literature of pregnancy in individuals with Werner syndrome are rare, many of the women in the International Registry of Werner Syndrome have had offspring. Preterm delivery has been reported in several cases, and has been attributed to cervical incompetence. Preeclampsia is another reported obstetric complication [Murakami et al 2003].

The use of assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and egg donation has not been reported in women with Werner syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Affected individuals may benefit from reproductive advice regarding the rapid decline in fertility.

Although topical PDGF-BB has been shown to provide some improvement of granulation, it failed to heal the ulcer in a person with Werner syndrome [Wollina et al 2004].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a WFS1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Wolfram syndrome and Wolfram-like syndrome

Glucose tolerance test (if not already performed)

Eye examination, including visual acuity, color vision, and visual fields

Audiologic examination, including auditory brain stem responses (ABRs) and evoked otoacoustic emissions

Neurologic examination

Neuroimaging with MRI

Developmental assessment in young children and assessment of cognitive abilities in older children and adolescents

Baseline psychologic assessment

Urologic consultation with imaging studies of the urinary tract and kidneys

Test of the concentrating ability of urine to evaluate for diabetes insipidus

Clinical genetics consultation

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL)

Audiologic examination

Treatment of Manifestations

Diabetes mellitus. Treatment follows routine practices for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Optic atrophy. Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids).

Hearing impairment

WFS. Hearing loss is managed with either hearing aids or cochlear implant depending on the degree of hearing impairment and the frequencies affected.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Hearing aids should be tried early on, but may not be necessary until later in the disease course when a broader range of frequencies is involved. Hearing should be assessed throughout childhood in order to provide hearing aids when clinically indicated.

Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Treatment follows routine practices.

Psychiatric difficulties. Treatment follows routine practices.

Neurogenic bladder. Treatment follows routine practices. Patients with recurrent urinary infections, urodynamic abnormalities, and incomplete bladder emptying must be treated according to established protocols for these abnormalities, like clean intermittent self-catheterizations or indwelling catheter, and frequent surveillance of presence of urinary infections.

Other

Treatment of central diabetes insipidus follows routine practices.

Treatment of gastroparesis and celiac disease follows routine practices. (See Celiac Disease.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of diabetes mellitus related complications is through optimization of glycemic control following established guidelines.

Surveillance

Wolfram syndrome. Regular evaluations including the following to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Diabetes mellitus: tests of glucose tolerance

Optic atrophy: ophthalmologic examination

Sensorineural hearing loss: audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing

Neurologic deficits: neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities: assessment for signs including depression, suicidal behavior, and changes in personal appearance and social behavior

Urologic abnormalities: urodynamic examination and assessment of ability to empty the bladder. Regular urine cultures when bladder dysfunction or other renal tract abnormality is present.

Diabetes insipidus: assessment of concentrating ability of the urine

Growth delay: monitoring of linear growth in children using standard growth charts

Hypogonadism

Puberty: monitoring for signs of onset of puberty

Once diabetes mellitus is present, regular follow-up for complications that can occur with time, including evaluations for:

Diabetic retinopathy

Microalbuminuria

Because women with WFS may develop diabetes insipidus during pregnancy [Rugolo et al 2002], monitoring for diabetes insipidus during pregnancy is warranted.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Regular audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Wolfram syndrome. Sibs of a proband warrant either molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known) or screening for the earliest manifestations of WFS (i.e., diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss) to allow for early diagnosis and treatment.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). At-risk relatives should be encouraged to seek either molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variant is known) or audiologic evaluation because the earliest manifestations of low-tone hearing loss may not be appreciated clinically.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus have a two- to eightfold higher risk than pregnant women without diabetes of having a child with a birth defect or a pattern of birth defects (diabetic embryopathy). These defects can involve the craniofacial, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, urogenital, musculoskeletal, and central nervous systems. Optimizing glucose control before and during pregnancy can reduce, but does not eliminate, the risk for diabetic embryopathy. High-resolution fetal ultrasonography and fetal echocardiogram are recommended to screen for congenital anomalies during pregnancy. Consultation with a maternal fetal medicine specialist during pregnancy should also be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of growth parameters and plotting on growth charts

Evaluation of cognitive, language, and motor development and social skills

Waking/sleeping video-EEG-polygraphic studies in childhood (mainly ages 1-6 years) to detect atypical absence seizures that may be subtle [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2009]

Evaluation for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux with referral to a dysphagia team

Physical examination for skeletal anomalies (e.g., clubfoot, scoliosis, kyphosis); if anomalies are present, referral for orthopedic and physical therapy evaluation (including full biomechanical assessment)

Ophthalmology consultation in infancy even in the absence of overt anomalies

Examination of the heart (auscultation, electrocardiogram, echocardiography) in infancy

Testing for immunodeficiency (particularly plasma Ig levels, lymphocyte subsets, and polysaccharide responsiveness); although limited data on immunodeficiency in individuals with WHS are available, such testing should be considered when clinically appropriate.

Complete blood count to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Comprehensive evaluation by an otolaryngologist and comprehensive audiologic screening (brain stem auditory evoked responses) as early as possible to allow appropriate interventions

Renal function testing and renal ultrasonography in infancy to detect structural renal anomalies and/or vesicoureteral reflux [Grisaru et al 2000]

Baseline liver ultrasound to evaluate for hepatic adenoma

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Because almost 95% of individuals with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome have multiple seizures, most often triggered by fever, and almost one third later develop valproic acid-responsive atypical absence seizures, it is appropriate to start treatment with valproic acid soon after the first seizure. Atypical absence seizures are well controlled on valproic acid alone or in association with ethosuccimide [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2009].

Sodium bromide has recently been proposed as the initial treatment for the prevention of the development of status epilepticus [Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Clonic, tonic-clonic, absence, or myoclonic status epilepticus can be well controlled by intravenous benzodiazepines (Diazepam) [Battaglia & Carey 2005, Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Because individuals with WHS have distinctive EEG abnormalities not necessarily associated with seizures [Battaglia et al 2009], it seems appropriate to withdraw antiepileptic drugs in individuals who have not experienced seizures for five years.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is also appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices such as the "Haberman feeder" can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with a cleft palate prior to surgical repair.

Gavage feeding may be indicated in individuals with poorly coordinated swallow.

Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner.

In one study, almost 44% of individuals with WHS were managed with gastrostomy and, occasionally, gastroesophageal fundoplication [Battaglia & Carey 2000].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., clubfoot, scoliosis, kyphosis) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner.

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Sleeping problems. If no medical factors (e.g., otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, eczema, obstructive sleep apnea) are involved and if sleeping problems are reinforced by parental attention, the 'extinction of parental attention' is an effective behavioral treatment [Curfs et al 1999].

Hepatic adenomas. Medical treatment (either surgery or chemotherapy) varies in relation to the number and size of the adenomas.

Other structural anomalies (e.g., diaphragmatic, gastrointestinal, dental) should be addressed in a standard manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for vesicoureteral reflux.

Intravenous Ig infusions or continuous antibiotics may be indicated for those with antibody deficiencies.

Surveillance

Systematic follow up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Ferrarini et al 2003, Battaglia et al 2008, Battaglia 2010].

Complete blood count annually to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Annual renal function testing, including serum BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C; urinalysis; and creatinine clearance test

Consideration of routine liver ultrasonography to evaluate for liver adenomas

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Carbamazepine may worsen atypical absence seizures [Battaglia & Carey 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Williams syndrome (WS), and to guide medical management, the following evaluations are recommended [Committee on Genetics 2001, Committee on Genetics 2002]:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on Williams syndrome growth charts

Cardiology evaluation

Full clinical evaluation by a cardiologist with experience in treating WS

Measurement of blood pressure in all four limbs

Echocardiogram, including Doppler flow studies

Electrocardiogram

Additional cardiovascular imaging studies (computed tomography, magnetic resonance angiography, or cardiac catheterization) may be required in individuals with diminished pulses, bruits, or signs of diffuse thoracic aortic stenosis.

Urinary system evaluation

Ultrasound examination of the bladder and kidneys

Serum concentration of BUN and creatinine

Urinalysis

Calcium determinations

Serum concentration of calcium or ionized calcium

Calcium/creatinine determination on a spot urine sample (See Sargent et al [1993] for normal values.)

Thyroid function tests

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Baseline audiologic evaluation

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation, including assessment of motor, speech, language, personal-social, general cognitive, and vocational skills

Assessment of behavior including attention, anxiety, and adaptive skills

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Cognitive/behavioral. Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommended therapies include speech/language, physical, and occupational therapy. Consider hippotherapy (use of equine movement during speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy).

Verbal strengths can be used to assist in learning spatial tasks.

Phonics methods are recommended to teach reading [John & Mervis 2010].

Mastery of daily living skills contributes to adult well-being and should be encouraged.

Psychological evaluation, polysomnography, and psychiatric evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Behavior in young children may be addressed using techniques based on applied behavior analysis [Mervis & John 2010].

Behavioral counseling and psychotropic medication are often used to manage behavior problems, especially attention deficit disorder and anxiety, which require pharmacologic treatment in approximately 50% [Cherniske et al 2004].

Self-calming techniques can help manage anxiety.

Cardiovascular. Surgical correction of SVAS is performed in 20%-30% [Kececioglu et al 1993, Bruno et al 2003, Collins et al 2010b]. Surgical treatment of mitral valve insufficiency or renal artery stenosis may be required.

Hypertension is usually treated medically. In one series, calcium channel blockers were used successfully [Bouchireb et al 2010]. Antihypertensive therapy also results in improvement in vascular stiffness [Kozel et al 2014]. Lifelong monitoring of the cardiovascular system by a cardiologist familiar with treating WS is recommended.

Hypercalcemia. Management of hypercalcemia involves the following:

Hydration status should be assessed; increase water intake as indicated.

The diet should be adjusted with the help of a nutritionist so that the calcium intake is not higher than 100% of the recommended daily intake (RDI) [Ross et al 2011]. If the serum concentration of calcium remains elevated, dietary calcium should be reduced; but the serum concentration of calcium must be monitored. Parents should be counseled not to restrict dietary intake of calcium without medical supervision.

Vitamin supplements containing vitamin D should be avoided. If vitamin D deficiency is suspected, it is important to check vitamin D levels prior to initiating therapy, and calcium levels must be monitored during treatment. Absorption of calcium from the gut is increased in Williams syndrome (cause unknown) and vitamin D promotes calcium absorption.

Refractory hypercalcemia may be treated with oral steroids.

Intravenous pamidronate has been used successfully to treat infants with severe symptomatic hypercalcemia [Cagle et al 2004, Oliveri et al 2004].

Referral to an endocrinologist and/or nephrologist is recommended for treatment of persistent hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and/or nephrocalcinosis.

Eye, ear, nose, and throat. Hyperopia is treated with corrective lenses; strabismus is treated with patching of one eye or surgery; dacrostenosis is treated as in the general population.

Recurrent otitis media may be treated with tympanotomy tubes.

Hypersensitivity to sounds may be treated with ear protection when increased noise levels can be predicted.

Dental care may require assistance with daily brushing and flossing. Dental cleaning frequency should be increased to every four months in adolescents and adults. Orthodontic referral should be considered for treatment of malocclusion.

Gastrointestinal.The treatment of feeding problems in infancy and abdominal pain in children and adults depends on the cause (e.g., G-E reflux, hypercalcemia, hiatal hernia, and/or diverticulitis). Infants often benefit from feeding therapy.

Constipation must be aggressively managed at all ages due to the increased risk for early onset diverticulosis/diverticulitis. Treatment usually includes dietary increase in water and fiber followed by osmotic laxative treatment. Severe abdominal pain may indicate diverticulitis and/or intestinal perforation, which may occur at a young age in WS.

Urinary tract abnormalities. Individuals with febrile urinary tract infections will likely require investigation of the lower urinary tract such as voiding cystourethrogram to direct treatment.

Endocrine. Early puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist [Partsch et al 2002, Pober 2010]. Hypothyroidism is treated with oral thyroxine therapy; subclinical hypothyroidism typically is monitored but does not require treatment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are indicated:

Exercise and a balanced diet to avoid insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus

Range of motion exercises to prevent or ameliorate joint contractures

Because of the increased risk for myocardial insufficiency in individuals with biventricular outflow tract obstruction, especially during induction of anesthesia [Horowitz et al 2002] and because there is an increased risk for adverse events with sedation or anesthesia in WS, anesthesia consultation for surgical procedures. Guidelines for sedation and anesthesia risk assessment and anesthetic management for WS have been published [Burch et al 2008, Matisoff et al 2015, Latham et al 2016]. Electrocardiogram prior to surgery.

Awareness of the risk for myocardial insufficiency and cardiac arrest; for surgical procedures, use of a center equipped for cardiopulmonary resuscitation

Surveillance

Table 3. 

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Interval / Age

Test/Measurement

In infants – toddlers

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 yearsThyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Annual / all ages 1

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismusHearing evaluationMonitoring of blood pressure in both armsMeasurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysisCardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Every 2 years

Serum concentration of calciumThyroid function and TSH level

Every 10 years

Renal and bladder ultrasound

In adults

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenosesEvaluation for cataracts

1. 

Except as noted

2. 

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 years

Thyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Medical evaluation

Vision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing evaluation

Monitoring of blood pressure in both arms

Measurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysis

Cardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Serum concentration of calcium

Thyroid function and TSH level

Renal and bladder ultrasound

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2

Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenoses

Evaluation for cataracts

Except as noted

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Children with WS should not be given multivitamins because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies in women with WS are high risk. They should be monitored for the development of pregnancy-induced hypertension, arrhythmias, and heart failure. Regular urinalyses should be performed in late gestation due to the increased risk for urinary tract infection. Ultrasound monitoring of the fetus is suggested [Lin et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Wilson disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of severity of the liver disease by liver biopsy or by biochemical testing and imaging of the liver

Upper GI endoscopy to exclude or confirm esophageal varices

Detailed clinical neurologic assessment. A validated neurologic rating scale is available [Członkowska et al 2007].

Brain MRI to assess for structural alteration

Assessment of kidney function

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The goal of therapy is to institute treatment with chelating agents as soon as possible in individuals with symptomatic Wilson disease. See extensive review by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] (full text) and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: Wilson's disease [European Association for Study of Liver 2012] (full text).

Treatment is life long, including during pregnancy.

If one treatment modality is discontinued, an alternative modality must be substituted.

Discontinuation of all treatment leads to hepatic and neurologic decompensation, which is usually refractory to further medical intervention.

Copper chelating agents that increase urinary excretion of copper are the first-line treatment for persons with symptomatic Wilson disease. Note: Routine institution of chelation therapy before age three years has not been adequately assessed and may have adverse effects on growth.

D-penicillamine (chelator). Used since the 1950s as first-line therapy for Wilson disease [Durand et al 2001, Walshe 2003a], D-penicillamine is given as tablets by mouth two or three times daily. Pyridoxine must be given along with D-penicillamine. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to confirm chelation and increased excretion of copper. Urinary copper values should be five to ten times normal; if the values are lower, non-compliance may be an issue, or body copper stores may have been adequately depleted.

Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly during D-penicillamine therapy. Serious side effects can occur in up to 30% of individuals, and include: severe thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, aplastic anemia, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, polyserositis, Goodpasture syndrome, and severe skin reactions. An early allergic reaction with fever, rash, and proteinuria may occur. Evidence of any such side effects may require discontinuation of D-penicillamine and substitution of an alternate treatment. If such alternate therapies are unavailable, D-penicillamine-induced adverse events may be manageable by co-administration of steroids.

D-penicillamine inhibits collagen cross-linking and has some immunosuppressant properties. After decades of treatment, individuals may have abnormal skin and connective tissue collagen, and possible chronic depletion of copper and (possibly) other trace metals.

D-penicillamine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc, pending adequate clinical assessment of this treatment strategy.

Trientine (chelator), also known as triethylene tetramine dihydrochloride (2,2,2-tetramine) or trien, is the usual second-line treatment for individuals who cannot tolerate D-penicillamine. It is gaining acceptance as a first-line drug because of good efficiency and better tolerance than D-penicillamine; however, it is still not generally available in all countries.

Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly in all individuals on trientine.

Rare side effects include gastritis with nausea and, in cases of overtreatment, iron deficiency anemia.

Trientine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc pending adequate assessment of this combination. Current reports suggest that the combination of trientine and zinc, temporally dispersed throughout the day such that each drug is administered 5-6 hours apart from the other, may be effective in severely decompensated hepatic Wilson disease [Santos Silva et al 1996, Askari et al 2003].

Zinc (metallothionein inducer). High-dose oral zinc interferes with absorption of copper from the gastrointestinal tract presumably by inducing enterocyte metallothionein, which preferentially binds copper from the intestinal contents and is lost in the feces as enterocytes are shed in normal turnover. Zinc therapy is most effective after initial decoppering with a chelating agent [Brewer 2001, Brewer et al 2001]. In selected cases, it can be used as an initial treatment [Milanino et al 1992, Linn et al 2009]. Zinc is taken as tablets by mouth at least twice (usually 3x) daily, before meals. The dose is based on the elemental zinc in the tablet. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to monitor total body copper stores, which should decrease. Increase of urinary copper excretion under zinc therapy may indicate insufficient treatment efficacy [Weiss et al 2011]. The computed estimate of non-ceruloplasmin-bound copper may be used to titrate the zinc dose. Serum or urinary zinc concentration can be measured to monitor compliance in individuals taking zinc.

Note: (1) Gastritis, a common side effect, can be reduced with the use of zinc acetate or zinc gluconate; (2) zinc should NOT be used simultaneously with any chelator, pending further clinical investigation.

Antioxidants. Serum and hepatic vitamin E concentrations are reported to be low in individuals with Wilson disease [Sokol et al 1994, Ogihara et al 1995], likely because of excessive consumption to counteract free radicals produced by excess copper. Antioxidants such as vitamin E may be used along with a chelator or zinc in protecting tissues from damage.

Restriction of foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) is likely prudent, especially at the beginning of treatment. It is recommended that individuals with special dietary needs (e.g., vegetarians) consult with a trained dietitian.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is reserved for individuals who fail to respond to medical therapy or cannot tolerate it because of serious adverse side effects [Schilsky et al 1994, Emre et al 2001, Sutcliffe et al 2003]. It remains controversial whether orthotopic liver transplantation should be a primary treatment for individuals with Wilson disease who have severe neurologic disease [Medici et al 2005, Weiss et al 2013a].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Medical therapy is recommended for asymptomatic patients to prevent development of symptoms (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Monitoring of patients under therapy should include routine assessments of treatment efficacy by biochemical testing and clinical evaluation:

Insufficient therapy, underdosage, or malcompliance could lead to reaccumulation of copper and development of new symptoms.

Adverse events related to medical treatment (especially under D-penicillamine treatment) should be evaluated.

Excessive long-term treatment could result in copper deficiency, leading to immobilization of iron (as observed in aceruloplasminemia) and to neurologic symptoms of copper deficiency [Horvath et al 2010, da Silva-Júnior et al 2011].

Surveillance

According to current guidelines (AASLD [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines [European Association for Study of Liver 2012]), routine monitoring should include the following examinations:

At least twice annually: serum copper and ceruloplasmin, liver biochemistries, international normalized ratio, complete blood count, urinalysis, and physical examination including neurologic assessment

Note: Patients receiving chelation therapy require a complete blood count and urinalysis regularly, no matter how long they have been on treatment

At least once annually: 24-hour urinary excretion of copper

Note: Measurements are recommended more frequently if there are questions on compliance or if dosage of medications is adjusted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) should be avoided, especially at the beginning of treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The goal is to identify those sibs of a proband who have Wilson disease preferably before symptoms occur so that the therapies described under Treatment of Manifestations can be initiated as soon as possible. Evaluations can include the following:

Molecular genetic testing if both ATP7B pathogenic variants in the proband are known

If the pathogenic variants in an affected family member are not known, biochemical assessment of parameters of copper metabolism (serum copper, urinary copper, ceruloplasmin) and liver function tests as well as ultrasound imaging of the liver and slit lamp examination for the presence of Kayser-Fleischer rings

Note: Because presymptomatic individuals generally have a low serum concentration of ceruloplasmin and mildly increased basal 24-hour urinary copper excretion, biochemical testing can be used; however, sometimes asymptomatic affected individuals cannot be distinguished from heterozygotes.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Treatment must be continued during pregnancy because of the risk of fulminant hepatic failure.

D-penicillamine has been used in many pregnancies with no adverse outcomes; however, congenital connective tissue disorders encompassing inguinal hernias and skin laxity have been reported in some exposed infants. Such adverse outcomes may depend on dose, which should be kept as low as possible. The dose of D-penicillamine should be maintained at the lowest effective dose with the plan to reduce by approximately 30% in the third trimester if the mother has been well chelated prior to pregnancy. A possible over-chelated (copper deficiency) status prior to pregnancy or genetic characteristics of the mother can contribute to fetal abnormalities [Pinter et al 2004].

Trientine has been used successfully during pregnancy, but the total number of reported cases is small. Reduction of the dose to the lowest effective dose is recommended using a comparable approach to that for D-penicillamine.

Zinc has been used effectively during pregnancy.

See www.mothertobaby.org for more information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (chelator) interferes with copper absorption from the intestine and binds plasma copper with high affinity. It may be useful for treatment of severe neurologic Wilson disease because, unlike D-penicillamine, it appears not to be associated with early neurologic deterioration [Brewer et al 2003]. However, the ammonium salt has not proven suitable for oral formulations.

Choline tetrathiomolybdate (chelator) is a more stable salt formulation of tetrathiomolybdate and is currently under investigation for Wilson disease [Weiss et al 2015].

Curcumin. Experimental in vitro studies suggest partially restored protein expression of some ATP7B mutants by curcumin [van den Berghe et al 2009]. This could enable novel treatment strategies in Wilson disease by directly enhancing the protein expression of mutated ATP7B with residual copper export activity. Furthermore, curcumin is an ideal antioxidant and an effective scavenger of reactive oxygen species and can act as a copper chelating agent. However, clinical data in patients with Wilson disease are not yet available.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.The following are appropriate:

Audiology evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of the hearing loss associated with WS1 depends on its severity (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Cochlear implantation has been successful in individuals with WS [Amirsalari et al 2012, de Sousa Andrade et al 2012, Koyama et al 2016].

Surveillance

The hearing loss in WS1 is typically non-progressive. Hence, repeat audiogram would usually not be necessary.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk relatives of an affected individual to allow early screening of those at risk for hearing loss. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Physical examination for the clinical features of WS1 and audiology evaluation if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Folic acid supplementation in pregnancy has been recommended for women at increased risk of having a child with WS1, given the possibly increased risk of neural tube defects in association with WS1 [Fleming & Copp 1998]; however, no human studies have addressed the ideal dose of folic acid to be used during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Endocrine. Evaluation for possible endocrine findings (if not done at the time of diagnosis) relating to: hypogonadism, low IGF-1, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism

Ectodermal. Assessment of scalp hair

Neurologic

Neurologic examination for evidence of dystonia (if not done at the time of diagnosis) (see Dystonia Overview)

Speech and language assessment of dysarthria and dysphagia

Assessment of hearing (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness)

Assessment of psychomotor development (in young children) or intellectual ability in individuals older than age six years

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No specific treatment exists for WSS. All treatment is symptomatic.

Endocrine

Hypogonadism. Sex hormone replacement therapy at the usual age of puberty to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and promote bone health

Note: Standard replacement hormonal treatment will not promote fertility. It may be possible to stimulate testes with gonadotropins and harvest sperm with assisted reproductive technology.

Low IGF-1. Treatment with recombinant IGF-1 not recommended: no evidence shows that it improves the clinical features of WSS [Agopiantz et al 2014]. Of note, IGF-1 levels may increase with sex hormone replacement therapy.

Diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment

Hypothyroidism. L-thyroxine replacement therapy

Ectodermal

Treatment is symptomatic and cosmetic only.

Neurologic

Movement disorders

Dystonia. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2015]:

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics such as trihexyphenidyl (moderately effective for ~40%-50% of individuals)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (~100 mg/day) in younger individuals.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam

Other medications tried alone or in combination with the above categories: levodopa, carbamazepine, and dopamine depleting agents (reserpine, tetrabenazine)

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful, and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail, surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for some forms of medically refractory primary generalized dystonia [Vidailhet et al 2007, Crowell & Shah 2016]. Its use in WSS has not been documented.

Dysarthria. Consultation with a speech therapist may be helpful.

Dysphagia. Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning. Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management by a knowledgeable nutritionist is helpful.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Surveillance

Monitor for endocrine abnormalities:

Hypogonadism at age 12-14 years

Diabetes mellitus in the teens and later

Hypothyroidism in the teens and later

Neurologic manifestations should be monitored by experts in rehabilitative medicine, speech, and swallowing.

Dystonia may require monitoring by a neurologist.

Monitor hearing annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Persons with dystonia should avoid situations in which the risk of falling is increased.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing for known familial DCAF17 pathogenic variants is appropriate for the evaluation of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who will benefit from early identification and treatment of potential complications.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI

Adrenal function tests [Dubey et al 2005]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

When adrenal insufficiency is identified in an affected male, corticosteroid replacement therapy is essential and can be lifesaving. (Corticosteroid replacement therapy has no effect on nervous system involvement.)

Affected boys benefit from the general supportive care of parents, as well as psychological and educational support.

Physical therapy, management of urologic complications, and family and vocational counseling are of value for men with adrenomyeloneuropathy, many of whom maintain successful personal and professional lives [Silveri et al 2004].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) ) is an option for boys and adolescents in early stages of symptom set 1 who have evidence of brain involvement on MRI.

Because HSCT is associated with a 20% risk for morbidity and mortality, it is recommended only for individuals with evidence of brain involvement by MRI but minimal neuropsychologic findings (performance IQ >80) and normal clinical neurologic examination.

HSCT is not recommended for individuals with severe neurologic and neuropsychologic dysfunction (i.e., performance IQ <80) [Shapiro et al 2000, Baumann et al 2003, Loes et al 2003, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2005, Resnick et al 2005].

Surveillance

Adrenal function should be reevaluated periodically in males with X-ALD whose initial evaluation revealed normal adrenal cortical function [Dubey et al 2005].

Males with X-ALD should undergo brain MRI every six months through childhood and then yearly to monitor for the development of cerebral disease [Peters et al 2004] because MRI abnormalities occur well in advance of clinical disease [Loes et al 2003] and the evidence clearly shows that HSCT has the best outcome when performed on an asymptomatic individual [Shapiro et al 2000, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from timely treatment of adrenal insufficiency [Mahmood et al 2005].

If the ABCD1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the ABCD1 pathogenic variant in the family is not known, very long chain fatty acid analysis may be used with the limitations previously discussed to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In a single-arm study of presymptomatic boys with a normal MRI, reduction of hexacosanoic acid (C26:0) by Lorenzo's oil was associated with a reduced risk of developing MRI abnormalities and, therefore, childhood cerebral disease. The authors emphasized that the benefits of therapy required the reduction of C26:0 and that the amount of reduction correlated with lowered risk. Despite this reduction, some individuals still developed childhood cerebral disease. It is emphasized that the study was an open trial without a placebo group; thus, the results should be interpreted with some caution. The use of Lorenzo's oil remains an investigational therapy [Moser et al 2005].

A trial of ex vivo gene therapy is presently on-going.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Physical examination with attention to growth parameters, skin, hair, and skeleton, as well as possible internal malformations (CNS, cardiac, renal)

Full skeletal survey and orthopedic evaluation to assess limb length differences, kyphoscoliosis, and other skeletal abnormalities, including polydactyly

Pulmonary evaluation, if scoliosis compromises respiratory function

Dermatologic evaluation to exclude other causes of the phenotype

Ophthalmologic evaluation for congenital cataracts and other eye abnormalities

Developmental assessment (after the newborn period)

Echocardiogram for possible congenital heart defect at the time of diagnosis

Renal ultrasound examination for possible kidney anomalies

Hearing evaluation to detect hearing loss

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic and should be tailored to each patient. For females with typical CDPX2 diagnosed in the newborn period:

Orthopedic management of leg length discrepancy; surgical correction of polydactyly; frequent assessment of kyphoscoliosis, which can progress rapidly at any age

Cataract extraction and correction of vision

Dermatologic management of skin lesions

Physical, occupational, and speech therapies, if necessary

Standard interventions for congenital heart defects, kidney anomalies, and hearing loss

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes:

Regular follow-up of ophthalmologic abnormalities

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor kyphoscoliosis or joint problems and assess linear growth and any leg length discrepancy

Ongoing developmental assessments

Ongoing follow-up with dermatologist

Routine monitoring of any existing cardiac and/or renal abnormalities

Regular hearing evaluations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), the following evaluations are recommended:

Initial evaluation of the developing dentition, typically accomplished by palpating the dental alveolus of the infant/toddler to establish if developing tooth buds (which manifest as bulges in alveolus) are present. A dental evaluation by age one year is recommended.

Dental radiographs, essential to determining the extent of hypodontia and frequently taken in the toddler or child using panoramic or conventional dental radiographic techniques

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of affected individuals targets the three cardinal features and is directed at optimizing psychosocial development, establishing optimal oral function, and preventing hyperthermia.

Hypotrichosis. Wigs or special hair care formulas and techniques to manage sparse, dry hair may be useful. One report describes a child with HED and alopecia who was treated with topical minoxidil to the scalp and had resultant hair growth [Lee et al 2013].

Hypohidrosis. During hot weather, affected individuals must have access to an adequate supply of water and a cool environment, which may mean air conditioning, a wet T-shirt, and/or a spray bottle of water. Some individuals may benefit from "cooling vests."

Affected individuals learn to control their exposure to heat and to minimize its consequences, but special situations may arise in which intervention by physicians and families is helpful. For example, a physician may have to prescribe an air conditioner before a school district complies, or parents may have to advocate for children who need to carry liquids into areas where they are prohibited.

Hypodontia

Dental treatment, ranging from simple restorations to dentures, must begin at an early age. Bonding of conical shaped teeth in young affected individuals improves aesthetics and chewing ability.

Orthodontics may be necessary.

Dental implants in the anterior portion of the mandibular arch have proven successful only in children age seven years and older [Kramer et al 2007, Stanford et al 2008].

Children with HED typically need to have their dental prostheses replaced every 2.5 years.

Dental implants in adults can support aesthetic and functional dentition.

Hyposalivation is present in some individuals, predisposing them to dental caries and the need for therapeutics directed at maintaining oral lubrication and caries control.

Dietary counseling may be helpful for those individuals who have trouble chewing and swallowing despite adequate dental care.

Other

Regular visits with an ENT physician may be necessary for management of the nasal and aural concretions. Commonly, nasal and aural concretions must be removed with suction devices or forceps and recommendations made about humidification of the ambient air to prevent their formation [Mehta et al 2007].

Skin care products are useful for management of eczema and rashes and for dry skin associated with certain outdoor exposures like swimming.

Lubrication eye drops can be helpful for dry eyes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Saliva substitutes and optimal fluoride exposure may be helpful in preventing dental caries in those individuals having a marked reduction in salivary flow. Other dental caries preventive approaches such as pit and fissure sealants can be beneficial as well.

Surveillance

The first dental visit should occur by age one year to monitor tooth and maxillary/mandibular development and for anticipatory guidance for parents. The developing dentition should be evaluated every six to 12 months to monitor existing treatments and to provide continued interventions as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with severe hypohidrosis can have marked heat intolerance; care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat and the potential for febrile seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic, at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early diagnosis and treatment and, importantly, measures to avoid hyperthermia.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known;

Targeted history, physical examination, and dental examination for the features of HED if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known. A sweat test can be done in at-risk relatives of an individual with XLHED.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Optimal prenatal nutrition is recommended for mothers who are carriers of or affected with HED. Affected women at risk for hyperthermia should take extra care not to become overheated during pregnancy. There are no other special recommendations for pregnancy management.

Some women may have difficulty breastfeeding their infants because of hypoplasia of the mammary glands.

Therapies Under Investigation

A Phase II clinical trial was conducted at several US and European medical centers to investigate the use of EDI200, developed by Edimer Pharmaceuticals, Inc [Huttner 2014]. The results of the study were inconclusive. EDI200 is an ectodysplasin-A1 (EDA-A1) replacement protein that has been shown to bind specifically to the EDA-A1 receptor (EDAR) and activate the signaling pathway that leads to normal ectodermal development. EDI200 has demonstrated permanent correction of the disease manifestations in both mouse and dog models of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, with reduction in mortality and morbidity [Huttner 2014]. For additional information on the clinical trial click here

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to evaluate for rashes, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and neurologic dysfunction

Evaluation of blood and bone marrow compartments (CBC and bone marrow biopsy)

Determination of the extent of liver involvement by measuring serum concentration of transaminases, bilirubin, triglycerides, sodium, and lactate dehydrogenase

Identification of potential infectious cofactors (especially viral infection or reactivation) that would require specific treatment

Testing to assess immune function including lymphocyte subset analysis (T cell, B cell, NK cell) and serum concentrations of IgG, IgM, and IgA

Establishing the presence or extent of CNS involvement by evaluating the CSF and performing neuroimaging and neuropsychological assessment

Evaluation of inflammatory factors including serum concentrations of ferritin, sIL2Rα, and other cytokines

Evaluation and monitoring of PT, PTT, and fibrinogen

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No formal management guidelines exist; the following are general considerations.

Individuals with XLP who develop fulminant EBV infection/HLH often improve with early treatment (e.g., based on HLH-1994 protocol) similar to that used in other life-threatening genetic hemophagocytic disorders including familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) [Henter et al 1997, Jordan et al 2011], typically consisting of etoposide and steroids. Rituximab (anti-CD20 antibody) [Milone et al 2005, Lee et al 2006] as well as IVIG may also be considered.

Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be strongly considered in individuals with confirmed XLP1 as early in life as is feasible [Lankester et al 2005]. Successful outcomes have been reported with the use of matched sib donors and marrow or umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors [Gross et al 1996, Filipovich 2001, Lankester et al 2005]. Overall survival appears to be approximately 80%, regardless of conditioning regimen used. However, survival of affected individuals who received a transplant was increased if they were transplanted prior to an episode of HLH [Booth et al 2011].

The outcomes of allogeneic HCT for males with XLP2 are less certain at this time. Early evidence suggests that reduced-intensity conditioning regimens should be considered due to very poor early experience with myeloablative preparative regimens [Marsh et al 2013].

Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated with IVIG.

Lymphoma associated with XLP1 is treated with the standard chemotherapy appropriate to the tumor diagnosis. Once lymphoma remission is achieved, the individual should quickly proceed to allogeneic HCT.

Colitis associated with XLP2 is treated symptomatically and with immunosuppression similar to that used for irritable bowel disease.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

It is recommended that boys with known or suspected XLP and hypogammaglobulinemia receive regular intravenous (IV) IgG replacement therapy every three to four weeks until definitive treatment can be provided.

HCT is the only curative therapy and should be considered in children with confirmed XLP as early in life as possible.

Surveillance

No formal surveillance guidelines exist; the following are general considerations:

Blood should be monitored by EBV-PCR for evidence of EBV infection if symptoms of infection or HLH develop.

Blood counts, hepatic profiles, coagulation studies, and inflammatory markers (ferritin, soluble IL2R) should be monitored as needed based on clinical status for early evidence of HLH.

IgG levels should also be monitored as needed based on clinical phenotype.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with XLP who come into contact with EBV are at risk until curative treatment with allogeneic HCT has been performed. Individuals are also at risk of developing HLH or inflammatory problems with other infections.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once the pathogenic variant has been identified in a proband, molecular genetic testing of at-risk sibs and other maternal male relatives is appropriate for medical management and for consideration of presymptomatic bone marrow transplantation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked ocular albinism (XLOA), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical history and physical examination, including a careful evaluation of pigmentation status at birth and later to distinguish between oculocutaneous and ocular albinism

A complete ophthalmologic evaluation

Dilated retinal examination of any at-risk possible carrier (mother, daughter) for the classic retinal carrier state

Dermatologic consultation for sun-protective lotion and sun-protective clothing and avoidance of associated cumulative solar damage

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Refractive errors should be treated with appropriate spectacle correction as early as possible.

Photodysphoria can be relieved by sunglasses, transition lenses, or special filter glasses, although many prefer not to wear them because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses when indoors.

Abnormal head posture with dampening of the nystagmus in a null point may be modified with prismatic spectacle correction.

Strabismus surgery is usually not required but may be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus or the face turn is marked or fixed. The need for vision aids and the educational needs of the visually impaired should be addressed.

Dermatologic counseling for age-appropriate sun-protective lotions and clothing should be sought.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Appropriate education for sun-protective lotions and clothing (preferably by an informed dermatologic consultant) is indicated to moderate the cumulative lifelong effects of solar radiation.

Surveillance

Children younger than age 16 years with ocular albinism should have an annual ophthalmologic examination (including assessment of refractive error and the need for filter glasses) and psychosocial and educational support.

In adults, ophthalmologic examinations should be undertaken when needed, typically every two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although no formal trials exist, standard care avoids use or application of sun-sensitizing drugs or agents.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Nystagmus dampening has been achieved by bilateral horizontal rectus recession surgery in some centers, but this is not a generally accepted treatment nor is there evidence from a comparative clinical trial that such intervention improves the final visual outcome.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FLNA-related periventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH) the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a neurologist

Evaluation by an epileptologist if seizures are present

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the intracranial vessels, carotid arteries, and aorta to address the increased risk for stroke

Echocardiogram or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRA) to evaluate for valvular dysplasia, congenital cardiac anomalies, or aortic and vascular disease. Because of the potential risk for congenital cardiovascular anomalies and/or aortic aneurysm, a baseline evaluation by a cardiologist may be prudent.

Evaluation by a hematologist if findings suggest a bleeding diathesis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with FLNA-related PVNH is directed toward symptomatic treatment.

Treatment of epilepsy generally follows basic principles for a seizure disorder caused by a known structural brain abnormality, including:

Detailed initial history and evaluation to confirm the suspicion of a seizure disorder. Testing may include an electroencephalogram (EEG) to define the location and severity of electrical brain dysfunction that may be present in individuals with epilepsy.

Repeat imaging may be necessary only in the setting of new neurologic findings on examination.

Treatment with antiepileptic agents. Choice of antiepileptics is generally made empirically based on the clinical features of the seizure disorder. However, because no significant differences exist between medications for newly diagnosed, presumably localized epilepsy, choices may be made on the specific attributes of each antiepileptic drug (i.e., risk of teratogenicity of the antiepileptic drug during pregnancy), tolerability, and efficacy.

Because of the risk for aortic or carotid dissection, it may also be wise to ensure good blood pressure control.

Treatment of aortic/carotid dissection, congenital heart disease, and valvular disease is the same as in the general population.

Many individuals with periventricular nodular heterotopia have dyslexia. Therefore, it may be prudent for those with a family history of PVNH to have children tested for dyslexia at an early age.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The secondary complications are those associated with prolonged seizure medication usage.

Surveillance

Because of the associated increased incidence of aortic or carotid dissection in PVNH, affected individuals should be screened by echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. There is insufficient data at present to provide definitive guidelines. However, given that such complications have occurred in early adulthood, it is reasonable to perform evaluation initially in late adolescence, with follow up as needed. Cardiology evaluation of those who have connective tissue findings and classic PVNH would be prudent.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Given the risk for vascular disease in neurologically asymptomatic individuals, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, head MRI can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Ideally, women should seek information prior to conception regarding risks to the fetus associated with taking an anti-seizure medication during pregnancy so that changes in the anti-seizure medication regimen (if needed) can be made prior to conception. If not done prior to conception, discussion of the risks and benefits of anti-seizure medication use during pregnancy should occur as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. The teratogenic risk to the fetus associated with the use of anti-seizure medication during pregnancy depends on the type of anti-seizure medication used, the dose, and the gestational age of the fetus.

Currently no guidelines exist on the most appropriate surveillance for and management of cardiac, vascular, and connective tissue problems during pregnancy in women with PVNH. See Marfan Syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Classic Type for possible pregnancy management recommendations.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Surgical resection has been attempted but has not proven beneficial [Li et al 1997].To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID), the following evaluations are recommended:

History, including family history, growth and development, and localized and generalized infectious processes (e.g., diarrhea, failure to thrive, pneumonia, sepsis, viral and fungal infections)

CBC and differential count to document absolute lymphocyte count, if not performed in the diagnostic work up

Flow cytometric determination of T-cell, B-cell, and NK-cell numbers, if not performed in the diagnostic work up

In vitro mitogen assay of mononuclear cells (using PHA, ConA, or PWM) and soluble antigens (Candida antigen, tetanus toxoid). Rarely, pathogenic variants in the TCR pathway can alter the ability to proliferate after stimulation in response to anti-CD3 stimulation, despite normal numbers of T lymphocytes.

Functional screening of STAT3 phosphorylation after IL-21 stimulation to test functionality of the common-gamma chain

Consultation with a specialist in immunodeficiency

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The current goals of treatment include prophylaxis for infections and preemptive bone marrow transplant (BMT) prior to the development of symptoms (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

An individual diagnosed with X-SCID requires emergent treatment to provide a functional immune system.

Interim management includes treatment of infections and use of immunoglobulin infusions and antibiotics, particularly prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly Pneumocystis carinii) and, in most cases, fungal infections.

Isolation from exposure to CMV (breast milk, young children, blood products) is indicated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Prompt immune reconstitution is required for survival of children with X-SCID [Myers et al 2002]. BMT was first successful in 1968 and remains the standard means of immune reconstitution. The general experience is that genotypically HLA-identical marrow transplantation restores T-cell immunity in more than 90% of unconditioned individuals with SCID, although B-cell reconstitution occurs in only a limited subset of these individuals [O'Reilly et al 1989, Buckley et al 1999].

Although many centers have expertise in performing bone marrow transplantation in individuals with malignancy, the special issues arising in bone marrow transplantation for X-SCID require involvement of immunodeficiency specialists for an optimal outcome. Individuals with SCID have no immune system capable of rejecting the graft and, therefore, do not typically require fully ablative conditioning; regimens that do not employ agents at doses resulting in long-lasting marrow aplasia are referred to as reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens. Additionally, protocols including alpha/beta T-cell depletion in graft preparations are now being used to improve unrelated donor graft outcomes.

HLA-matched bone marrow transplantation from a relative is preferred; however, most individuals lack a matched, related donor.

For infants who do not have a matched, related donor, haploidentical parental bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T cells can be used [Buckley et al 1999, Pai et al 2014]. In this technique, the bone marrow is depleted of T cells in order to remove mismatched T cells, which would react against the baby's tissues and cause graft versus host disease (GVHD).

Matched, unrelated donor transplantation of peripherally harvested bone marrow (or less frequently cord blood hematopoietic stem cells) in association with partially myeloablative or RIC regimens is now being used at specialized transplantation centers, although GVHD can be a significant problem in some individuals.

Mismatched T cells can react against the baby's tissues and cause GVHD. Cord blood from normal infants is now being banked; frozen cells can be thawed and used in other unrelated donor transplants.

The best timing for BMT is immediately after birth because young infants are less likely than older infants to have had serious infections or failure to thrive. The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) found in 25 centers over the last decade significantly better outcomes (>90% survival) in children receiving transplantation in early infancy (age <3.5 months) without prior infections even after alternative donor grafts were used [Pai et al 2014]. Younger infants also have more rapid engraftment, fewer post-transplantation infections, less GVHD, and shorter hospitalizations than those in whom BMT is delayed [Kane et al 2001, Myers et al 2002]. The optimal age and RIC regimen in young infants, however, remains to be determined. BMT after age 3.5 months and/or a history of infections resulted in a dramatic decrease in survival post transplantation.

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells, chronic warts, and lymphocyte dysregulation.

Administration of immunoglobulin. Long-term periodic administration of immunoglobulin may be required in those who fail to develop allogeneic, functional B lymphocytes after transplantation.

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has been evaluated in individuals not eligible for BMT, after failed BMT, and in individuals with only haploidentical donors. Gene therapy performed using autologous bone marrow stem/progenitor cells transduced with gamma-retroviral vectors expressing a therapeutic gene resulted in significant T-cell reconstitution in the majority of young infants with X-SCID, but only limited success in those with severe infections at the time of transplantation [reviewed in Fischer et al 2011, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014].

B-cell reconstitution was less consistent with roughly half being able to discontinue gamma-globulin replacement therapy.

Unfortunately, between two early trials, five of 20 individuals developed leukemia-like disease requiring ALL-type therapy due to retroviral insertional activation of cellular growth regulatory genes [Howe et al 2008, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2010, Deichmann et al 2011]. Newer, second-generation vectors utilizing self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral vectors have shown similar efficacy in T-cell reconstitution with improved safety design, no adverse events reported in nine individuals over three years post transplantation, and significantly fewer insertions found in genes implicated in lymphoproliferation [Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. Clinical trials using an SIN-lentiviral vector in conjunction with busulfan-based partial myeloablative conditioning are underway for both infants and older individuals who have failed BMT. Initial results in a small number of older individuals have demonstrated sustained myeloid viral marking and restoration of T, B, and NK cell numbers and function [Author, personal communication].

See also Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells (presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells), chronic warts, lymphocyte dysregulation, and rarely, malignancy. All individuals have some degree of immunodeficiency, especially during the first six to 12 months following transplantation. PJP, viral and encapsulated organism prophylaxis should be applied per transplantation protocols. IVIG prophylaxis should be considered to maintain serum IgG levels above 400mg/dL. Prompt evaluation of illness should occur until the individual is deemed immunologically competent. Individuals with primary immunodeficiency post transplantation will require bacteriophage testing off all immunosuppressive therapy to determine eligibility for re-vaccination. Only CMV-negative, irradiated blood products should be used. Avoid breast feeding and exposure to young children to prevent CMV transmission to babies with X-SCID.

Surveillance

After successful bone marrow transplantation, routine evaluation of affected boys every six to 12 months is appropriate to monitor donor cell engraftment, growth, immune and lung function, and gastrointestinal and dermatologic issues.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

Live vaccines. All immunizations should be deferred until after restoration of immunocompetence.

Transfusion of non-irradiated blood products. Only CMV-negative, irradiated (1500 to 5000 RADS) blood products should be used.

Breast-feeding and breast milk, until maternal CMV status is established by CMV DNA PCR testing of a blood sample. CMV is a chronic infection and intermittent viral shedding in various bodily fluids occurs unpredictably. If such testing is negative and the mother is CMV serology negative, breast milk may rarely be considered safe for feeding. Frequent retesting of breast milk is required given the risk of primary infection in the mother. Pasteurization of breast milk remains controversial in preparation for BMT given the severe negative consequences in BMT outcomes.

Exposure to young children, sick contacts, or individuals with cold sores

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk male relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the IL2RG pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

When the pathogenic variant in the family is known, prenatal diagnosis of at-risk males allows preparation for bone marrow transplantation to be initiated before birth. Most couples at risk of having an affected male have desired prenatal testing to help prepare for optimal treatment of an affected newborn: bone marrow transplantation centers were chosen, HLA testing of family members and the prenatal sample was carried out, and a search for a marrow donor could be initiated [Puck et al 1997a].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The following investigations are underway:

Second-generation gene replacement strategies based on self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral (RV) and lentiviral (LV) vectors lacking the LTR enhancers with high insertional genotoxicity are in early clinical development (see ClinicalTrials.gov), and similar strategies based on self-inactivating foamy viral vectors are in pre-clinical development.

Multi-institutional Phase I/II trials using an SIN RV vector carrying the IL2Rgamma cDNA have recently completed enrollment for infants with X-SCID performed without conditioning. Using the same SIN RV vector, the NIH has enrolled older males with X-SCID who had prior transplantation but did not achieve satisfactory immune reconstitution for a clinical trial using reduced-intensity conditioning.

St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and Seattle Children's Hospital are enrolling infants with X-SCID and the NIH is enrolling older males who had prior transplantation in SIN LV clinical trials using low dose busulfan conditioning.

The PIDTC is developing a clinical trial assessing the impact of busulfan dose escalation in infants receiving marrow transplantation in classic SCID. This work may provide new information regarding optimal conditioning regimens for transplant and/or gene therapy.

Thus, it is anticipated that over the next several years, gene transfer therapies with improved safety and efficacy profiles will become increasingly available.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Assessment of speech

Assessment of swallowing

Nutritional assessment

Surface electromyography (EMG) study

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Pharmacologic Treatment of Dystonia

Anticholinergic agents and benzodiazepines. In the early stages of the disease when dystonia is focal or segmental in distribution, individuals may respond significantly to anti-dystonia medications, particularly to anticholinergic agents and benzodiazepines.

The two most commonly prescribed anticholinergic drugs are trihexyphenidyl (Artane™) and biperiden (Akineton™). Trihexyphenidyl appears to have a more consistent and beneficial effect than biperiden, especially in the moderate-to-advanced stages.

The benzodiazepine associated with the best response is clonazepam.

Even greater improvement in dystonia is noted when anticholinergic drugs are combined with clonazepam.

Zolpidem. Once the dystonia is multifocal or generalized in distribution, even polypharmacy offers only partial relief of the dystonic symptoms. In such states, zolpidem has been observed to be potentially effective [Evidente 2002].

Zolpidem is particularly useful in individuals with a predominantly phasic type of generalized dystonic movements and no contractures. In such cases dramatic improvement can occur: some individuals experience nearly 100% improvement of dystonia for a few hours.

The clinical effect of zolpidem may last six to eight hours per 10-mg dose in the first few weeks. Subsequently, the effect becomes progressively shorter, decreasing to two to three hours.

Zolpidem was previously reported to have modest effects on parkinsonism in some individuals with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) [Daniele et al 1999] and Parkinson disease [Daniele et al 1997]; however, its effect on dystonia in individuals with XDP is more robust than its effect on parkinsonism.

Individuals with XDP who take frequent doses of zolpidem either overcome its soporific effects rapidly or develop tolerable daytime sleepiness.

Neuroleptics, particularly those with strong dopamine D2 antagonistic properties, are often prescribed because they are relatively cheap and widely available.

Haloperidol is often used by primary care physicians who see individuals with XDP de novo in the Panay Islands. Although haloperidol may be effective initially for mild-to-moderate dystonia, its effect in more advanced dystonia remains dubious, as it is unclear if the progression of the dystonia is caused by the disease alone or partially caused by the extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) of haloperidol.

Risperidone seems less effective than haloperidol in controlling dystonia. At doses of 6 mg/day or higher, risperidone may also be associated with EPS including tardive dyskinesias and parkinsonism.

Of the atypical neuroleptics, clozapine has the greatest potential to be effective, at least for a limited period. However, its clinical use is limited by its potential to cause aplastic anemia and the need to do frequent complete blood counts, which is impractical in the rural areas of the Panay Islands where XDP is most prevalent.

Tetrabenazine (a non-neuroleptic presynaptic dopamine depleter) also benefits some individuals with clinically advanced dystonia [Evidente et al 2002a]. Similar to zolpidem, tetrabenazine best helps individuals with phasic dystonia and no contractures.

Botulinum toxin injections improve focal dystonia, particularly cervical dystonia, blepharospasm, tongue dystonia, and jaw dystonia. It can, however, dramatically worsen swallowing in individuals with preexisting dysphagia if injected in the cervical or tongue area. The prohibitive cost of botulinum toxin also limits its use in individuals with XDP in rural areas. Rosales et al [2011] using botulinum toxin-A injections in 109 persons with XDP found substantial improvement for oromandibular and lingual dystonias and moderate improvement for truncal-axial dystonias as well as a significant reduction in associated pain.

Injections of ethanol and lidocaine for afferent blocking of muscle are far less costly than botulinum toxin and have been attempted in individuals with XDP with cervical dystonia. They only offer clinical benefits for one to two weeks and are associated with undesirable side effects including severe pain during injections and muscle fibrosis and contractures with repeated use.

Pharmacologic Treatment of Parkinsonism

Levodopa. Individuals with XDP, particularly those with pure parkinsonism, may be responsive to levodopa. Persons with parkinsonism who develop dystonia may become increasingly less responsive to levodopa as the dystonia progresses. Of note, long-term use of levodopa does not lead to development of levodopa-associated dyskinesias.

Dopamine agonists are also effective in controlling tremor in individuals with XDP but are less effective than levodopa in controlling bradykinesia or shuffling gait. Rarely, levodopa or dopamine agonists may exacerbate the dystonia in persons with XDP.

Surgical Treatment of Dystonia and Parkinsonism

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). XDP was successfully treated in one individual using DBS of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) bilaterally [Evidente et al 2007]. The individual had parkinsonism and generalized dystonia, with severe disabling jaw-opening dystonia, drooling, dysphagia, and dysarthria (speech was unintelligible). He received only partial relief of his symptoms with a combination of levodopa, piribedil (a dopamine agonist), trihexyphenidyl, and zolpidem. His generalized dystonia and parkinsonism improved markedly within the first week after surgery, with sustained benefits at seven year follow-up. Thus, it appears that bilateral pallidal stimulation may be the best option for symptomatic improvement in individuals with XDP with advanced disease and medically refractory dystonia [Wadia et al 2010, Aguilar et al 2011, Patel et al 2014].

Although dystonia uniformly improves in individuals with XDP undergoing bilateral pallidal DBS, the parkinsonism may be less responsive [Oyama et al 2010]. In one individual with XDP rapidly progressive dystonia was noted to have early and marked benefit with bilateral GPi DBS [Martinez-Torres et al 2009]. In another individual with XDP who underwent bilateral pallidal DBS, an impulse control disorder similar to what is observed in people with Parkinson disease who have undergone DBS was described [Piano & Tan 2013].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The secondary complications of significant dysphagia and immobility are usually related to progression of dystonia.

Swallowing evaluation, especially in those with subjective dysphagia, can guide diet modification and use of swallowing techniques that minimize the risk for aspiration pneumonia.

Physical therapy, coupled with maximal medical and surgical therapy, may help delay the bedridden state and its complications.

Although traditional neuroleptics may initially help focal or segmental dystonia, they may eventually exacerbate the underlying parkinsonism in individuals with lubag and also lead to tardive dystonia with chronic use. Thus, it may be difficult to determine with chronic therapy if traditional neuroleptics actually help or worsen dystonia in patients with lubag.

Surveillance

Presymptomatic males known to have the pathogenic variant may need yearly clinical evaluations after age 30 years to identify the onset of symptoms in order to institute appropriate therapy as early as possible.

Once an individual is symptomatic, biannual follow-ups are recommended in order to adjust medications to assure best management of dystonia and/or parkinsonism.

Periodic swallowing evaluation, especially in those with subjective dysphagia, is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Other sleep medications such as zaleplon (Sonata™) have had no beneficial effect on dystonia in individuals with XDP.

Drugs that have been used anecdotally with poor or inconsistent effects on dystonia in individuals with XDP include gabapentin, topiramate, baclofen, and tizanidine.

Brain surgeries for advanced dystonia in individuals with XDP that have failed in the past include four thalamotomies, two pallidotomies, and one cerebellar implantation [Lee et al 2002].To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FRMD7-related infantile nystagmus (FIN), the following are recommended:

Evaluation of visual acuity at different gaze positions [Yang et al 2005]

Recording eye movements to evaluate the nystagmus waveform:

Amplitude, frequency, and conjugacy

Foveation dynamics

Null point width determination

In individuals with periodic alternating nystagmus, recording of cycle duration and the presence of an alternating head posture

Treatment of Manifestations

Optical devices

Correction of refractive errors as early as possible using contact lenses or appropriate refractive correction can improve visual acuity appreciably. Contact lenses not only provide optical correction but also may have a role in dampening the intensity of the nystagmus. Although the mechanism is not clear, it has been suggested that dampening of the nystagmus may be exerted through the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, which is part of the proprioceptive pathway [Dell'Osso 2002].

The use of prisms may be helpful in individuals with binocular vision whose nystagmus is dampened by convergence. There are no fixed age groups for which prisms are prescribed; however, prisms are typically used in adults, teenagers, and cooperative children.

Pharmacologic. Memantine and gabapentin have been reported to improve visual acuity, intensity of nystagmus, and foveation [Shery et al 2006, McLean et al 2007].

Surgery

The Anderson-Kestenbaum procedure consists of surgery of the extraocular muscles to shift the null zone to the primary position. As mentioned above, the cause of an anomalous head posture is an eccentric null zone. Therefore, shifting the null zone also corrects the anomalous head posture. In practice this procedure not only shifts but also broadens the null zone, as well as decreasing nystagmus outside the null zone. Abnormal head posture is only seen in approximately 15% of affected individuals.

Clinical trials to assess the role of horizontal rectus tenotomy and its effects on visual function found an improvement in nystagmus waveform and visual function [Hertle et al 2003].

Surveillance

Regular follow up, especially during childhood, is necessary to evaluate for development of vision, refractive errors, strabismus, and/or ambylopia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), the following evaluations are recommended:

A complete blood count with differential

Chemistries that include renal and liver function tests, total protein, albumin, and CRP

Quantitative serum immunoglobulins and titers to vaccine antigens as baseline measurements prior to initiation of gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Baseline chest and sinus x-rays

If the patient is able to cooperate, base line pulmonary function tests

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with XLA should receive specialty care at a center with expertise in this disorder.

If individuals develop acute infections, they should be treated with a course of antibiotics that is at least twice as long as that used in otherwise healthy individuals. Generous use of antibiotics is recommended and treatment should be given without any unnecessary delay.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Bacterial Infections

Gammaglobulin substitution therapy is the mainstay of treatment for individuals with XLA. Most individuals in the United States are given approximately 400 mg/kg of gammaglobulin every four weeks. In the past, the majority of individuals received their gammaglobulin by intravenous infusion every two to four weeks. In the last few years, an increasing proportion of individuals have been receiving gammaglobulin by weekly subcutaneous injections. Both routes provide good therapeutic concentrations of serum IgG. The choice of route may depend on factors related to the convenience of the physician and patient [Berger 2004].

A variety of brands of gammaglobulin are available; none has proven to be superior to others as measured by efficacy or side effects. Occasionally, individuals with XLA have a reaction to gammaglobulin, consisting of headaches, chills, backache, or nausea. These reactions are more likely to occur when the individual has an intercurrent viral infection or when the brand of gammaglobulin has been changed. Such reactions may disappear over time.

Chronic prophylactic antibiotics are used in some centers for prevention of bacterial infections.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children with XLA should only be given inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and not oral polio vaccine.

The sibs of children with XLA should also be given IPV rather than oral polio vaccine (in order to avoid infecting their affected sib with live virus).

Surveillance

At least once a year:

A complete blood count with differential, chemistries, and quantitative serum immunoglobulins to monitor gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Chest x-rays or CTs and sinus films

Note: Chronic lung disease can develop in the absence of an acute pulmonary infection [Quartier et al 1999].

If the patient is stable, the serum IgG does not need to be evaluated with every infusion of gammaglobulin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Live viral vaccines, particularly oral polio vaccine, should be avoided in individuals with XLA.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk male relatives as soon after birth as possible so that gammaglobulin substitution therapy can be initiated promptly and administration of live viral vaccines can be avoided. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing for the known family-specific BTK pathogenic variant;

Analysis of the percentage of B cells in the peripheral circulation.

Note: Serum immunoglobulins will not be helpful in the evaluation of a newborn or infant because maternal IgG crosses the placenta.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Research studies exploring gene therapy for XLA have been conducted in mice [Kerns et al 2010, Ng et al 2010, Bestas et al 2014], but it is not clear when this type of treatment may be available for humans.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.Following the diagnosis of X-linked hyper IgM syndrome (HIGM1), the GI and respiratory tracts should be evaluated for overt or occult infections.

Treatment of Manifestations

The only curative treatment currently available for HIGM1 is allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), ideally prior to onset of a life-threatening complication and organ damage [Levy et al 1997]. Currently, boys with HIGM1 who receive allogeneic HCT have a 70%-75% long-term survival rate [Tomizawa et al 2004, Tsuji et al 2006]. Modified conditioning regimens prior to HCT may be necessary in individuals with preexisting liver disease [Dogu et al 2011].

For a concise summary of current clinical management practices in this disorder, see Davies & Thrasher [2010].

Other

Total parenteral nutrition may be required.

Treat chronic neutropenia with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).

Institute appropriate antimicrobial therapy for infections.

Aggressively evaluate pulmonary infections, including the use of diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage, to define the specific etiology.

Some males with end-stage sclerosing cholangitis have been treated successfully with orthotropic liver transplantation closely associated with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

Treat lymphomas and GI cancer.

Treatment of autoimmune disorders usually involves judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

Liver disease, including primary cirrhosis and carcinomas, in addition to tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, complicate the management of older individuals with HIGM1 [Lee et al 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The following methods are used to prevent infection:

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP) is indicated because infants with HIGM1 are at high risk of developing PCP during the first two years of life. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy.

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG). IVIG replacement should be considered by the time the child is age six months, as individuals with HIGM1 cannot generate antibodies to encapsulated bacteria naturally and are at risk for overwhelming infection from these organisms. IVIG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies) that is typically given every three to four weeks or can be given subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis.

Additional antibiotic prophylaxis should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

Routine childhood immunizations (killed vaccines) may be safely administered but do not preclude the need for IVIG replacement.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

In areas where cryptosporidium may be present in the water supply, only purified water should be ingested.

Surveillance

Monitor and treat pulmonary complications:

Annual pulmonary function tests for those older than age seven years

Follow-up of pulmonary infiltrates with a high-resolution chest CT scan, as they may represent lymphoid aggregates

Bronchoscopic evaluations as indicated

Perform annual endoscopic evaluation.

At routine visits, monitor for the following:

Chronic neutropenia

Chronic diarrhea and resulting malnutrition. If present, screen for ova and parasites.

Liver disease with biochemical liver function tests, especially in individuals with documented history of cryptosporidiosis

Lymphomas and GI cancers by history of new symptoms that could be suggestive of malignancy

Autoimmune disorders with history, physical examination, and CBC

Neurologic complications with neurologic examinations and brain MRI, as indicated

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing of CD40LG if the pathogenic variant in the family is known so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alpha-thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability (ATRX) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of medical history for developmental progress and seizures

Assessment of growth in infants and children

Physical examination including assessment of facial features, muscle tone, and deep tendon reflexes

Assessment of cognitive and adaptive functions by neuropsychological testing

Auscultation of the heart for evidence of structural defect

Examination of the genitalia for cryptorchidism and other anomalies

Assessment of feeding in early childhood for swallowing difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux, and/ or recurrent vomiting

Ophthalmologic evaluation for strabismus, visual acuity problems, or structural eye defects if indicated by clinical assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatments are recommended:

Calorie-dense formula and/or gavage feeding to compensate for poor nutritional intake

If food refusal is an issue, evaluation for gastrointestinal causes such as peptic ulcer disease

If drooling is a serious problem, treatment with anticholinergics, botulinum toxin type A injection of the salivary glands and/or surgical redirecting of the submandibular ducts

Treatment in the usual manner for gastroesophageal reflux, recurrent respiratory and urinary tract infections, seizures, severe behavior problems, anomalies (e.g., cleft palate, cardiac malformations, cryptorchidism, ambiguous genitalia, hypospadias)

Early intervention programs and special education for developmental delays

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis and vaccination to prevent pneumococcal and meningococcal infection are reasonable precautions in the rare patient with asplenia [Leahy et al 2005].

Surveillance

Growth should be followed regularly in infancy and childhood and plotted on age-appropriate growth charts. (Syndrome-specific growth charts are not available.)

Developmental progress should be monitored throughout infancy and childhood.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Anemia, if present, is mild and rarely requires treatment.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), the following evaluations are recommended (reviewed in Tamura et al [2014]).

Skin

Perform baseline examination of the skin (including all sun-exposed as well as sun-shielded areas) for evidence of sunlight-induced damage including pigmentary changes, precancerous lesions, and skin cancers.

For examination of the scalp, use a hair dryer (on a cool setting) to blow the hair aside.

Examination of the lip and adjacent tip of the tongue for signs of sun damage, including actinic cheilitis (a type of actinic keratosis or leukoplakia occurring on the lips) and prominent telangiectasia, which may precede the development of cancer in these areas [Butt et al 2010].

Baseline clinical color photographs of the entire skin surface with close-ups (including a ruler) of individual lesions to facilitate follow-up and detection of early skin cancers.

Eyes

Examine the lids and anterior UV-exposed portions of the globe for evidence of sun-induced damage including ectropion, entropion, inflammatory masses (pterygia, pinguecula), clouding of the cornea, and cancer of the lids, conjunctiva, or cornea. Eversion of the lids may be necessary to detect cancers of the mucosal surface.

Use the Schirmer test to detect dry eyes. This test involves measurement of the extent of absorption of tears into filter paper placed under eyelids for a few minutes [Brooks et al 2013].

Neurologic

Deep tendon reflex testing

Measurement of the occipital frontal circumference (OFC), to determine if microcephaly is present

MRI of the brain and nerve conduction velocities, if other neurologic problems are detected

Auditory. Baseline audiometry evaluation to screen for the sensorineural hearing loss, which may be present as a component of the XP-associated neurologic abnormalities [Totonchy et al 2013]

Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatment of manifestations is reviewed in Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. Premalignant lesions (e.g., small actinic keratosis) may be treated by freezing with liquid nitrogen.

Larger areas of sun-damaged skin can be treated with field treatments such as topical 5-fluorouracil or imiquimod preparations. Rarely, therapeutic dermatome shaving or dermabrasion has been used to remove the more damaged superficial epidermal layers. This procedure permits repopulation by relatively UV-shielded cells from the follicles and glands.

Cutaneous neoplasms are treated in the same manner as in individuals who do not have XP. This involves electrodesiccation/curettage or surgical excision. Skin cancers which are recurrent or in locations at high risk for recurrence are best treated with Mohs micrographic surgery. Because multiple surgical procedures are often necessary, removal of undamaged skin should be minimized. Severe cases have been treated by excision of large portions of the facial surface and grafting with sun-protected skin.

While individuals with XP are not abnormally sensitive to therapeutic x-rays, and individuals with XP have responded normally to full-dose therapeutic x-radiation for treatment of inoperable neoplasms [DiGiovanna et al 1998], cultured cells from a few individuals with XP were found to be hypersensitive to x-radiation [Arlett et al 2006]. When x-radiation therapy is indicated, an initial small dose is advisable to test for clinical hypersensitivity.

Oral isotretinoin or acitretin can be effective in preventing new neoplasms in individuals with multiple skin cancers [Kraemer et al 1988]. Because of its toxicity (hepatic, hyperlipidemic, and teratogenic effects; calcification of ligaments and tendons; premature closure of the epiphyses), oral isotretinoin or acitretin should be reserved for individuals with XP who are actively developing large numbers of new tumors. Some individuals may respond to lower doses of isotretinoin or acitretin with less toxicity.

A few case reports have described regression of skin cancers with use of imiquimod cream in individuals with XP [Giannotti et al 2003, Nagore et al 2003, Roseeuw 2003]; however, no controlled studies have been reported.

Eyes. Methylcellulose eye drops or soft contact lenses have been used to keep the cornea moist and to protect against mechanical trauma in individuals with deformed eyelids.

Corneal transplantation has restored vision in individuals with severe keratitis with corneal opacity. However, the immunosuppression necessary to prevent rejection of the transplant may increase the risk for skin cancer.

Neoplasms of the lids, conjunctiva, and cornea are usually treated surgically.

Hearing. Hearing aids can be of great help for individuals who have sensorineural hearing loss with learning difficulties in school (see Totonchy et al [2013] and Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Treatment of XP depends on early diagnosis and immediate, aggressive avoidance of sun and other UV exposure. This involves avoiding or minimizing outdoor exposure at times when UV radiation is present (when the sun is out or during daytime through clouds).

Clinical suspicion of XP should prompt immediate sun-protective measures until the diagnosis is confirmed or an alternative explanation is determined.

Individuals should be educated to protect all body surfaces from UV radiation by wearing protective clothing including hats, long sleeves, long pants and gloves, broad-spectrum, high sun-protective factor (SPF) sunscreens, UV-absorbing glasses, and long hair styles. The eyes should be protected by wearing UV-absorbing glasses with side shields. Some individuals have custom-made hats with UV-absorbing face shields to permit visibility outdoors while protecting the face from UV.

Because the cells of individuals with XP are hypersensitive to UVA and UVB (found in sunlight) and UVC (found in some artificial light sources), it is useful to measure UV light in an individual's home, school, or work environment with a light meter so that high levels of environmental UV (e.g., halogen lamps) can be identified and eliminated if possible. While no standards exist for perfectly safe UV exposure in individuals with XP, the use of UV meters can alert individuals to unexpected sources of high levels of environmental UV.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D is produced in the skin by a reaction involving exposure to UV radiation. Active adults with XP and skin cancers received sufficient vitamin D in their diet in the past to result in normal serum concentrations of the active form (1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D) [Sollitto et al 1997]. However, children protected from sunlight very early in life have had low serum concentration of 25 hydroxy vitamin D; one child became susceptible to bone fractures [Ali et al 2009; Author, personal observation]. Dietary supplementation with oral vitamin D is recommended for persons with low serum concentration of serum vitamin D [Reichrath 2007; Author, personal communication].

Surveillance

See Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. A physician should examine the skin of an affected individual at frequent intervals (every ~3-12 months, depending on the severity of skin disease).

Affected individuals or their parents should be educated to look for abnormal pigmented lesions or the appearance of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. Individuals should be examined frequently by a family member who has been instructed in recognition of cutaneous neoplasms.

Eyes should be examined regularly for signs of UV exposure and damage.

Neurologic. Routine neurologic examination is indicated because of progressive neurologic abnormalities that are present in a minority of individuals with XP and may not be detected in young children.

Hearing. Periodic audiograms. Serial audiograms at regular intervals may also be useful for assessing the presence or absence of progressive neurologic degeneration, especially in those with a history of acute burning on minimal sun exposure [Totonchy et al 2013].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

UV exposure from sunlight and artificial sources of UV radiation should be avoided (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Artificial sources of UV. Certain light sources (e.g., mercury arc, halogen, and other lamps) can be unrecognized sources of UV. Although such light sources are often shielded, in open areas such as gymnasiums they can be a source of UV if the shield has been breached. UV meters are readily available to enable monitoring of areas to identify unexpected UV sources.

Cigarette smoke. Because cells from individuals with XP are also hypersensitive to environmental mutagens, such as benzo[a]pyrene found in cigarette smoke, prudence dictates that individuals with XP should be protected against these agents. One individual with XP who smoked cigarettes for more than ten years died of bronchogenic carcinoma of the lungs at age 35 years [Kraemer et al 1994]. The authors recently cared for another individual with XP who smoked and developed lung cancer in the fifth decade of life.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the family-specific pathogenic variants have been identified, molecular genetic testing for at-risk sibs is possible.

Clinical evaluation to identify affected sibs of a proband may be difficult, especially in an infant or young child. In this case, sun protection may be recommended for sibs until a definitive laboratory diagnosis is obtained.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The systemic retinoids isotretinoin and acitretin are used as skin cancer chemopreventive agents in individuals who are actively developing large numbers of skin cancers, and thus may be used by some women with XP [Kraemer et al 1988]. Systemic retinoids are known to be teratogenic to a developing fetus and pose a high risk for birth defects. Therefore, women who are using systemic retinoids should be appropriately counseled about pregnancy risks and the need for effective contraception; regular monitoring with pregnancy tests is indicated. Systemic retinoids should be administered only by physicians who are knowledgeable regarding their risks and benefits.

To access isotretinoin in the US, women and their prescribing providers must be enrolled in the iPLEDGE program to minimize the potential for fetal exposure. Pregnancy avoidance is initiated before therapy, continues during therapy, and extends post-treatment until the drug is cleared from the body. While both drugs may be effective in preventing skin cancers, acitretin may take longer to be eliminated from the body, requiring an extended period (3 years) of post-therapy pregnancy avoidance to minimize teratogenic risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

The bacterial DNA repair enzyme T4 endonuclease V in a topical liposome-containing preparation has been reported to reduce the frequency of new actinic keratoses and basal cell carcinomas in individuals with XP in one research study [Yarosh et al 2001]. As of 2016, this treatment is not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.

Oral vismodegib (Erivedge®), an inhibitor of the hedgehog pathway, has been approved by the FDA for treatment of metastatic basal cell carcinoma or locally advanced basal cell carcinoma that has recurred following surgery. This drug has also been approved for use in individuals with basal cell carcinoma who are not candidates for surgery or for radiation therapy (see FDA package insert). This treatment may be appropriate for some individuals with XP, however, no studies on the efficacy of this drug in those with XP have been published. Oral vismodegib is also a teratogen, leading to embryo-fetal death, midline defects, missing digits, and other birth defects in an exposed embryo or fetus; effective contraception during and after vismodegib treatment is advised in both women and men.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Use of cotton swabs to obtain specimens from conjunctival lesions for cytologic examination for malignant cells is being evaluated [Brooks et al 2013].To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the int22h1/int22h2-mediated Xq28 duplication syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of medical history for behavioral and psychiatric problems, recurrent infections, and atopic diseases

Comprehensive physical examination with emphasis on growth parameters, hands and feet, and possible kyphoscoliosis

Neuropsychological evaluation to assess level of cognitive functioning and for any behavioral problems

Psychiatric evaluation if psychiatric illness is suspected

Echocardiogram

Audiologic evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination

Spine x-ray and orthopedic evaluation if kyphoscoliosis is present

Nutritional evaluation and counseling if obesity is present

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Early intervention with speech and physical therapy is recommended for young children with developmental delay. Special education programs are subsequently recommended for school-aged children with intellectual disability.

Recurrent bacterial infections are treated with standard antibiotics. Children with recurrent ear infections should be referred to ENT to assess need for tympanostomy tubes.

Nutritional counseling and regular exercise are needed when obesity is an issue.

Standard management is recommended for the following:

Behavioral and psychiatric problems

Kyphoscoliosis

Cardiac malformations

Hearing impairment

Eye problems

Surveillance

The following routine monitoring is recommended:

Assessment of developmental progress and cognitive abilities

Screening for behavioral and psychiatric problems

Audiology evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic children who are relatives of an affected individual by genomic testing for the int22h1/int22h2-mediated Xq28 duplication. Clinically asymptomatic children who have the familial duplication should be assessed and monitored for developmental delay with the goal of early initiation of therapies and support if needed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a 46,XX testicular disorder of sex development (46,XX testicular DSD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size by history and/or physical examination

Dexascan to evaluate for osteopenia

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Testosterone-replacement therapy. Management of individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD with testosterone deficiency is similar to that for other causes of testosterone deficiency. Physicians should check for the most current preparations and dosage recommendations before initiating testosterone replacement therapy.

After age 14 years, low-dose testosterone therapy can be initiated. Note: If an individual has short stature and is eligible for growth hormone therapy, testosterone therapy should be either delayed or given at lower doses initially in order to maximize growth potential.

Testosterone enanthate is given IM every three to four weeks, starting at 100 mg and increasing by 50 mg every six months to 200-400 mg. Initial high doses of testosterone should be avoided to prevent priapism. The treatment should plateau, in adulthood, at the best possible dosage, typically between 50 and 400 mg every two to four weeks.

Injection of testosterone enanthate is the preferred method of replacement therapy because of low cost and easy, at-home regulation of dosage; however, side effects include pain associated with injection and large variations of serum testosterone concentration between injections, resulting in a higher risk of mood swings.

Alternative delivery systems that result in a more stable dosing include transdermal patches (scrotal and non-scrotal) and transdermal gels. Testosterone-containing gels, however, are associated with the risk of interpersonal transfer, which can be reduced by the use of newer hydroalcoholic gels [Kühnert et al 2005].

Gynecomastia. Regression of gynecomastia may occur with testosterone replacement therapy. If it does not, and if it causes psychological distress to the individual, reduction mammoplasty can be offered.

Osteopenia. Depending on the degree of osteopenia, treatment may include: calcium, exercise, vitamin D, biphosphonates, or calcitonin. Referral to an internist, pediatrician, or endocrinologist is recommended.

Psychological support.

Sensitivity is necessary when conveying information to individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD about the genetic cause and associated sterility of the disorder. This information must be presented in a manner that helps minimize psychological distress. Providers are encouraged to anticipate the need for further psychological assistance.

Surveillance

Monitoring during testosterone replacement therapy should include the following:

Evaluation of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size.

Measurement of serum testosterone concentration at three-month intervals (prior to the next injection) to evaluate nadir testosterone concentrations. Concentrations lower than 200 ng/dL or higher than 500 ng/dL may require adjustment of total dose or frequency.

In adults, digital rectal examination and measurement of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) prior to treatment and three, six, and 12 months after initiation of therapy to evaluate for the presence of an overt prostate cancer, which would be a contraindication to the treatment. Such testing should then be performed annually.

For individuals on testosterone replacement therapy, evaluation of hematocrit at three, six, and 12 months, then annually because of risk of increased hematocrit with subsequent risk of hypoxia and sleep apnea

Lipid profile and liver function tests, as testosterone may alter lipid profile and liver function

Bone mineral determination by bone densitometry (DEXA) once a year, if osteopenia has been diagnosed

Ongoing psychosocial support

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contraindications to testosterone replacement therapy include prostate cancer (known or suspected) and breast cancer.

Oral androgens such as methyltestosterone and fluoxymesterone should not be given (especially for long-term therapy) because of liver toxicity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Y chromosome infertility, semen analysis to determine the number, motility, and morphology of sperm is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

A couple in which the male has Y chromosome infertility can be offered the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) [Silber 2011]. In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by IVF (in vitro fertilization).

Retrieval of sperm has been successful mainly for most males with deletions of AZFc, and rarely for males with deletions of AZFb or AZFa. The reason for this is that an autosomal copy of DAZ (DAZL) may serve as a “back up gene,” which would help preserve a tiny amount of residual spermatogenesis in males with AZFc deletions that remove the DAZ genes. There are no such autosomal “back up” copies for genes in AZFa and AZFb.

The definition of SCOS (Sertoli cell only syndrome) has been the subject of confusion in the literature. There are two main causes of non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA): maturation arrest and Sertoli cell only. With maturation arrest, there is a failure of spermatocytes to progress beyond meiosis I. But in 60% of cases, a few spermatocytes do progress to sperm and can be retrieved from the testis. Similarly, in about 60% of cases with SCOS a tiny number of tubules actually contain a few spermatozoa resulting from small foci of spermatogenesis.

It is important to discuss the possibility of transmission of Y chromosome infertility to male offspring (see Genetic Counseling) prior to attempting fertilization by ICSI and IVF [Stouffs et al 2005].

In males with retrievable spermatozoa, the presence or absence of deletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome has no apparent effect on fertilization or pregnancy rates [Oates et al 2002, Kihaile et al 2004, Silber 2011]. The risk for birth defects is not different from that of any infertile couple who achieves a pregnancy through assisted reproductive technology [Choi et al 2004, Davies et al 2012].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Testicular sperm retrieval for in vitro fertilization is ineffective for males with AZFb and AZFa deletions, but has been achieved for the majority of males with AZFc deletions [Oates et al 2002, Stouffs et al 2005, Reyes-Vallejo et al 2006, Silber 2011].The care of individuals diagnosed with ZAP70-related CID is best managed with a multidisciplinary team of providers including hematology/oncology/bone marrow transplantation, immunology, genetics, and infectious disease specialists. To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ZAP70-related combined immunodeficiency (CID), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of growth

Evaluation for common and opportunistic viral, bacterial, and fungal disease-causing agents

Complete metabolic panel (liver and renal function), complete blood count (CBC) with differential and platelet count, lymphocyte subsets and mitogen proliferation, and quantitative immunoglobulins

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consultation with a clinical immunologist

Consultation for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment relies on prompt reconstitution of the individual’s immune system (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Supportive treatment includes IVIG and antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis to control and reduce the occurrence of infections.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The only curative therapy for ZAP70-related CID is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Extrapolated data show that the outcome of HSCT in children with SCID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of infections [Pai et al 2014]. Children with ZAP70-related CID have been successfully transplanted using a variety of donors including haploidentical donors and unrelated umbilical cord blood [Noraz et al 2000, Elder et al 2001, Hönig et al 2012, Cuvelier et al 2016].

Outcomes are the best with HLA-matched, related donors.

If an HLA-matched, related donor is not available, alternatives include:

Matched unrelated donor;

Umbilical cord blood donor;

Haploidentical parental bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood stem cells that have been T-cell depleted.

In contrast to individuals with SCID, individuals with ZAP70-related CID are typically treated with a chemotherapeutic conditioning regimen prior to HSCT, although some individuals have received unconditioned transplants with variable success, suggesting that conditioning may not be essential in some circumstances [Hönig et al 2012, Kim et al 2013, Cuvelier et al 2016].

The largest series of eight individuals with ZAP70-related CID who received HSCT using a variety of stem cell sources showed the following:

All individuals were alive at a median of 13.5 years of follow up.

Two-thirds of the individuals who did not receive conditioning failed to have myeloid engraftment but have maintained stable mixed chimerism. In addition, three individuals who received stem cells from a matched sib did not receive conditioning prior to transplant and achieved engraftment.

75% of individuals developed acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and 50% developed chronic GVHD.

Seven of eight individuals achieved freedom from IVIG and show evidence of class switching with resolution of dysregulated immunoglobulin production and six of the eight show evidence of antibody production to both protein and polysaccharide vaccines.

Two individuals receiving myeloablative conditioning have developed premature ovarian failure.

Cellular reconstitution following HSCT takes up to one year, while restoration of humoral immunity can take significantly longer, and may not occur in some individuals.

Complications from HSCT include graft-versus-host disease, failure to reconstitute the humoral immune compartment, graft failure over time, and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease [Skoda-Smith et al 2001, Dvorak & Cowan 2008, Pai et al 2014].

Affected individuals with poor humoral reconstitution are maintained on long-term immunoglobulin replacement.

Individuals who do not undergo HSCT require close monitoring for worsening of immune function manifested by increased susceptibility to severe or opportunistic infections (see also Surveillance). If clinical status worsens, rapid transition to HSCT should be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate:

Use of irradiated, leukoreduced, cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe blood products

Delay of immunizations until immune reconstitution

Consideration for formula feeds in place of breast feeding until CMV status of mother is known. Caution should be taken to assess the quality of the water source for the infant formula.

Surveillance

Following a successful HSCT, the following should be routinely monitored:

Growth

Psychomotor development

Complete blood counts

Liver and renal function

Immune status

Donor and recipient chimerism

Development of post-transplant complications, particularly chronic graft-versus-host disease, decreased bone density, pulmonary and cardiac function, and gonadal function

Individuals with milder findings or those who have not undergone HSCT also need to be monitored for worsening of immune function with periodic assessment of clinical status and functional lymphocyte responsiveness.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with ZAP70-related CID should avoid the following:

Non-irradiated blood products

Live virus vaccinations

Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) vaccine against tuberculosis, Salmonella typhi (Ty21a) vaccine against typhoid fever, and Vibrio cholerae (CVD 103-HgR) vaccine against cholera, which may be part of the routine vaccination schedule in countries where these diseases are endemic

Contaminated water sources

Exposure to fungus-enriched environments (e.g., construction sites, agricultural areas with active soil disruption, mulch, hay)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the outcome of HSCT in children with ZAP70-related CID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of severe infections, early testing of at-risk sibs should be considered. In addition, any sibs considered as bone marrow donors must be evaluated for ZAP70-related CID prior to donation.

If the ZAP70 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, CBC, quantitative immunoglobulins, and lymphocyte subsets and proliferation can be used to clarify the genetic status (immunologic status) of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Appropriately screened blood products should be available, if needed, during the course of the pregnancy and delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has not been performed in ZAP70-related CID. Experimental studies utilizing gene therapy have been conducted on murine models [Adjali et al 2005, Irla et al 2008] as well as human cells in vitro [Steinberg et al 2000, Kofler et al 2004, Gavino et al 2017]. Nonviral transfer methods (e.g., electro-gene transfer) have also been used to correct ZAP-70 deficiency in a murine model [Irla et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.