Bleeding tendency

Agents. Drugs that inhibit platelet function or blood coagulation:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially aspirin, which are strong inhibitors of platelet aggregation

Other substances that interfere with platelet function including some antibiotics; cardiovascular, psychotropic, and oncologic drugs; drugs that affect platelet cAMP; some anesthetics; antihistamines; and radiographic contrast agentsNote: (1) Drugs that impair platelet function should be prescribed only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits. (2) Physicians should try to avoid prescribing any other drugs that increase the risk of bleeding in individuals with MYH9RD. (3) Individuals with MYH9RD can develop thromboembolic events [Girolami et al 2011]. The use of antithrombotic agents (such as heparin) must be carefully balanced against the risks according to the overall clinical picture of each affected individual.

Circumstances. In individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, avoidance of activities at high risk of trauma (e.g., contact sports)

Hearing loss

Agents. Ototoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicylates in large quantities, loop diuretics, some drugs used in chemotherapy regimens). These should be used only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits.

Circumstances. Exposure to hazardous noise. If noise exposure cannot be avoided, use ear devices (e.g., earplugs, headphones) to attenuate intense sound.

Nephropathy

Agents that can damage renal function, including radiocontrast, antibiotics, NSAIDs, diuretics, and oncologic drugs. The balance between benefit and risk of such agents should be carefully considered, especially in individuals with established kidney involvement or with MYH9 pathogenic variants associated with high risk for kidney damage.

Cataract

Agents. Glucocorticoids and radiation therapy, which predispose to development of cataracts

Elevation of liver enzymes

Agents. In affected individuals with liver enzyme elevation, assessment of risks versus benefits before use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs
