http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/achondroplasia

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



Clinical manifestations in achondroplasia vary modestly. In order to establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with achondroplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical genetics consultation and, if feasible, consultation with a clinician experienced in caring for children with bone dysplasias

Documentation of length, weight, and head circumference compared with achondroplasia-specific growth standards

Assessment of the craniocervical junction including neurologic history and examination, computerized tomography of the craniocervical junction, and polysomnography

Baseline computerized tomography of the brain

Treatment of Manifestations



Recommendations for management of children with achondroplasia were outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics [Trotter et al 2005]. The recommendations of the committee are meant to supplement guidelines available for treating the child with average stature. A recent review [Pauli 2010] updates the information available in Trotter et al [2005].

The recommendations include (but are not limited to) the following:


Short stature

A number of studies have assessed growth hormone (GH) therapy as a possible treatment for the short stature of achondroplasia [Seino et al 2000, Kanaka-Gantenbein 2001, Kanazawa et al 2003].

In general, these and other series show initial acceleration of growth, but with lessening effect over time.

Only modest effects on adult stature seem to accrue.

Extended limb lengthening using various techniques remains an option for some. Increases in height of up to 12-14 inches may be obtained [Peretti et al 1995, Ganel & Horoszowski 1996, Yasui et al 1997, Aldegheri & Dall’Oca 2001].

Although some have advocated performing these procedures as early as ages six to eight years, many pediatricians, clinical geneticists, and ethicists have advocated postponing such surgery until the young person is able to participate in making an informed decision.

At least in North America, only a tiny proportion of affected individuals elect to undergo extended limb lengthening. The Medical Advisory Board of Little People of America has published a statement regarding use of extended limb lengthening.

Obesity. Measures to avoid obesity should start in early childhood.

Standard weight and weight-by-height grids specific for achondroplasia [Hunter et al 1996, Hoover-Fong et al 2007] should be used to monitor progress.

Note that the body mass index has not been standardized for individuals with achondroplasia and will yield misleading results; thus, body mass index should not be used in this population until normal ranges are established.


Hydrocephalus

If increased intracranial pressure arises, referral to a neurosurgeon is needed.

Because of the presumed mechanism giving rise to hydrocephalus in this population, probably ventriculoperitoneal shunting, rather than third ventriculostomy, is appropriate.


Craniocervical junction constriction

The best predictors of need for suboccipital decompression include:

Lower-limb hyperreflexia or clonus

Central hypopnea demonstrated by polysomnography

Reduced foramen magnum size, determined by CT examination of the craniocervical junction and by comparison with the norms for children with achondroplasia [Pauli et al 1995].

If there is clear indication of symptomatic compression, urgent referral to a pediatric neurosurgeon for decompression surgery should be initiated [Bagley et al 2006].


Obstructive sleep apnea

Treatment may include the following:

Adenotonsillectomy

Weight reduction

Continuous positive airway pressure

Tracheostomy for extreme cases

Improvement in disturbed sleep and some improvement in neurologic function can result from these interventions [Waters et al 1995].

In rare instances in which the obstruction is severe enough to require tracheostomy, surgical intervention to advance the midface has been used to alleviate upper airway obstruction [Elwood et al 2003].


Middle ear dysfunction

Routine management of frequent middle-ear infections, persistent middle-ear fluid, and consequent hearing loss should be undertaken as needed.

Speech evaluation by age two years should be undertaken if any concerns arise on screening.


Varus deformity

Criteria for surgical intervention have been published previously [Kopits 1980, Pauli 2010].

Presence of progressive, symptomatic bowing should prompt referral to an orthopedist. Various interventions may be elected (e.g. valgus-producing and derotational osteotomies, guided growth using 8-plates).

Kyphosis. A protocol to help prevent the development of a fixed, angular kyphosis is available [Pauli et al 1997]:

In children in whom spontaneous remission does not arise after trunk strength increases and the child begins to walk, bracing is usually sufficient to prevent persistence of the thoracolumbar kyphosis.

If a severe kyphosis persists, spinal surgery may be necessary to prevent neurologic complications [Ain & Browne 2004, Ain & Shirley 2004].


Spinal stenosis

If severe signs and/or symptoms of spinal stenosis arise, urgent surgical referral is appropriate.

Extended and wide laminectomies [Pyeritz et al 1987, Lonstein 1988], need to be done as soon as possible [Carlisle et al 2011].


Socialization

Because of the highly visible nature of the short stature associated with achondroplasia, affected persons and their families may encounter difficulties in socialization and school adjustment.

Support groups (see Resources), such as the Little People of America, Inc (LPA), can assist families with these issues through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs.

Information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children with short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting is available through a national newsletter, seminars, and workshops.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



For issues related to the secondary complications that may arise in achondroplasia, see Treatment of Manifestations and Surveillance.

Surveillance



Guidelines for surveillance are incorporated into the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical report [Trotter et al 2005].

Growth. Monitor height and weight at each physician contact using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978, Hoover-Fong et al 2007]

Development. Screening of developmental milestones throughout infancy and early childhood should be performed and compared with those specific for achondroplasia [Fowler et al 1997, Ireland et al 2010].


Head growth and risk for hydrocephalus

Complete baseline CT scan (or MRI) of the brain in infancy

Monitoring of head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978] throughout childhood


Craniocervical junction

Every infant should have a CT scan (or MRI) of the craniocervical junction in infancy, with comparison of foramen magnum size to diagnostic-specific standards [Hecht et al 1989].

Overnight polysomnography should also be completed in infancy and interpreted with consideration of features important in assessing the craniocervical junction [Pauli et al 1995].

Neurologic examination including for signs of cervical myelopathy should be incorporated into each physical examination in infancy and childhood.


Sleep apnea

Inquiry should be made regarding signs and symptoms of sleep apnea.

If worrisome nighttime or daytime features arise, then polysomnography should be completed.


Ears and hearing

In addition to newborn screening, each infant should have tympanometric and behavioral audiometric evaluation by age approximately one year.

Evidence for middle ear problems or hearing loss should be sought throughout childhood.


Kyphosis

The spine of the infant and child should be clinically assessed every six months until age three years.

If severe kyphosis appears to be developing, radiologic assessment is needed (lateral in sitting or standing, depending on age, and lateral cross-table prone or cross-table supine over a bolster).

Legs. Clinical assessment for development of bowing and/or internal tibial torsion should be part of each physical assessment.

Spinal stenosis. Because adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk for spinal stenosis, a clinical history and neurologic examination is warranted every three to five years once the person with achondroplasia reaches adulthood.

Adaptation to difference. Inquiry regarding social adjustment should be part of each primary physician contact.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Particularly in childhood, care must be taken to limit risk for injury to the spinal cord at the craniocervical junction. This should include proscription of activities including collision sports (e.g., American football, ice hockey, rugby), use of a trampoline, diving from diving boards, vaulting in gymnastics, and hanging upside down from knees or feet on playground equipment.

Protocols have been published regarding positioning that should be avoided in order to decrease the likelihood of development of a fixed, angular kyphosis [Pauli et al 1997].

There is no increased risk for bone fragility or joint degeneration, and no circumstances to avoid related to these.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Cephalo-pelvic disproportion may necessitate delivery by caesarean section when the pregnant woman is of average stature and the fetus has achondroplasia.

Pregnant women with achondroplasia must always be delivered by caesarean section because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.