http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alk-nbs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility, the following evaluations are recommended based on the author’s personal experience as no guidelines have been established for initial evaluation of individuals diagnosed with a germline ALK pathogenic variant.

Physical examination to assess for clinical manifestations of neuroblastic tumors such as an abdominal mass, Horner syndrome, and/ or cutaneous lesions

Radiograph of the chest radiograph and ultrasound examination of the abdomen, the most common sites for neuroblastic tumor development

Measurement of urine cathecholamines, as homovanillic acid and vanillylmendelic acid may be elevated in the presence of a neuroblastic tumor

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Children who develop neuroblastic tumors (neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastoma, or ganglioneuroma) should be evaluated and treated by a pediatric oncologist at a pediatric cancer center.

Neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma. The treatment for individuals with a neuroblastic tumor who have a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant is the same standard risk-stratified therapy used to treat all neuroblastic tumors. Clinical trials are ongoing to study the efficacy of ALK-targeted therapy in the setting of relapsed and refractory neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma (see Therapies Under Investigation).

The management guidelines for neuroblastoma or ganglioneuroblastoma are complex [Irwin & Park 2015]

Depending on the age of the affected individual, stage of the tumor, and biologic characteristics of the tumor, treatment may involve observation or surgical resection.

Tumors with risk for metastatic spread or those that have already metastasized require chemotherapy and sometimes radiation therapy, stem cell transplantation, and immunotherapy.

Ganglioneuromas are typically removed by surgical resection and require no further therapy.

Surveillance



Asymptomatic children at risk. Large-scale, population-based studies in Japan, Europe, Canada, and the US that screened healthy infants with urinary catecholamines to identify neuroblastomas found no improvement in survival in children diagnosed before symptoms occurred [Schilling et al 2002, Woods et al 2002].

Because no data are available as yet on the effect of screening in families with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant and because tumor surveillance at the population level does not improve neuroblastoma outcome, there is currently no consensus on the proper frequency or type of tumor surveillance for individuals with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant. In the absence of published guidelines, the noninvasive measures of physical examination, abdominal ultrasound examination, and measurement of urine catecholamine metabolite levels have been performed on the following schedule; less frequent intervals may also be appropriate.

Every 1-2 months in infants age ≤12 months

Every 3-4 months in children age ≤10 years

After successful treatment of a neuroblastic tumor, screening for neuroblastic tumors should continue since children with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility are at risk of developing multiple primary tumors. Although no consensus exists, some recommend screening until age six years [Bourdeaut et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



There is currently no evidence that individuals with ALK-related neuroblastoma tumor susceptibility have increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation therapy; thus, medical and surgical management of tumors should be the same as for the general population.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to test relatives at risk* for the ALK pathogenic variant found in the proband to identify those at high risk for neuroblastoma, for whom early detection of neuroblastoma and initiation of therapy would likely improve quality of life and may affect outcome (if therapy is started prior to end organ damage).

*Sibs who are younger than age ten years at the time of diagnosis of the proband, as well as sibs born subsequently.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Oral preparations of small molecule inhibitors targeting the ALK tyrosine kinase domain (e.g., crizotinib, ceritinib) have shown efficacy and minimal toxicity in children with ALK translocated tumors other than neuroblastoma.

Of affected individuals with refractory/relapsed neuroblastoma, response has only been identified in those with tumors resulting from germline ALK pathogenic variants, including a complete response in at least one individual [Mossé et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.