http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/androgen

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with androgen insensitivity syndrome, a complete evaluation by specialists in disorders of sex development (DSDs), which can include specialists in endocrinology, urology, gynecology, clinical genetics, psychology, and psychiatry [Hughes et al 2006, Parisi et al 2007, Douglas et al 2010], is ideal.

Treatment of Manifestations



A number of clinicians have sought to establish a consensus statement on management of DSD including AIS [Hughes & Deeb 2006]. A number of publications have subsequently discussed best management of these disorders. See Diamond & Beh [2008] (full text), Douglas et al [2010] (full text), Pasterski et al [2010] (full text), Wiesemann et al [2010] (full text), and Hughes et al [2012] (full text).

Assignment of sex of rearing. The issue of sex assignment in infancy when the child is being evaluated for ambiguous genitalia is paramount. It requires informed decision making by parents and healthcare personnel and should be resolved as early as possible, after a multidisciplinary evaluation has been completed.

Even in CAIS this may not always be easy. Cheikhelard et al [2008] evaluated 29 individuals with CAIS; it was recommended that gonads be retained at least until the completion of spontaneous puberty and the possibility of virilization be evaluated before management decisions are made.

Psychological counseling and use of support groups can be of benefit [Cull & Simmonds 2010, Hughes et al 2012].

Gender identity has become a topic of increasing importance due to the possibility of changes in sex assignment over time [Kolesinska et al 2014].

Issues of sexual orientation regardless of gender phenotype have also become increasingly important to explore and discuss [Brunner et al 2016].

CAIS



A critical consideration of any surgical intervention is the nature and timing of such intervention; thus, surgeons need to be involved with the affected individuals and pediatrician in any such decisions [Purves et al 2008, Munoz & Swan 2010]. Vidal et al [2010] reviewed the evolution of surgical techniques for ‘feminization’ and ‘masculinization’ and their possible outcomes.

A common practice is to remove the testes after puberty when feminization of the affected individual is complete, since feminization occurs partly by testicular estrogen and partly by peripheral conversion of androgen to estrogen.

The rationale for postpubertal gonadectomy is that testicular malignancy, which develops at the usual rate for cryptorchid testes, seldom occurs before puberty [Hannema et al 2006]. Prepubertal gonadectomy is now only considered if inguinal testes are physically or esthetically uncomfortable, and if inguinal herniorrhaphy is necessary. In this event, estrogen replacement therapy is necessary to initiate puberty, maintain feminization, and avoid osteoporosis.

However, the issue of gonadectomy is controversial. Some have argued that the true risk for malignant transformation of the gonads is small and have suggested postpubertal gonad biopsy as opposed to removal [Hughes et al 2006, Parisi et al 2007, Patel et al 2016], which would allow affected individuals to retain a natural source of androgen production and avoid exogenous hormone replacement.

In one study of 48 individuals diagnosed with either CAIS or PAIS, gonadoblastomas were observed in 9/30 (30%) of individuals with CAIS and 3/18 (16%) of individuals with PAIS, suggesting that the risk of gonadal malignancy may be greater than previously reported; the authors suggest earlier rather than later prophylactic gonadectomy [Liu et al 2014]. Another study found the frequency of gonadal tumor in individuals with CAIS was 13/48 (27%) and in those with PAIS was 2/21 (9%), with similar conclusions regarding the time of gonadectomy [Jiang et al 2016].

Vaginal dilatation to augment vaginal length and to avoid dyspareunia is typically the treatment of choice for those with short vaginal length. If this method fails, new treatments of blind vagina have been proposed, including autologous buccal mucosal graft vaginoplasty and enhanced balloon vaginoplasty [Zhao et al 2009, El Saman et al 2011]. Recent studies that examined the long-term outcomes of vaginoplasty with autologous buccal micromucosa indicated a high degree of satisfaction [Li et al 2014]. In addition, a study reported that peritoneal vaginoplasty appeared to be superior to ileal vaginoplasty [Huang et al 2014]. However, surgical reconstruction frequently requires maintenance vaginal dilatation to decrease the likelihood of future stricture.

The question of how much and when to disclose the diagnosis of CAIS to an affected individual has not been resolved uniformly; however, it has become obvious that explanation of the diagnosis in an empathic setting is much preferable to systematic concealment or self-discovery of the diagnosis in an environment devoid of support from family, professionals, and other affected individuals [Conn et al 2005].

PAIS with Predominantly Female Genitalia (Incomplete AIS)



The issues are similar to those discussed under CAIS, except prepubertal gonadectomy helps avoid the emotional discomfort of increasing clitoromegaly at the time of puberty.

In instances in which the diagnosis of PAIS is difficult to establish because of the presence of somatic mosaicism, a change of sex assignment can result in concomitant problems [Köhler et al 2005].

PAIS with Ambiguous Genitalia or Predominantly Male Genitalia



The assignment of sex in an infant with ambiguous genitalia is a complex process that requires timely assessment by a multidisciplinary team in consultation with the family and should be resolved as early as possible. Aside from purely anatomic and surgical considerations, the choice of a male sex-of-rearing demands a therapeutic trial with pharmacologic doses of androgen to try to predict potential androgen responsiveness at puberty. Furthermore, appreciable phallic growth in response to administered androgen facilitates reconstructive surgery.

In instances in which maximum information is being gathered on an infant with no family history of AIS before sex is assigned, sequence analysis of AR may be considered; however, the lower probability of detecting an AR variant in individuals with the PAIS phenotype and the poor positive predictive value of any given variant regarding AIS phenotype need to be considered when making decisions about sex assignment.

It has also been reported that the length of the AR exon 1 CAG repeat can influence the efficacy of testosterone treatments: individuals with shorter repeat lengths are more likely to respond to hormonal treatments [Zitzmann 2009]. However, the efficacy of CAG repeat length as a possible marker to assess hormonal treatment must await further studies.

Based on experience with a small number of individuals, the role of long-term androgen pharmacotherapy in individuals with PAIS who are raised as males remains unclear. Response to androgen treatment may be substantial in individuals with certain missense variants in the DNA-binding domain of the androgen receptor [Weidemann et al 1998], and a recent study confirmed the difficulty of accurately predicting the efficacy of androgen treatment [Becker et al 2016]. Thus, considerable caution should be exercised with regard to androgen treatment [Werner et al 2010], in particular because special hormonal profiles to androgen insensitivity have often not been acknowledged in replacement strategies. It has been proposed that an external masculinization score in neonates could be a reasonable predictor of virilization at puberty in individuals with PAIS who have been assigned a male sex of rearing [Hughes et al 2012].

Gynecomastia that develops in puberty eventually requires reduction mammoplasty. It has been reported that tamoxifen has been used for treating pubertal gynecomastia in two sibs with PAIS [Saito et al 2014].

Those individuals with PAIS who are raised as females and who have gonadectomy after puberty may need combined estrogen and androgen replacement therapy, the latter to maintain libido.

MAIS



Men with MAIS often require reduction mammoplasty for treatment of gynecomastia.

A trial of androgen pharmacotherapy is recommended to attempt to improve virilization [Loy & Yong 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



The efficacy of androgen therapy in preventing manifestations such as gynecomastia is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations



Women with CAIS have decreased bone mineral density, regardless of timing of gonadectomy [Oakes et al 2008]. However, women with PAIS who choose not to undergo gonadectomy do not appear to be at high risk for decreased bone mineral density [Bertelloni et al 2010].

In addition to estrogen replacement therapy, supplemental calcium and vitamin D are recommended.

Regular weight-bearing exercises are encouraged to maintain bone health.

Bisphosphonate therapy may be indicated for those individuals with evidence of decreased bone mineral density and/or multiple fractures.

Surveillance



Appropriate measures include the following:

Monitoring of postnatal development of genitalia that were ambiguous at birth for changes that could lead to reconsideration of the assigned sex

For individuals assigned a male sex, evaluation during puberty for signs of gynecomastia

In adults, monitoring of bone mineral density through DEXA (dual-emission x-ray absorptiometry) scanning [Oakes et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include karyotype in sibs who have normal external female genitalia but have not yet undergone menarche.

Molecular genetic testing can be pursued next if a phenotypic female is found to have a 46,XY karyotype and if the AR variant in the family is known.

Androgen binding assays may be considered if an AR variant has not been identified in the family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Chen et al [2010] noted that Fkbp52 regulates AR transactivation activity and male urethra morphogenesis, suggesting that AR variants may require other genetic factors to produce hypospadias.

Apolipoprotein D (APOD) is a possible biomarker of AR function in AIS [Appari et al 2009].