http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/aved

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical neurologic examination – particularly reflex status, vibratory and position sense, gait, Babinski sign, tremor, dysarthria

Ophthalmologic examination for evidence of macular degeneration or retinitis pigmentosa and decreased visual acuity; electroretinogram (ERG)

Cardiac examination; echocardiography and ECG to assess for cardiomyopathy

Neurophysiologic examination; nerve conduction velocity (NCV) and somatosensory potentials (especially the central conduction time [Schuelke et al 1999]), which are good objective measures of neurologic improvement after vitamin E supplementation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The treatment of choice for AVED is lifelong high-dose oral vitamin E supplementation. Some symptoms (e.g., ataxia and intellectual deterioration) can be reversed if treatment is initiated early in the disease process [Schuelke et al 1999]. In older individuals, disease progression can be stopped, but deficits in proprioception and gait unsteadiness generally remain [Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014]. With treatment, plasma vitamin E concentrations can become normal.

In presymptomatic individuals, the manifestations of AVED can be prevented if vitamin E supplementation is initiated early [El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].

No large-scale therapeutic studies have been performed to determine optimal vitamin E dosage and to evaluate outcomes.

The reported vitamin E dose ranges from 800 mg to 1500 mg (or 40 mg/kg body weight in children) [Burck et al 1981, Harding et al 1985, Amiel et al 1995, Cavalier et al 1998, Schuelke et al 1999, Schuelke et al 2000b, Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004].

One of the following vitamin E preparations is used:

The chemically manufactured racemic form, all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate

The naturally occurring form, RRR-α-tocopherol

It is currently unknown whether affected individuals should be treated with all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate or with RRR-α-tocopherol. It is known that alpha-TTP (αTPP) stereoselectively binds and transports 2R-α-tocopherols [Weiser et al 1996, Hosomi et al 1997, Leonard et al 2002]. For some TTPA pathogenic variants, this stereoselective binding capacity is lost and affected individuals cannot discriminate between RRR- and SRR-α-tocopherol [Traber et al 1993, Cavalier et al 1998]. In this instance, affected individuals would also be able to incorporate non-2R-α-tocopherol stereoisomers into their bodies if they were supplemented with all-rac-α-tocopherol. Since potential adverse effects of the synthetic stereoisomers have not been studied in detail, it seems appropriate to treat with RRR-α-tocopherol, despite the higher cost.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



If vitamin E treatment is initiated in presymptomatic individuals (e.g., younger sibs of an index case), the symptoms of AVED do not develop [Amiel et al 1995, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].

Surveillance



During vitamin E therapy, the plasma vitamin E concentration should be measured at regular intervals (e.g., every 6 months), especially in children. Ideally the plasma vitamin E concentration should be maintained in the high normal range.

Some protocols call for measuring the total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter of plasma (TRAP). Although α-tocopherol only contributes 5%-10% to TRAP, this parameter appears to be the best surrogate marker for clinical improvement [Schuelke et al 1999]. Discontinuation of vitamin E supplementation, even temporarily, leads to a drop in plasma vitamin E concentration within two to three days and to a prolonged drop in TRAP, even after reinitiating vitamin E supplementation [Kohlschütter et al 1997, Schuelke et al 2000b].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with AVED should avoid:

Smoking because it considerably lowers TRAP and reduces plasma vitamin E concentrations [Sharpe et al 1996];

Occupations requiring quick responses or good balance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Predictive testing should be offered to all sibs of a proband, as timely treatment with vitamin E supplementation may completely avert the clinical manifestations of the disease.

All relatives at risk, especially younger sibs of a proband, should be evaluated for vitamin E deficiency.

If plasma vitamin E concentration is low, the person should be tested for presence of the TTPA pathogenic variants found in the proband so that individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants can be treated promptly with vitamin E supplementation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Reduced vitamin E levels are associated with low fertility and embryo resorption in mice [Traber & Manor 2012] and α-tocopherol transfer protein is highly expressed in the human placenta [Müller-Schmehl et al 2004]; therefore, it is advisable to keep vitamin E levels in the high normal range during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Because of abnormal position sense in the extremities, individuals with AVED may have difficulty riding a bicycle or driving a car. Before attempting to drive a car, affected individuals need to be tested by a physician to determine whether they can drive safely.