http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/barth

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and medical needs in an individual diagnosed with Barth syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count and differential

Echocardiogram

ECG

Plasma amino acids

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Management of heart failure. There is no specific treatment for cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmia in Barth syndrome. Standard heart failure (HF) medications are used to improve symptoms, effect reverse remodeling of the ventricle, and improve ventricular function as measured by ejection fraction (EF).

These medications include ACE-inhibitors, beta blockers, and digoxin for typical outpatient management, and intravenous inotropes, including milrinone for in-patient management of acute decompensation.

Therapy received by 22 individuals in the French cohort [Rigaud et al 2013] included: 16/22 beta blockers, 9/22 beta blockers, 11/22 digoxin, 17/22 diuretics, 5/22 anticoagulants, and 5/22 aspirin.

Although no studies are available to evaluate the effectiveness of medical therapy in males with Barth syndrome, when medications are stopped a decline in heart function is often observed. However, this can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from the natural fluctuations of the clinical phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description, Heart failure).

Aspirin should be considered for prevention of clot formation (and thus reduction in the risk for stroke) in males with severe cardiac dysfunction and/or marked LVNC. Suggested aspirin dose is 5 mg/kg daily for children and 81 to 325 mg daily for adults.

The potential role of prophylactic antiarrhythmic medication or implantable cardiac defibrillator for primary arrhythmia prevention has not been clarified.

Cardiac transplantation has been successful when heart failure is severe and intractable [Mangat et al 2007, Roberts et al 2012]; however, given the natural history of improving ventricular function after infancy, cardiac transplantation should be carefully considered.

Management of neutropenia. The treatment of neutropenia in children with Barth syndrome varies, including regular administration of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), administration of G-CSF during times of high risk only (e.g., surgery or infection), prophylactic antibiotics, and other preventive treatment strategies.

Early on, it was suggested that the administration of G-CSF during times of suspected or known bacterial infection may be effective in reducing the incidence of severe infections [Cox et al 1995]. The usual starting dose of G-CSF is 2-3 μg/kg/dose with a frequency of administration ranging from twice a week to every other day [Clarke et al 2013].

In 83 patients, 42 of whom had been treated with G-CSF, the median dose was 2.78 ± 0.78 (SEM) μg/kg/dose (range: 0.45-12.8 μg/kg/dose) [Dale et al 2013]. On average, G-CSF was begun at age 5.8 years, with an average exposure of 7.3 years; none developed acute myeloid leukemia, and treatment responses to G-CSF were maintained long-term.

Of note, although neutropenia appears to improve with G-CSF treatment, in the French cohort in which six affected males were actively treated with G-CSF, two developed a severe infection, including one episode of septic shock [Rigaud et al 2013].

Nutrition. Uncooked cornstarch given prior to bedtime has been recommended as a means of avoiding muscle protein loss overnight. Specific dosing according to age and weight can be obtained from the Barth Syndrome Foundation [Avery 2006].

Educational support in school. The excessive fatigue that boys with Barth syndrome experience and the characteristic cognitive phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description) warrant educational support during the early school-age years [Mazzocco et al 2007] with particular attention to mathematics [Raches & Mazzocco 2012].

Physical therapy. The goal should be attainment of development milestones and functional outcomes while at the same time monitoring cardiovascular status [Jarvis et al 2001].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Antibiotic prophylaxis has been used to prevent recurrent infections. In the French study of 22 patients, four received antibiotic prophylaxis [Rigaud et al 2013].

As males with Barth syndrome may be predisposed to hypoglycemia, episodes of fasting (such as prior to surgery) should be as short as possible and accompanied by intravenous glucose infusion [Schlame 2013].

Potassium issues:

Increased risk for hypokalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome can rapidly become potassium-depleted during a gastrointestinal illness (as would anyone with marked muscular hypoplasia) [Kelley 2002], serum potassium levels should be monitored during episodes of diarrhea.

Increased risk for hyperkalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome lack normal muscle “reservoir” for potassium, they can rapidly develop hyperkalemia when given intravenous fluids containing potassium [Kelley 2002]; thus, serum potassium levels should be monitored during the administration of intravenous fluids.

Because of their growth delay, males with Barth syndrome have lower than normal caloric requirements, and attempts to induce growth by overfeeding can lead to chronic diarrhea [Kelley 2002].

Surveillance



Height and weight should be monitored on a regular basis with consideration of Barth syndrome-specific growth patterns [Roberts et al 2012].

Standardized cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitoring should be considered at least yearly [Spencer et al 2005].

A low threshold for performing an electrophysiologic study to assess for a potentially serious arrhythmia is appropriate, especially in the presence of symptoms such as palpitations and syncope, abnormal arrhythmia screening tests, or a family history of sudden death [Spencer et al 2005].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid the following:

The use of rectal thermometers in those with neutropenia

The use of succinylcholine, as non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers could have a prolonged effect [Schlame 2013]

The use of human growth hormone is usually discouraged, as the majority of affected males will attain normal stature by adulthood.

Although the use of sevoflurane has been reported without adverse effects, the muscular involvement in Barth syndrome may increase the risk for malignant hyperthermia compared to the general population [Schlame 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger brothers of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the TAZ pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs.

If the TAZ pathogenic variant in the family is not known, testing by means of MLCL:CL ratio (if available) can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs.

If MLCL:CL ratio is not available, a combination of urine organic acid analysis, complete blood count with differential, and echocardiogram may be able to clarify the genetic status of at-risk male sibs. However, such testing cannot completely exclude a diagnosis of Barth syndrome.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Given that Barth syndrome has been variably associated with different prenatal complications including intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios, intrauterine ventricular dysfunction, and hydrops fetalis [Cardonick et al 1997, Steward et al 2010], it seems prudent to recommend that pregnancies of male fetuses known to have Barth syndrome be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician. Of note, there are no specific recommendations regarding mode, timing, or location of delivery.


Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Pantothenic acid. The original report of successful treatment of Barth syndrome with pantothenic acid [Ostman-Smith et al 1994] was not substantiated by later reports [Kelley 2002, Rugolotto et al 2003].

Coenzyme Q10. The rationale behind the use of coenzyme Q10 is based on the fact that both coenzyme Q10 and 3-methylglutaconic acid (3-MGC) can be produced from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP), an intermediate in the synthesis of cholesterol. Thus, if coenzyme Q10 production is impaired, more DMAPP could potentially be shunted towards the production of 3-MGC [Costeff et al 1998]. However, no formal study has been undertaken to prove the efficacy of coenzyme Q10 therapy in males with Barth syndrome. In a study of 15 males with Barth syndrome, three took coenzyme Q10 [Spencer et al 2011].

Carnitine. Although early reports claimed significant benefit from carnitine supplementation in males with Barth syndrome [Ino et al 1988], subsequent reports identified rapid deterioration in cardiac function in some cases with carnitine supplementation [Ostman-Smith et al 1994, Kelley 2002]. Thus, unless plasma carnitine levels are low, its supplementation has no role in the treatment of Barth syndrome.

Arginine. Because low plasma arginine levels detected in males with Barth syndrome [Rigaud et al 2013, Vernon et al 2014] could contribute to growth delay and cardiac abnormalities by impairing protein synthesis, it has been proposed that oral arginine supplementation be used. Improvements in ventricular function have also been noted concurrently with normalization of the amino acid profile [R Kelley, personal communication]. However, to date no formal assessments of the efficacy of this treatment have been published.