http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bcns

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline measurement of head circumference, preferably with plotting on a chart that accounts for height. Evidence of rapid increase in centiles should prompt further investigation to exclude hydrocephalus.

Physical examination for birth defects of clinical significance (e.g., orofacial clefts, polydactyly)

X-rays to evaluate for rib and vertebral anomalies and falx calcification

Ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of strabismus, cataract, orbital cyst, microphthalmia, and pigmentary changes of the retinal epithelium

Evaluation by a dentist or orthodontist familiar with NBCCS; jaw x-ray (orthopantogram) in individuals age eight years or older to evaluate for jaw keratocysts and other anomalies

Skin examination by a dermatologist familiar with NBCCS

Ultrasound examination of the ovaries to evaluate for ovarian fibromas prior to pregnancy

Echocardiography in the first year of life to evaluate for cardiac fibromas

Clinical genetics consultation

Because mesenteric and pleural cysts are rare, evaluation is not necessary in the absence of symptoms.

Treatment of Manifestations



Manifestations should be treated by specialists (e.g., oral surgeon, dermatologist, plastic surgeon, pediatrician, clinical geneticist) experienced with the condition.

Keratocysts usually require surgical excision.

Early treatment of BCCs is essential to prevent long-term cosmetic problems, particularly on the face. The priorities are to ensure complete eradication of aggressive BCCs, and to preserve normal tissue to prevent disfigurement. Surgical excision is supplemented by a number of other possible treatments including cryotherapy and laser treatment for early lesions and photodynamic therapy. Photodynamic therapy is particularly suitable for thin lesions of <2 mm on ultrasound [Basset-Seguin et al 2014]. Surgical treatment using Mohs' microsurgery [Mohs et al 1980] appears particularly effective.

Systemic treatment with retinoids (e.g., etretinate) is possible but often not well tolerated.

Treatment of individuals with severe BCC manifestations and/or advanced lesions with sonic hedgehog inhibitors such as vismodegib is now possible. Although side effects are common and quite severe there is a high resolution of advanced lesions and reduction in new BCCs [Sekulic et al 2012]. Sonic hedgehog inhibitors may be particularly helpful with lesions around the eyes [Ozgur et al 2015].

Cardiac fibromas may be asymptomatic and can be monitored by a pediatric cardiologist.

If ovarian fibromas require surgical treatment, preservation of ovarian tissue is recommended, although it involves a risk of recurrence [Seracchioli et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Affected individuals should cover up exposed skin by wearing long sleeves, high collars, and hats; complete sunblock should be used.

Surveillance



Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computed tomography (CT) scans should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity. A recent consensus meeting has suggested annual head MRI scans until age eight years in affected children [Bree et al 2011], but this would require general anesthesia for many children and is probably not now justified in PTCH1-related NBCCS with only a 2% risk. However, it may well be justified in infants with SUFU pathogenic variants [Smith et al 2014].

No other tumors occur at a frequency that warrants surveillance above that offered to members of the general population.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Use of radiotherapy can lead to the development of thousands of BCCs in the radiation field [Strong 1977, Evans et al 1991a] and therefore should be avoided if there are alternative treatments, especially in childhood. If the treating team believes that no other treatment modality is possible, radiotherapy should be used through as few skin ports as possible.

Diagnostic x-rays should be used sparingly.

Individuals with NBCCS should be advised to avoid direct sun exposure as much as possible. Excessive sun exposure increases the likelihood of developing BCCs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives, including children, of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance (see Surveillance) for complications of NBCCS (most notably medulloblastoma in children and jaw cysts and BCCs in adults) and the need to avoid x-rays and sun exposure (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

Clinical examination and x-rays of the skull for calcification if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known; these may be less likely to clarify the genetic status in a very young child because of the age-related features of NBCCS.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Since individuals with NBCCS have a large head circumference, a woman who is carrying an affected fetus should be assessed for the need for either early induction of labor or caesarean section delivery due to cephalopelvic disproportion.

Therapies Under Investigation



Photodynamic therapy (with infra-red light) showed early promise and appears safe [Haylett et al 2003]. A recent study showed outcomes in 33 individuals with NBCCS treated with photodynamic therapy (PDT) with a near-60% control rate [Loncaster et al 2009].

Aminolevulinic acid has been investigated [Itkin & Gilchrest 2004, Oseroff et al 2005]. It is usually used in conjunction with PDT [Loncaster et al 2009].

Topical treatment with 5-fluorouracil (Efudex®) or imiquimod (5%) has been investigated [Kagy & Amonette 2000, Marks et al 2001, Stockfleth et al 2002]. A recent review suggested control rates approaching 90% for superficial BCCs and 50% for aggressive or nodular BCCs with imiquimod [Alessi et al 2009].

Topical 5-fluorouracil appears effective for superficial multicentric BCCs without follicular involvement but should not be used for deeply invasive BCCs.

Recently topical use of sonic hedgehog antagonists has entered clinical trials and is showing promise [Saran 2010]. Systemic use of sonic hedgehog antagonists in individuals with NBCCS who have advanced or refractory BCCs has also been effective [Sekulic et al 2012, Tang et al 2012], with a 43% response rate in 63 affected individuals with locally advanced BCCs. Response rates were very high in individuals with NBCCS but 53% discontinued therapy because of adverse side effects [Tang et al 2012]. Sonic hedgehog antagonists may be particularly useful for periocular lesions [Ozgur et al 2015]. A recent report suggests that anti-sonic hedgehog agents may also resolve keratocysts when given for BCC treatment [Goldberg et al 2011].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.