http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bethlem

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



Bethlem myopathy. To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Bethlem myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of degree of muscle weakness and mobility

Joint examination for contractures

Physiotherapy assessment and advice regarding stretches/splints for contractures and mobility aids

Possibly orthopedic evaluation if surgery is to be considered for tendon Achilles contractures

Assessment of respiratory status

Seek history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence.

Inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD). To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Ullrich CMD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation of degree of muscle weakness and mobility

Examination of back for scoliosis

Joint examination for contractures and hyperlaxity

Physiotherapy assessment and advice regarding stretches/splints for contractures and mobility aids such as swivel walkers and standing frames to achieve upright posture and protect against the development of scoliosis and other contractures

Possibly x-rays of thoracolumbar spine and orthopedic evaluation if scoliosis is clinically suspected

Possibly orthopedic evaluation if hip dislocation is suspected or surgery is to be considered for tendon Achilles contractures

Assessment of respiratory status

Seek history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence.

Inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry.

Assessment of growth and feeding. Feeding difficulties may manifest as failure to thrive or excessive time taken to finish eating a meal.

Treatment of Manifestations




Bethlem myopathy

Physiotherapy and possibly orthopedic management of contractures are useful to maintain mobility. Contractures may be dynamic and may require stretching and splinting.

Symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation respond well to noninvasive respiratory support such as mask ventilation [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Approximately two thirds of individuals over age 50 years need supportive aids for outdoor mobility [Jöbsis et al 1999].


Ullrich CMD

Children require active physiotherapy management as soon as the diagnosis is established to promote mobility and independence. Early mobilization in standing frames is important to achieve upright posture and protect against the development of scoliosis and other contractures.

Contractures tend to be aggressive and may require surgery.

Feeding difficulties may manifest as failure to thrive or excessive time taken to finish eating a meal. Consultation with a nutrition specialist may be required to boost calorie intake; for serious problems, feeding by gastrostomy may be the best solution to promote a normal weight gain.

Respiratory support with nocturnal ventilation usually becomes necessary in the first or second decade and can be effective in reducing symptoms, promoting quality of life, and allowing normal schooling [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Scoliosis frequently develops in the first or second decade and requires active management including surgery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prophylaxis of chest infections with vaccination and physiotherapy as well as early and aggressive use of antibiotics may prevent further respiratory problems in both disorders.

Surveillance




Bethlem myopathy

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry)

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly annually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.


Ullrich CMD

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, scoliosis, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Once scoliosis is evident, regular orthopedic follow up

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry);

Clinical assessment of nutritional status

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly biannually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For a pregnant woman with a collagen VI-related disorder, no specific pregnancy management issues exist; however, prenatal physiotherapy may be indicated.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.