http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bscl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSCL), the following clinical evaluations are recommended:

Complete blood count

Serum concentration of electrolytes, AST, alanine transaminase, urea, creatinine, insulin, C-peptide, triglycerides, and cholesterol

Oral glucose tolerance test; when appropriate, clamp glucose homeostasis study

Ultrasound of the liver to evaluate liver size and fatty content

Echocardiogram to evaluate for cardiac hypertrophy

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for kidney size

Physical examination for orthopedic complications including reduced hip mobility and genu valgum

Skeletal survey, especially of the long bones, to evaluate for bone cysts

Bone age and assessment of sexual maturity rating/pubertal status

Complete ophthalmologic examination, including slit lamp examination, to evaluate for ophthalmologic complications due to hyperlipemia and/or diabetes mellitus

Assessment of cognitive ability with age-appropriate scales

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Restriction of total fat intake between 20% and 30% of total dietary energy is often sufficient to maintain normal triglyceride serum concentration.

Fibric acid derivatives and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids derived from fish oils can be tried for the treatment of extreme hypertriglyceridemia.

Leptin treatment has proven successful in controlling both hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes mellitus [Garg et al 1999, Beltrand et al 2007, Ebihara et al 2007]. Despite the absence of well-controlled randomized studies that could provide a more thorough assessment of the possible adverse effects of leptin therapy, the United States Food and Drug Administration granted approval of leptin administration [Tsoukas et al 2015].

Management of diabetes mellitus does not differ from that of childhood-onset diabetes mellitus.

Special education is required for individuals with psychomotor retardation or intellectual disability.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Dietary restriction of total fat intake may prevent hypertriglyceridemia (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Periodic screening for glycosuria as a manifestation of diabetes mellitus

For individuals with diabetes mellitus, follow-up in a diabetes clinic every six months to monitor for possible retinal, peripheral nerve, and renal complications

Yearly cardiac ultrasound and EKG

Yearly or biennial liver ultrasound examination to detect fatty infiltration

Ultrasound surveillance is a noninvasive procedure that can, along with serum lipid concentrations and liver enzymes, provide information on the degree of lipid control and compliance with the fat-restricted diet.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Excessive dietary fat intake should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Affected pregnant women should be followed in a high-risk pregnancy care unit by a multidisciplinary team including a specialist in fetal medicine and an expert in diabetic management. Pregnancy may increase the risk of diabetic decompensation. Babies born to women with diabetes are at an increased risk for fetal anomalies and postnatal complications compared to babies born to women without diabetes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Other drugs, including fenfluramine, have no proven efficacy and should be avoided.