http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ca5a-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with carbonic anhydrase VA (CA-VA) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of serum lactate, plasma ammonia, serum glucose, blood gases, plasma amino acids, urine ketone bodies, and urine organic acid profiles (during periods of illness; when stable for monitoring, preferably fasting)

Liver function parameters (coagulation, albumin, AST, ALT) as acute liver failure can occur in the urea cycle disorders which are metabolically similar

Consideration of:

Brain MRI to define extent of or to exclude brain edema

Neurodevelopmental testing

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



During acute episodes. Admit to the hospital children with insufficient intake or refusal to take anything orally and/or signs of metabolic decompensation such as encephalopathy. The following are recommended:

Always provide IV fluids (with glucose at maintenance doses) and extra calories via IV lipids; restrict protein intake if plasma ammonia is elevated.

Always monitor plasma ammonia, serum lactate, serum glucose, blood gases, electrolytes, and liver parameters.

Consider administration of carglumic acid (which – though not approved yet for this indication – enhances CPS1 activity and thus partially compensates for reduced HCO3- resulting from CA-VA deficiency). In the three children who were given carglumic acid during the acute phase, hyperammonemia and clinical symptoms resolved within 12 hours. Without carglumic acid, hyperammonemia persisted longer (i.e., an additional 1-2 days).

Other ammonia-lowering medications such as sodium benzoate would also be reasonable.


To prevent metabolic decompensation during any catabolic state (viral illness or fasting conditions)

Use a sick day formula (extra calories, with limited proteins and extra lipids).

Monitor plasma ammonia, serum glucose, blood gases, serum lactate, and plasma amino acids (frequency according to patient’s clinical state and physician’s expertise).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



There is no evidence to date that use of a special diet and/or cofactor (zinc) treatment during periods of wellness prevents metabolic decompensations.

Surveillance



Follow up with a metabolic disease specialist every three to six months for physical and neurologic examinations. Consider neurodevelopmental testing and measurement of: plasma ammonia and amino acids (to check for chronic hyperammonemia and citrulline deficiency as well as general nutritional state); serum lactate and glucose; blood gases; liver parameters; and urine organic acids.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Acetazolamide should be avoided, as it inhibits carbonic anhydrase activity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



When both CA5A pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate all sibs in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt treatment when symptoms appear.

Of note, in some families, asymptomatic (older) sibs were found to have biallelic CA5A pathogenic variants through family screening [van Karnebeek et al 2014b]. This finding suggests a possible “susceptibility period” during childhood after which individuals with biallelic CA5A pathogenic variants may no longer be at risk of developing signs of CA-VA deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



For an affected mother. No pregnancy manaagement issues are known.


For an affected child

No special management is required during pregnancy.

Delivery in hospital is indicated with monitoring for several days (including physical examination and measurement of plasma ammonia, serum lactate, serum glucose, blood gases, plasma amino acids, and urine organic acids).

Therapies Under Investigation



Zinc treatment to enhance residual CA-VA activity is under investigation.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.