http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/canavan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with neonatal/infantile (severe) Canavan disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Brain MRI

Developmental assessment

Nutritional assessment

Treatment of Manifestations




Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Treatment is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious diseases, and protecting the airway.

Children benefit from physical therapy to minimize contractures and to maximize abilities and seating posture, from other therapies to enhance communication skills (especially in those with a more gradual clinical course), and from early intervention and special education programs.

Seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

A feeding gastrostomy may be required to maintain adequate intake and hydration in the presence of swallowing difficulties.

Diamox® seems to reduce intracranial pressure.

Botox® injections may be used to relieve spasticity.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. These individuals may require speech therapy or tutoring but require no special medical care.

Prevention of Secondary Complications




Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Contractures and decubiti need to be prevented by exercise and position changes.

Feeding difficulties and seizures increase the risk of aspiration, which can be reduced with use of a G-tube for feeding.

Surveillance



Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease. Follow up at six-month intervals to evaluate developmental status and evidence of any new problems is suggested.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. Annual routine follow up is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation




Humans

Gene transfer to the brains of two children with Canavan disease using a nonviral vector was well tolerated [Leone et al 2000, Janson et al 2002]. Some biochemical, radiologic, and clinical changes may have occurred; however, the children continued to follow the course of those with untreated Canavan disease.

In ten children with Canavan disease, multisite injection with AAV2 as the vector for ASPA was well tolerated [McPhee et al 2006]. Three developed AAV2 neutralizing antibodies. No children improved.

Lithium citrate may reduce N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) concentration in the brain. Six persons with Canavan disease given lithium citrate for 60 days were reported to have reduced NAA in the basal ganglia and mild improvement in frontal white matter [Assadi et al 2010]. The clinical significance of use of lithium citrate is not known.

The enzyme defect in Canavan disease leads to decreased levels of acetate in the brain. In a clinical trial with glycerol triacetate in two persons with Canavan disease the compound was well tolerated; however, there was no clinical improvement [Madhavarao et al 2009]. It is speculated that higher doses of glycerol triacetate may be needed.


Animal models

A knock-out mouse has been created, with a phenotype similar to that of human Canavan disease [Matalon et al 2000]. This model is being used to investigate pathophysiology [Surendran et al 2004] gene therapy and other modes of treatment [Matalon et al 2003].

Gene therapy with AAV2 was given to knock-out Canavan disease mice: localized improvement did not spread to the entire brain [Matalon et al 2003].

Stem cell therapy in knock-out Canavan disease mice was done in collaboration with Genzyme Corporation: The stem cells produced some oligodendrocytes but not enough to make myelin [Surendran et al 2004].

Enzyme replacement therapy using native ASPA and pegylated ASPA (i.e., ASPA in which covalent attachment of polyethylene glycol polymer chains masks the enzyme from the host allowing for longer circulation and less renal clearance) were injected into the peritoneum of Canavan disease mice. Preliminary results show that the enzyme passed the blood brain barrier and there was a decrease of NAA in the brain. These experiments were short term; longitudinal studies are being planned [Zano et al 2011].

A mouse that seems to have a Canavan disease phenotype was produced by using the mutagen ethylenenitrosourea (ENU) to change the residue Gln193 to a termination codon in exon 4 (577C>T) [Traka et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.