http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ccd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Full skeletal survey including the hands and feet, if not performed already as part of the initial diagnostic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Dental evaluation by a dentist familiar with CCD and its management

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Dental. Early referral to a dental clinic familiar with CCD allows for timely planning of necessary procedures.

The dental problems that need to be addressed include the retention of deciduous dentition, the presence of supernumerary teeth, and the non-eruption of the permanent dentition.

The goal of treatment is to improve appearance and to provide a functioning masticatory mechanism. The goals may be achieved with prosthetic replacements, with or without prior extractions; by removal of the supernumerary teeth followed by surgical repositioning of the permanent teeth; and by a combination of surgical and orthodontic measures for actively erupting and aligning the impacted permanent teeth. For a detailed review, see Becker et al [1997a] and Becker et al [1997b], and Roberts et al [2013].

Generally, an aggressive approach to coordinate multiple oral surgeries for removal of primary dentition and exposure of permanent dentition is recommended, as watchful waiting for spontaneous eruption after initial delay is not effective.

Speech therapy may be required during periods of dental treatment.

Sinus and middle ear infections require aggressive and timely treatment; tympanostomy tubes should be considered when middle ear infections are recurrent [Visosky et al 2003].

Craniofacial. The fontanels close with time in the majority of individuals and cranial remodeling is usually not necessary.

If the cranial vault defect is significant, the head should be protected from blunt trauma; helmets may be advised for high-risk activities. In these cases, evaluation by a craniofacial surgeon and rehabilitation services are indicated.

Affected individuals may consider having correction of the depressed forehead or lengthening of the hypoplastic clavicles for cosmetic reasons. There have been reports of successful surgical interventions in a very small number of affected individuals [Kang et al 2009, Sewell et al 2013].

Skeletal. If bone density is below normal on DEXA, treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplementation should be considered. Preventive treatment for osteoporosis should be initiated at a young age since peak bone mineral density is achieved in the second and third decade.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Anesthetic management of those with CCD needs to be carefully planned since affected individuals may present with a large brachycephalic head with mandibular prognathism and maxillary underdevelopment. In addition, the depressed nasal bridge and hypoplastic sinuses disturb nasal breathing. The dental and craniofacial abnormalities result in predictably difficult airway management. If this is anticipated, an otolaryngologist should be consulted to assist in securing the airway, and alternative anesthetic approaches, including neuraxial block, should be considered [Ioscovich et al 2010].

Surveillance



Children with CCD should be monitored for the following:

Orthopedic complications

Dental abnormalities

Upper-airway obstruction. Because of the craniofacial involvement, signs and symptoms of obstructive upper-airway disease should be elicited. When symptoms are suggestive, a sleep study is indicated and surgical intervention may be required.

Sinus and ear infections

Hearing loss. Regular audiometry in individuals with repeated ear infections allows the identification and early management of hearing loss if it develops.

Osteoporosis. DEXA to measure bone mineral density should be done early in adolescence and every five to ten years thereafter. If there are clinical signs of osteopenia (increased number of fractures), evaluation and treatment should be started earlier.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



To avoid head trauma, helmets and protective devices should be worn when participating in high-risk sports and activities.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



Pregnant women with CCD should be monitored closely for cephalopelvic disproportion, which may require delivery by cesarean section.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Individuals with CCD should by followed by their primary care physician and receive regular immunizations and anticipatory guidance as recommended.