http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cherubism

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with cherubism, the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiologic assessment to determine facial bone involvement

Orthodontic assessment

Ophthalmologic examination

Assessment of family history

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment protocols for cherubism are not well established since both ends of the spectrum (mild clinically unrecognized cases and severe cases with extensive bone loss) are seen. Given that cherubism is considered to be a self-limited condition that improves over time, treatment should be tailored to the individual's needs. Depending on the severity, surgery may be needed for functional and esthetic concerns.

Children with cherubism should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience for evaluation. A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team, medical geneticist, dentist, orthodontic specialist, ophthalmologist, and social worker.

Surgical interventions include curettage with or without bone grafting [Kozakiewicz et al 2001, Roginsky et al 2009]. Liposuction has also been used successfully to re-contour the jaws. Surgical interventions are likely to occur between ages five to 15 years in individuals with disfiguring enlargement of jaws or locally aggressive lesions associated with complications.

Orthodontic treatment is commonly required as the jaw distortion leads to permanent dental abnormalities including a malocclusive bite, premature loss of deciduous teeth, and widely spaced, misplaced, unerupted, or absent permanent teeth.

Ophthalmologic treatment is necessary in rare individuals in whom orbital manifestations such as lower lid retraction, proptosis, diplopia, globe displacement, and visual loss caused by optic atrophy are present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Early treatment (i.e., orthodontic and surgical reconstruction of the jaw) may reduce the risk for secondary complications such as upper airway obstruction, obstructive sleep apnea, and tooth displacement.

Surveillance



Generally, long-term follow up including clinical, radiographic, dental, orthodontic, and ophthalmologic evaluations is indicated [Silva et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



At-risk relatives could be offered clinical and radiographic evaluations given that manifestations may not be evident in all affected individuals. When the disease-causing mutation is known in the proband, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate relatives at risk for the disorder. This may allow mildly affected relatives to benefit from early surveillance and intervention.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



A mouse model for cherubism demonstrated that increased cytokine tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) production by myeloid cells is causative [Ueki et al 2007]. If TNF-α were found to be pathogenic in humans, anti-TNF therapies could provide new treatment options for cherubism.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Results in the two reports to date on the use of calcitonin in the treatment of cherubism have not been promising [Hart et al 2000, Lannon & Earley 2001].