http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/coq10-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic evaluation including brain MRI

Renal evaluation with particular attention to the presence of proteinuria

Cardiac evaluation including echocardiography with particular attention to possible hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Ophthalmologic evaluation with particular attention to possible retinopathy and optic atrophy

Audiometry with particular attention to possible sensorineural hearing loss

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Pharmacologic Treatment



Coenzyme Q10 supplementation. Individuals with primary CoQ10 deficiency may respond well to high-dose oral CoQ10 supplementation (ranging from 5 to 50 mg/kg/day). Soluble formulations are apparently more bioavailable [Desbats et al 2015a].

Treatment should be instituted as early as possible [Montini et al 2008] because it can limit disease progression and reverse some manifestations; however, established severe neurologic and/or renal damage cannot be reversed.

Individuals with the following genetic causes of primary CoQ10 deficiency apparently respond well to CoQ10 supplementation:

COQ4-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Neurologic signs responded to CoQ10 supplementation in a single individual reported to date with a heterozygous deletion encompassing COQ4 [Salviati et al 2012]; no response was observed in patients reported by Chung et al [2015].

COQ6-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Homozygotes for the pathogenic variants p.Gly255Arg or p.Ala353Asp responded [Heeringa et al 2011].

COQ8B-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. In a patient homozygous for a truncating pathogenic variant, edema resolved and proteinuria was significantly improved.

PDSS2-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. The only kindred reported responded [Rötig et al 2000].

Data for response to CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with mutation of other genes causing primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency are limited or lacking:

COQ8A-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. While most affected individuals respond poorly to CoQ10 supplementation, three individuals had a favorable response: one had objective stabilization of ataxia [Lagier-Tourenne et al 2008]; one had a dramatic and long-lasting improvement of dystonia and myoclonus after six months of treatment; and in one tremor and drawing ability improved [Mignot et al 2013].

COQ9-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. One patient with multiple-system disease characterized by intractable seizures, global developmental delay, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and renal tubular dysfunction did not respond to CoQ10 supplementation; however, this may be due to late diagnosis [Duncan et al 2009].

Ineffective treatments (or those without validated effects) for individuals with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency include the following CoQ10 derivatives:

Ubiquinol, the reduced form of CoQ10, has recently become commercially available; however, data on the therapeutic dosage and its efficacy are still lacking.

Short chain quinone analogs such as idebenone [Rötig et al 2000, López et al 2010] have been reported to cause clinical deterioration in individuals with CoQ10 deficiency [Hargreaves 2014].

Renal Disease



ACE inhibitors may be used in combination with CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with proteinuria [Heeringa et al 2011].

Renal transplantation is an option for those with end-stage renal disease [Salviati et al 2005].

Other



Treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, retinopathy, and sensorineural hearing loss is routine (see Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Early CoQ10 supplementation may prevent the onset of manifestations of primary CoQ10 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance



While surveillance depends on the specific genetic defect and on the clinical manifestations (see Table 1), it should always include periodic evaluations of the following: neurologic findings, urine analysis (for proteinuria) and renal function, ophthalmologic findings, and hearing.

Note: Because cardiomyopathy to date has been found only in the most severe phenotype (i.e., neonatal onset), cardiac evaluation should be performed at the time of diagnosis, but not periodically unless cardiac involvement has been documented.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Given the importance of early CoQ10 supplementation, it is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband who has primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those sibs who would benefit from early initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known and the diagnosis has been established by biochemical findings, one can consider measuring CoQ10 levels in skin fibroblasts of at-risk sibs [Desbats et al 2015b].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.