http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cutis-laxa

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Ortolani sign for detection of hip dislocation. Hip ultrasound examination as needed based on clinical findings.

Pelvic x-ray (1x only) to identify hip dysplasia in the event that hip dislocation has not been treated properly.

Assessment for inguinal hernias

Ophthalmologic examination, including refraction (for myopia), slit-lamp examination, fundus examination. Note: Slit-lamp examination allows diagnosis of corneal dysplasia, which was present in one individual.

Baseline neurodevelopmental evaluation

Brain MRI

EEG if seizures are suspected

Echocardiogram to look for evidence of floppy valves or more severe valvular dysplasia that can often be observed in a connective tissue disorder

Evaluation for a bleeding disorder linked to coagulation factor deficiencies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Repair of inguinal hernia(s)

Routine management of hip dislocation

Routine management of refractive errors

Early education services and developmental therapies with later special education supports

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs): valproate. Because treatment with valproate is often unsuccessful, carbamazepine can serve as a second-line drug and levetiracetam as a third-line drug; or a combination of AEDs can be used.

Psychological help as needed for self-image issues

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Treat for bleeding disorder linked to coagulation factor deficiency to prevent anemia.

Surveillance



Perform annual ophthalmologic examination, including refraction for evidence of myopia (which can be progressive) and fundus examination to inspect Bruch’s membrane.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to test older and younger sibs for presence of the ATP6V0A2 pathogenic variants found in the proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.