http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cyclic-n

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ELANE-related neutropenia, the following are recommended:

Dental examination for gingival and periodontal disease

Evaluation (particularly of those with severe congenital neutropenia) by an otolaryngologist and pulmonologist for chronic sinopulmonary inflammation and deep abscesses

Evaluation of individuals with severe congenital neutropenia for evidence of myelodysplasia or leukemia

Treatment of Manifestations



Conventional management includes prompt treatment of fevers and infections with antibiotics.

Individuals with abdominal pain require careful evaluation for the potentially lethal complications of peritonitis and bacteremia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is effective in elevating blood neutrophil counts in both congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia. G-CSF treatment ameliorates the symptoms and problems of infections in almost all affected individuals. (Although both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used to treat ELANE-related neutropenia, G-CSF is much more effective and associated with fewer adverse effects than GM-CSF.)

In cyclic neutropenia, G-CSF shortens the periods of neutropenia as well as the length of the neutropenic cycle. Treatment is known to be effective at least as early as age six months to one year. Studies indicate that treatment is effective with no adverse effects on growth, development, or pregnancy outcome with follow-up to age 18 years [Dale et al 2003; Dale, unpublished observations].

Treatment of cyclic neutropenia requires daily or alternate-day injections of G-CSF, normally in a dose of approximately 2 µg/kg/day. Individuals with congenital neutropenia often require higher doses (e.g., 5-10 µg/kg/day).

Common side effects of G-CSF include bone pain and headache, splenomegaly, and osteoporosis. Vasculitis, rashes, arthralgias, and glomerulonephritis have been infrequently reported [Dale et al 2003].


Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)

For affected individuals with a well-matched donor, HSCT may be the preferred treatment option [Choi & Levine 2010, Oshima et al 2010].

HSCT is the only alternative therapy for individuals with congenital neutropenia who are refractory to high-dose G-CSF or who undergo malignant transformation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Good dental hygiene with regular hygiene visits (several times per year) and careful brushing and flossing are recommended.

Surveillance



For those individuals with congenital neutropenia not undergoing HSCT, surveillance for evidence of malignant transformation to MDS/AML is critical to allow early therapeutic intervention. Observation should include the following:

General evaluations by parents and medical personnel several times a year

Blood counts several times a year

Annual bone marrow cytogenetic studies because of the frequent association of monosomy 7 and malignant transformation

Note: Although sequencing of the receptor for G-CSF (G-CSF-R) from peripheral blood may also provide evidence of evolution to MDS/AML [Ancliff et al 2003a], its clinical utility is not yet clearly established [Freedman & Alter 2002, Cassinat et al 2004, Beekman & Touw 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Evaluation of at-risk relatives can help identify those with mild or moderately severe disease who may benefit from treatment. If the family-specific ELANE pathogenic variant is known, molecular genetic testing can be used; otherwise serial ANCs can be evaluated.

Note: Complete blood counts (CBCs) obtained weekly for a month until an ANC lower than 0.2 x 109/L is documented in more than one sample confirms the diagnosis. A similar series of counts not showing neutropenia rules out this diagnosis.

Treatment of these individuals with G-CSF or any other modality should be based on medical history and the severity of symptoms. It is not yet clear if there are specific risks (i.e., osteoporosis, myelodysplasia, or leukemia) associated with administering G-CSF to such individuals, but conservative management is recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management 



Pregnancies in women with severe chronic neutropenia are at substantial risk for miscarriage.

A review of the records of 88 women (183 pregnancies) with congenital, cyclic, idiopathic or autoimmune neutropenia compared outcomes in those on G-CSF therapy during pregnancy with those not on G-CSF therapy during pregnancy [Boxer et al 2010]. In general the health of all the infants was equivalent for the two groups. Other findings included:

Reduced risk of fetal loss in the women treated during pregnancy.

Eleven complications (one premature rupture of membranes, two life-threatening infections, two minor infections, and six premature labors) in 55 women (123 pregnancies) not treated with G-CSF during pregnancy.

No life-threatening infections, no premature labors, five minor infections, and one patient who developed severe thrombocytopenia in 41 women (60 pregnancies) treated with G-CSF during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Unrelated cord blood transplantation for neutropenia is being investigated; outcome appears to depend on the closeness of the match [Mino et al 2004, Nakazawa et al 2004, Ferry et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions