http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dcm-ov

Management



Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment can favorably (and at times dramatically) affect the natural history of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Management of DCM includes (1) pharmacologic therapy and (2) pacemaker and implantable cardiac defibrillator device therapy for symptomatic and asymptomatic disease. Care should be provided by physicians skilled in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with heart failure and DCM.

Symptoms include those related to heart failure, arrhythmia, or stroke. Symptomatic DCM represents late disease. Full medical therapy (ACE inhibitors, beta blockers) with evaluation for antiarrhythmic therapy (e.g., pacemakers, implantable cardiac defibrillators) should be considered by cardiovascular specialists with expertise in the field.

Individuals with idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy should:

Be counseled that idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy is treatable even prior to the onset of symptoms, that treatment may result in remission of DCM, and may forestall symptomatic disease; and that treatment of symptomatic disease (heart failure, arrhythmias, or thromboembolic disease) improves survival and quality of life;

Understand the symptoms of heart failure, arrhythmia (including presyncope and syncope), and thromboemoblic disease, and be counseled to urgently seek medical care with the new presentation of any of these symptoms.

Training of relatives and/or caregivers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be suggested, particularly in families with a strong family history of sudden death and/or significant arrhythmias.

Cardiac transplantation remains the definitive treatment for progressive DCM and heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

Additional comprehensive guidelines are available [Yancy et al 2013].

Surveillance



An asymptomatic person with a known pathogenic variant. Cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) should be performed every one to three years.

An asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relative in a kindred with an established diagnosis of FDC in which the family pathogenic variant is unknown. Depending on age, cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) is indicated every three to five years. If an at-risk first-degree relative has evidence of idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy, the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

An asymptomatic first-degree relative of an individual with IDC in whom it is unknown if the IDC is familial should undergo cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every three to five years starting in childhood. If a first-degree at-risk relative shows evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy, a diagnosis of FDC is made and the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

For at-risk relatives with abnormal evaluation results that do not meet criteria for DCM but could be consistent with early DCM (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal systolic function, decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle, normal echocardiogram with ECG abnormality) [Burkett & Hershberger 2005, Hershberger et al 2010a, Hershberger & Siegfried 2011], full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease with history of myocardial infarction or history of exposure to cardiotoxic medications) and subsequent yearly screening are indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Using the strategy outlined in Evaluation of First-Degree Relatives of a Proband for Dilated Cardiomyopathy, it is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and preventive measures.

When the pathogenic variant(s) are known, relatives may be offered genetic testing to help clarify risk. However, the absence of a likely pathogenic variant in an unaffected relative should be interpreted with caution, as it is possible that some families may have two or more pathogenic variants.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In most cases, pregnancy is contraindicated in DCM.

Pregnant women with IDC or FDC should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician.

Asymptomatic women with a family history of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy may be at risk for peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) and pregnancy-associated cardiomyopathy (PACM). Although PPCM and PACM have traditionally been thought to have an etiology separate from familial dilated cardiomyopathy, evidence supporting a genetic basis is emerging [Elkayam et al 2005, Morales et al 2010, van Spaendonck-Zwarts et al 2010]. Healthcare providers must, therefore, be aware of the possibility of an underlying genetic cause for PPCM/PACM and follow guidelines for the evaluation of DCM (see Evaluation Strategy). Reproductive genetic counseling and genetic testing should be considered in these cases.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. A clinical trial for symptomatic LMNA DCM is underway [Author, personal communication (2015)].