http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dup7q11_23

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with the 7q11.23 duplication syndrome and to guide medical management, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters. Individuals with short stature should be evaluated for growth hormone deficiency.

Consideration of neuroimaging especially in individuals with macrocephaly and/or abnormal neurologic examination: brain MRI to evaluate for ventriculomegaly/hydrocephalus, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and/or white matter abnormalities. Note: Because sedation is likely to be necessary, this should be considered carefully and may not be necessary in every patient.

Cardiology evaluation

Evaluation by a cardiologist

Echocardiogram, including measurement of the aortic root and ascending aorta with computation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation

Genitourinary system evaluation

Ultrasound examination of the kidneys

Physical examination of males for cryptorchidism

In females with unilateral renal agenesis, evaluation of müllerian structures

Baseline ophthalmologic evaluation

Baseline audiologic evaluation

Clinical genetics evaluation/consultation for individualized assessment/recommendations and discussion of clinical manifestations, natural history, and recurrence risks

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Speech and language (preferably by an examiner who is experienced in evaluating children for childhood apraxia of speech)

Physical therapy

Occupational therapy (including assessment for sensory integration difficulties)

Social skills

Intellectual abilities

Adaptive behavior

Vocational skills

Assessment of behavior (preferably by a licensed psychologist) including:

Anxiety (especially social anxiety disorder, selective mutism, separation anxiety, generalized anxiety disorder)

Attention problems

Oppositional behavior/aggression. If indicated, refer for a functional behavioral assessment, preferably by a board-certified behavior analyst.

Autism spectrum disorder screening. If indicated, refer for gold-standard autism assessment (ADOS-2 [Lord et al 2012] and ADI-R [Lord et al 1994], plus clinical judgment) preferably by an examiner who is experienced with individuals who have social anxiety disorder.

Treatment of Manifestations



Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommendations include speech/language therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. Hippotherapy should be considered, especially for children who have difficulty with balance and children who have an autism spectrum disorder.

Psychological evaluation, psychiatric evaluation, and speech-language evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Childhood apraxia of speech. Intensive speech-language therapy (preferably by a speech-language pathologist who has specific training in treating this disorder) is recommended for children who have childhood apraxia of speech or signs of this disorder, in order to maximize effective oral communication and prevent or limit later language impairment and/or reading disorder.

Anxiety/selective mutism. Cognitive-behavioral intervention for anxiety (preferably by a licensed clinical psychologist) is recommended for those with social anxiety or selective mutism. Educators should be made aware of the signs and symptoms of social anxiety disorder and selective mutism and the appropriate educational interventions and support for children with these disorders. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated. For children who have selective mutism, co-treatment by the speech-language therapist and the psychologist should be strongly considered.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Applied behavior analysis (preferably conducted by a board-certified behavior analyst) or other empirically supported intervention for ASD is recommended for those with co-morbid ASD to address social communication difficulties.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Behavioral modifications in the home and school settings are recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Aggression. When shown, physical aggression should be assessed and treated immediately to prevent development of a long-standing pattern of aggression. Applied behavior analysis intervention is recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Oppositionality. Behavioral interventions are recommended to address oppositionality, with an emphasis on reinforcing positive behaviors. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Specific medical problems are treated in the following ways:

Hydrocephalus as needed with ventriculo-peritoneal shunting

Aortic dilation with beta blocker therapy in some affected individuals. Some with severe aortic dilation have required surgery [Zarate et al 2014, Morris et al 2015, Parrott et al 2015].

Strabismus in the usual manner

Recurrent otitis media in the usual manner

Poor feeding in infants. Feeding therapy

Constipation. Aggressive management at all ages to prevent encopresis and impaction

Growth hormone deficiency. Human growth hormone replacement therapy

Club feet. Casting

Surveillance




Table 2. 

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome 




Interval/Age
Test/Measurement




Infancy
Measurement of head circumference at every visit or at least every 3 monthsHearing evaluation


Annual
Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors & strabismusCardiology evaluationEchocardiogram to measure the aortic root & ascending aorta with calculation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation. Significant dilation may require more frequent monitoring and/or CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography.Occupational & physical therapy assessment (through age 6 years)Speech & language assessment (through age 6 years; annual assessment beyond age 6 years if moderate or severe speech/language disorder is present)Behavior assessment (attention, anxiety, opposition, aggression)


Every 3 years
Assessment of intellectual abilities & academic achievement


Adolescents/adults
Genetic counseling





Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]



Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.