http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ea1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with episodic ataxia type 1, the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed medical history of the individual

Neurologic examination

Initiation (and observation) of attacks of ataxia by either mild exercise or vestibular stimuli

EMG to confirm the presence of myokymia, particularly if it is not visible on examination

EEG to evaluate for epilepsy [Zuberi et al 1999, Eunson et al 2000, Chen et al 2007]

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Several drugs variably improve symptoms in affected individuals but, with the lack of clinical trials comparing the efficacy of these drugs, no single medication has been proven to be very effective. Thus, response to the following treatments may be poor.

Acetazolamide
(ACTZ), a carbonic-anhydrase (CA) inhibitor, may reduce the frequency and severity of the attacks in some but not all affected individuals. The mechanism by which ACTZ reduces the frequency and severity of the attacks is unclear. The recommended starting dosage is 125 mg once a day, given orally. However, individuals with good renal function may require higher daily doses, ranging from 8 to 30 mg/kg/day in one to four divided doses (not to exceed 1 g/day). ACTZ should not be prescribed to individuals with liver, renal, or adrenal insufficiency.

Chronic treatment with ACTZ may result in side effects including tiredness, paresthesias, rash, and formation of renal calculi; therefore, for some affected individuals treatment must be discontinued [Graves et al 2014, D’Adamo et al 2015].

Antiepileptic drugs
(AEDs) may significantly reduce the frequency of the attacks in responsive individuals; however, the response is heterogeneous as some individuals are particularly resistant to drugs [Eunson et al 2000].

Diphenylhydantoin treatment at a dose of 150-300 mg daily resulted in reasonable control of seizures in some individuals [VanDyke et al 1975]. In particular, phenytoin treatment at a dose of 3.7 mg/kg/day may improve muscle stiffness and motor performance [Kinali et al 2004]. Nevertheless, phenytoin should be used with caution in young individuals, as it may cause permanent cerebellar dysfunction and atrophy [De Marcos et al 2003].

Sulthiame 50-200 mg daily may reduce the attack rate. During this treatment abortive attacks were still noticed lasting a few seconds and troublesome side effects were paresthesias and intermittent carpal spasm.

Carbamazepine has been prescribed in doses up to 1600 mg daily [Eunson et al 2000]. The dose needs to be adjusted according to different factors including, age, weight, the particular carbamazepine product being used, responsiveness of the individual, and other medications being taken.

Lamotrigine ameliorates attacks in some affected individuals and therefore it has been proposed as an alternative treatment [Graves et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



In addition to the pharmacologic treatments mentioned above, behavioral measures such as avoidance of stress, abrupt movements, loud noises or caffeine intake may be used to reduce disease manifestations in either a symptomatic or an asymptomatic person.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Contractures occur in a small proportion of individuals and can be prevented by appropriate physiotherapy.

Surveillance



Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Known triggers of attacks should be avoided; physical exertion, emotional stress, and changes in environmental temperature are the most common triggers.

Marked generalized myokymia has been reported during induction of anesthesia [Kinali et al 2004].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from behavioral measures and avoidance of caffeine intake. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No published literature addresses management of the pregnancy of an affected mother or the effect of maternal EA1 on a fetus. However, affected women should be made aware that pregnancy may trigger attacks [Graves et al 2014] and the possible loss of balance and fall could endanger the fetus’s life. Moreover, several stressors that trigger attacks may cause breathing difficulties, thus, delivery by C-section should be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Morphologic studies on lateral gastrocnemius (LG) muscles derived from a mouse model of EA1 did not reveal changes in muscle mass, fiber type composition, or vascularization [Brunetti et al 2012].

Homozygous Val408Ala/Val408Ala pathogenic variants are embryonically lethal in an animal model of EA1 [Herson et al 2003], although this has not been reported in humans.