http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/efemp2-cutis-laxa

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with EFEMP2 -related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended:

Chest roentgenogram

Echocardiography

3D-CT scan

Lung function test

MR angiography (MRA) from head to pelvis

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Hernia. Routine repair is appropriate.

Pulmonary emphysema is treated symptomatically. Tracheostomy may be necessary when retrognathia leads to upper airway obstruction.

Arterial abnormalities. No definitive treatment is available. Based on experience in other related disorders (e.g., Marfan syndrome), treatment with beta-blockers or angiotensin receptor blockers can be considered when aortic root dilatation is present. However, the efficacy of these interventions in EFEMP2- related disorders has not been proven. Surgical repair of large aortic aneurysms (at risk for dissection) should be considered. Aortic aneurysm replacement has been performed successfully

Joint hypermobility can be supported by muscle reinforcing physical therapy.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular and pulmonary follow up starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis

Annual MRA from head to pelvis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid the following:

Cigarette smoking, which can worsen emphysema

Sun tanning, which can damage skin

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the EFEMP2 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No experience with pregnancy in an affected proband has been reported.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials related to this disorder.