http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/epp-xl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked protoporphyria (XLP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile if not performed as part of diagnostic testing

Assessment of hepatic function as well as imaging studies such as abdominal sonogram if cholelithiasis is suspected

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Acute photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment specific for this disease; furthermore, there is no specific treatment for the acute photosensitivity.

The pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Although several treatments have been proposed, most have been tried only in a single patient or a small number of patients. The only effective current treatment is prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light.

Use of protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats is indicated.

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows prevents exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Topical sunscreens are typically not useful; however, some tanning products containing creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent (e.g., zinc oxide) are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all.

Oral Lumitene™ (β-carotene) (120–180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600–800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. While oral beta-carotene has been used typically six to eight weeks before summer to reduce photosensitivity, its effectiveness may be limited [Minder et al 2009].

A systematic review of about 25 studies showed that the available data are unable to prove efficacy of treatments including beta-carotene, N-acetyl cysteine, and vitamin C [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Treatment of hepatic complications, which may be accompanied by motor neuropathy, is difficult.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988]

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002]

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, many transplant recipients experience a recurrence of the protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006]

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy in EPP [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].

Whatley et al [2008] reported some evidence of diminished iron stores in males with XLP; in one patient with iron deficiency, iron repletion decreased protoporphyrin accumulation and corrected the anemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance



Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies such as an abdominal sonogram is indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of alcohol and drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the ALAS2 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, at-risk relatives can be tested as newborns or infants so that those with the pathogenic variant can benefit from early intervention (sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of liver dysfunction.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



There is no information on pregnancy management in XLP. Based on experience with EPP pregnancy is unlikely to be complicated by XLP [Poh-Fitzpatrick 1997].

Therapies Under Investigation



Recent clinical trials with a subcutaneous insertion of a biodegradable, slow-released α-melanocyte stimulating hormone analogue, afamelanotide, that increases pigmentation by increasing melanin appear promising for the treatment of EPP (see Differential Diagnosis) and XLP [Harms et al 2009, Minder et al 2009, Minder 2010].

In Europe Phase 3 trials have been completed and the drug is currently approved for the management of EPP in Italy and pending EMA approval for other countries in the European Union.

In the US, Phase 2 trials have been completed and Phase 3 trials are currently underway in order for the drug to receive FDA approval.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.