http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/etha

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SCN9A-related inherited erythromelalgia (SCN9A-related IEM), the following are recommended:

Assessment of the pain management strategies used (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The pain of SCN9A-related IEM or secondary erythromelalgia is often refractory to treatment.

Reports on treatments in a series involve heterogeneous populations. In a report of 169 individuals with erythromelalgia of mixed etiologies, 84 medications or treatments were used [Davis et al 2000]. Response is highly variable, and no treatment is consistently effective. No controlled treatment trial has compared the effectiveness of various classes of medications.

Cooling the extremities reduces pain in a symptomatic person.

Medications. The effectiveness of medications and the order in which they should be tried is highly controversial, according to a consensus of expert opinion. Treatment should be determined by the individual’s treating physician, based on factors including other medical conditions, known medication allergies, and potential for drug-drug interactions.

Aspirin should be tried because of the known, dramatic response of thrombocythemia-associated EM to low-dose aspirin. A positive response warrants evaluation for and monitoring for myeloproliferative disease because the symptoms of thrombocythemia-associated EM may precede a diagnosis by several years. If pain is not relieved, aspirin should be discontinued.

Misoprostol, an oral prostaglandin E1 analog, was tested in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, one-way crossover clinical trial in 21 adults with erythromelalgia and 11 healthy controls. Improvements in pain and cooling scores were significant (p<0.01) [Mork et al 2004].

Seratonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) /selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Venlafaxine, an SNRI, has induced remissions in approximately a dozen individuals even after other classes of medications have been unsuccessful [DiCaudo & Kelley 2004]. SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline) have been reported to be helpful in some additional affected individuals.

Gabapentin has been one of the more effective medical treatments in both primary and secondary EM. Of 16 individuals taking gabapentin in a survey of Erythromelalgia Association members, all 16 reported benefit, although the degree was not quantified. Experts have reported typically mild to moderate pain relief. Remissions (i.e., remaining pain-free for 4-6 months) on gabapentin have been reported in an adult and a child [Cohen 2000].

Sodium channel blockers including lidocaine infusion, lidocaine patch, or oral mexilitine have been used successfully in inherited erythromelalgia and secondary erythromelalgia [Kuhnert et al 1999, Davis & Sandroni 2005, Nathan et al 2005, Choi et al 2009]. Because of the absence of systemic side effects, partial relief in 55% of the individuals studied, and greater than 80% pain relief in 12% of individuals, Davis & Sandroni [2005] have suggested a lidocaine patch as first-line treatment. It is not known whether sodium channel blockers are more effective in individuals with SCN9A-related IEM than in individuals with other forms of EM.

Carbamazepine. In a survey of 41 members of the Erythromelalgia Association, one of four persons using carbamazepine reported improvement [Cohen 2000]. A family with a known SCN9A pathogenic variant (p.Val400Met) reported significant improvement of symptoms while using carbamazepine [Fischer et al 2009].The combination of carbamazepine and gabapentin has been reported to produce relief in one individual with SCN9A-related IEM [Natkunarajah et al 2009].

Oxcarbazepine use in treating EM has not been reported.

Tricyclic antidepressants used alone or in combination with other classes of medications have reduced pain. Their use has diminished with the introduction of newer agents with a more favorable side-effect profile, but they should be considered in refractory individuals. Topical application of 1.0% amitriptyline hydrochloride and 0.5% ketamine hydrochloride in pluronic lecithin organogel has been reported effective in four of five patients with refractory EM [Sandroni & Davis 2006].

Calcium antagonists. Diltiazem is very effective in some individuals, inducing at least one remission. Paradoxically, diltiazem and other calcium channel antagonists have been reported to trigger secondary EM.

Magnesium. In 13 persons, high doses of oral magnesium induced remission in one person, improved symptoms in seven, did not change them in four, and exacerbated symptoms in one. Diarrhea was a limiting side effect [Cohen 2002]. Remission (freedom from pain) was also reported in an Italian child [Dell'era et al 2004].

Sodium nitroprusside infusion has been successful in the acute hospital setting in individuals with severe attacks [Chan et al 2002].

Cyclosporine was successful in one person with erythromelalgia. The postulated mechanism was inhibition of nitric oxide synthase in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells [Sano et al 2003]. Conversely, cyclosporine caused EM in another individual treated for psoriasis vulgaris [Thami & Bhalla 2003].


Sympathetic block, surgical sympathectomy, and epidural infusion

Sympathetic block has had mixed results in individuals with severe symptoms. Some have improved, some have not improved, and others have worsened [Cohen 2000]. Sympathetic block should be tried – and the response to repeated blocks considered – prior to surgical sympathectomy.

In at least two individuals, sympathectomy reduced redness but not pain.

Epidural infusions of opiates have been used in combination with bupivicaine and other oral and topical medications with good results in a few individuals.


Other

Reports of a single or a few individuals have noted remission or significant improvement with cyproheptadine, propranolol, or thalamic stimulation [Delye et al 2005].

Additional combinations of medical, surgical, and alternative treatments tried with varying success in individuals with either primary EM or secondary EM are summarized by Davis et al [2000] (see Table 2) and Cohen [2000] (see Table 3).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Avoidance of triggers (warmth, prolonged standing) may reduce the number or severity of episodes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Secondary complications from prolonged immersion in ice baths include: skin maceration, infection, and gangrene. Amputation has occasionally been necessary to treat these complications.

Cooling with a fan is generally safer than immersion in water.

Surveillance



There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are treated in dermatology clinics, neurology clinics, or pain clinics, or by anesthesiologists specializing in the management of chronic pain. It is important to monitor for side effects of treatment.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Symptoms are triggered by warmth and standing and, in some individuals, by alcohol and spicy foods including chili peppers or garlic.

In some individuals, exercise can trigger symptoms. However, for many individuals, the benefits of mild exercise outweigh the disadvantages. Swimming is a preferred exercise because the extremities remain cool.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Potential teratogenic effects of medications given for treatment of erythromelalgia should be discussed with affected women of childbearing age. The ideal time to discuss this is prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation



Small molecule inhibitors of the SCN9A encoded sodium channel Nav1.7 have been developed. In one exploratory, randomized, double-blind crossover trial of four subjects with EM in whom the presence of SCN9A pathogenic variants had been confirmed, the compound was reported to be more effective than placebo in reducing the amount of pain for two hours following a pain induction stimulus [Goldberg et al 2012]. Given the small number of treated individuals and short duration of the study, strong conclusions cannot be drawn from these results.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.