http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/focal-dh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with focal dermal hypoplasia, the following evaluations are recommended.

Ectodermal manifestations. Evaluation by a dermatologist for identification of dermal aplasia or erosive skin that may benefit from treatment with dressings or lotion


Papillomatosis

Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for evidence of laryngeal or peri-tonsillar verrucoid papillomas, which can cause obstructive sleep apnea.

Sleep study to evaluate for obstructive sleep apnea (often due to airway papillomas).

Limb and skeletal manifestations. Chest x-ray to evaluate for costovertebral defects and evidence of diaphragmatic hernia

Eye findings. Eye examination to evaluate for iris colobomas, chorioretinal colobomas, nystagmus, strabismus or cataracts


Oral and dental findings

Evaluation by a cleft palate team if relevant

Examination by a dentist beginning with the first teeth around age one year


Gastrointestinal and nutrition

Consideration of abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for diaphragmatic hernia

Evaluation by a gastroenterologist if gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is an issue


Renal and urogenital

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for structural anomalies of the kidneys and urinary collecting system

Evaluation by a pediatric gynecologist prior to puberty. Imaging studies of the reproductive tract should be considered as anomalies can affect fertility.

Cognitive and psychological. Hearing evaluation

Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Skin. For individuals with significant areas of dermal aplasia, regular care by a dermatologist and use of occlusive dressings and antibiotic creams may help prevent secondary infections as erosive lesions may be painful and pruritic, and therefore prone to infection. Some individuals report that lotion is helpful in managing pruritic erosions. Pulsed dye laser or other photodynamic therapy has been successful in managing excessive granulation tissue [Alster & Wilson 1995, Liu et al 2012].

An individual with refractory exophytic granulation tissue received significant benefit from a combination of curettage and photodynamic therapy [Mallipeddi et al 2006].

An adult individual with multiple cutaneous basal cell carcinomas has been reported. Whether this is more prevalent in FDH is currently unknown, but heightened surveillance and appropriate treatment for such lesions may be indicated [Patrizi et al 2012].

Papillomatosis. Verrucoid papillomas can cause significant morbidity, including breathing problems (which could reflect the presence of laryngeal and/or tracheal papillomas) and GERD symptomatology (which could reflect the presence of esophageal papillomas). When possible, individuals should be referred to an otolaryngologist or gastroenterologist depending on the anatomic location of the papillomas.

Symptomatic papillomas of the esophagus can be removed endoscopically [Kashyap et al 2011] or with balloon-assisted radiofrequency ablation [Bertani et al 2014]. Airway (hypopharyngeal, tonsillar, and tracheal) papillomas can be managed with surgery or laser therapy.

Skeletal. Impaired functionality associated with syndactyly, oligodactyly, and split-hand/foot malformation may improve with occupational therapy, assistive devices, or surgical intervention.

Reduction defects of the long bones, such as transverse deficiency of distal radius/ulna or tibia/fibula, may be managed with prostheses as appropriate.

Camptodactyly often improves with physical and occupational therapy.

Individuals with scoliosis secondary to costovertebral defects should be referred to an orthopedist for routine monitoring and management.

Management of pain related to diastasis pubis with anti-inflammatory medications and/or physical therapy usually resolves the pain. Individuals with pain refractory to these interventions should consult an orthopedist.

Eye. Colobomas of the eyelid may be repaired by an oculoplastic surgeon.

Iris colobomas can be aesthetically treated with colored contact lenses to give the appearance of a round pupil.

The photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas can be reduced by use of tinted glasses.

Because retinal detachment leading to blindness is a potential complication of retinal coloboma, any acute changes in vision should be evaluated urgently by an ophthalmologist.

In patients with microphthalmia, an ocularist using prosthetic intervention can work to expand the palpebral fissures. Additional surgical corrections can be discussed with an oculoplastic surgeon.

Children with reduced vision may benefit from visual aids or other visual resources as part of an early intervention program to increase visual-spatial development.

Dental. Regular care of a dentist and promotion of good oral hygiene, diet counseling, and consideration of fissure sealants are important to minimize the risk of dental caries [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Abnormalities in the structure and number of teeth may cause dental malocclusion and dissatisfaction with the appearance of the teeth. Orthodontic care may be indicated when dental malocclusion is present. Composite veneers and other aesthetic procedures may be used to improve the appearance of abnormal teeth [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Other. Consultation with:

A pediatric surgeon for the treatment of diaphragmatic hernia and abdominal wall defects.

A urologist or nephrologist for treatment of structural malformations of the kidneys and urinary collecting system and their sequelae. In individuals with structural renal malformations, standard measures are used to reduce risk for urinary tract infections.

A developmental pediatrician for evaluation and management of behavioral problems, emotional lability, or withdrawn behaviors. Those with intellectual impairment or developmental delay should receive early intervention in occupational, speech, and physical therapies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Preoperative evaluation by an otolaryngologist for hypopharyngeal and tonsillar papillomas [Rhee et al 2006] is indicated prior to general anesthesia. Any papillomas that would complicate endotracheal intubation should be surgically removed or communicated to the anesthesiologist prior to the procedure.

Note: These lesions may change significantly over time, so the evaluation should be within a few months of the procedure. The papillomas may be friable and prone to bleeding; when papillomas are present, the airway must be handled as gently as possible (which may include fiberoptic bronchoscopy for intubation rather than direct laryngoscopy) [Rhee et al 2006].

Surveillance



The following should be considered as part of routine medical care for individuals with focal dermal hypoplasia:

Skin. Routine follow-up with a dermatologist to anticipate and manage common skin problems


Papillomatosis

Monitoring for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease and swallowing difficulties at routine health visits. When present, refer to an otolaryngologist for evaluation of possible verrucoid papillomas and management with surgical or laser therapy as needed.

Routine monitoring for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea (snoring, gasping, breathing pauses). If present, a sleep study should be performed [Bostwick et al 2016].

Skeletal. Routine physical examinations and/or spine radiographs to evaluate for scoliosis, particularly in individuals with costovertebral segmentation abnormalities

Dental. Regular examinations


Other

Routine monitoring of growth and body composition to determine if early nutritional intervention is needed [Motil et al 2016]

Regular eye examinations to monitor for changes in visual acuity and risks for retinal detachment in individuals with retinal colobomas. Any acute changes in vision should be considered a medical emergency as retinal detachment can lead to total blindness.

Routine screening of cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and adaptive ability, with appropriate referrals to therapeutic interventions as indicated [Deidrick et al 2016]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Because some individuals with severe skin manifestations may have hypohidrosis (and thus be at increased risk for heat intolerance), care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For affected women, management of pregnancy should be guided by standard obstetric principles taking into account potential complications of FDH. Skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis or diastasis pubis may be present in some affected women, and may affect delivery management. Women with significant scoliosis will benefit from evaluation of respiratory status and feasibility of epidural analgesia. Obstetricians should be aware that verrucous papillomas in genital areas in women with FDH are unlikely to be viral in origin and thus, there is no risk for transmission to the newborn during vaginal delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.