http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fum

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fumarate hydratase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist. This evaluation will likely include a brain MRI study.

Feeding assessment and evaluation of nutritional status

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Seizures in individuals with fumarate hydratase deficiency are often difficult to control. Individuals with seizures need to be evaluated and treated by a qualified specialist (usually a pediatric neurologist) in order to improve clinical outcome. Recommendation of particular medications or interventions is beyond the scope of this review. However, it should be noted that the ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Nutritional intervention (e.g., feeding gastrostomy) may be appropriate in hypotonic and/or lethargic children with feeding difficulties and/or aspiration.

Physical therapy and orthopedic management is appropriate to minimize contractures and prevent scoliosis. Wheelchairs can be useful for some individuals.

In individuals with significant developmental deficits (including impairment of motor, language, and social development) special needs services are a required component of care.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



There are no recognized therapies to ameliorate or reverse the metabolic abnormalities resulting from decreased activity of fumarate hydratase. A brief therapeutic trial of a low-protein diet in one mildly affected individual with fumarate hydratase deficiency did not alter urinary excretion of fumaric acid or improve clinical signs [Kimonis et al 2012].

Surveillance



Specific recommendations should be provided after evaluating the individual needs of each affected person. However, the authors would recommend at least annual visits with pediatric neurology (most importantly, to monitor for and/or treat epilepsy) and physical medicine (most importantly, to monitor for equipment needs and to monitor for and/or treat manifestations of spasticity). As part of a special needs program, periodic visits with genetics, ophthalmology, and orthopedic surgery will also be required.


Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the fumarate hydratase-causing allelic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to consider offering molecular genetic testing to relatives who may be at risk of developing multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas (MCUL) or papillary renal cell carcinoma with leiomyomatosis (HLRCC).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation



Increasingly sophisticated models of mitochondrial function are being used to study the metabolic derangements associated with identified defects of intermediary metabolism, including fumarate hydratase deficiency [Smith & Robinson 2011]. These models may suggest treatment interventions with supplements or dietary changes that are not presently established.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



No significant clinical or biochemical improvement was noted by treatment with a protein-restricted diet [Shih et al 1991; Campeau et al, personal communication (2008)].