http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/galactosemia

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis in the Newborn Period



To establish the extent of disease and needs in a newborn diagnosed with classic galactosemia or clinical variant galactosemia, the following evaluations are recommended [Walter et al 1999]:

Consultation with a specialist in biochemical genetic disorders

Measurement of erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate concentration and urinary galactitol as a baseline for monitoring the effect of treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Neurologic examination and brain MRI as needed

Ophthalmologic examination, including slit lamp examination for cataracts

If applicable, evaluation for hepatocellular disease, especially in affected individuals with late-treated disease who may be at risk for cirrhosis

Treatment of Manifestations and Complications



An international clinical guideline addressing management has been published [Welling et al 2017] (full text).

See Prevention of Primary Manifestations for information on dietary intervention. Lactose restriction reverses liver disease in newborns who already have hepatocellular disease.

Ophthalmologic treatment. Cataract surgery may need to be performed in the first year of life, especially in the rare individuals where failure to perform NBS has resulted in delayed diagnosis.

Speech treatment. Affected individuals with childhood apraxia of speech and dysarthria require therapy by a speech expert until the complication has been brought under control. This may require years of intensive therapy.

Developmental treatment should include developmental examination by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician at age one year, followed by the psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician working closely with the speech therapist and treating physician to map out a treatment plan and evaluation scheme tailored to each child. An individual education plan and/or professional help with learning skills and special classrooms may be needed depending on the timing of the clinical manifestations and the nature of the complications, which may be quite variable, even for children with the same genotype.

Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) treatment. While biochemical/endocrine tests may indicate POI during early infancy, females do not usually exhibit signs of POI until there is delayed pubertal development or primary or secondary amenorrhea. Therefore, during pubertal development or adolescence females should be referred to a pediatric endocrinologist for consultation. When appropriate, the affected female should be seen by an obstetrician-gynecologist specializing in adolescent services and/or infertility.

Estrogen and progesterone may need to be given in a minority of instances to promote pubertal development or (more likely) when secondary amenorrhea occurs.

There is controversy as to whether females should be given estrogen and progesterone early in adolescence to retard “oocyte wastage” and whether more aggressive treatment plans (similar to those used in oncology) should be employed. In this regard, the autonomy of the affected female must be respected and, in the case of a pre-adolescent individual, her capacity for making an informed decision taken into consideration. Hospital ethics boards should be involved in any decision making and each case treated individually [van Erven et al 2013].

The consideration of ovarian biopsy with oocyte preservation for future use in females with classic galactosemia and POI is controversial. If this type of procedure (which is becoming more common for females undergoing cancer chemotherapy) is being considered, consultation with the hospital ethics committee is recommended.

Fertility is possible for certain persons with classic galactosemia. Therefore, adults should be afforded this opportunity and helped to secure consultation with an obstetrician-gynecologist who specializes in infertility and who will promote conception.

Infertility. Because of the ovarian dysfunction, stimulation with FSH may be useful in producing ovulation in some women.

One female with premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) conceived following FSH therapy, and subsequently delivered a normal child [Menezo et al 2004]. Others have found that POI in classic galactosemia may be caused by reduced number or maturation of ovarian follicles and in some instances may be potentially treatable by exogenous pharmacologic stimulation with gonadotropic hormones [Rubio-Gozalbo et al 2010].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Dietary intervention. Immediate dietary intervention is indicated in infants whose erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is ≤10% of control activity and whose erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate concentration is >10 mg/dL.

Because 90% of the newborn’s carbohydrate source is lactose and human milk contains 6%-8% lactose, cow’s milk 3%-4% lactose, and most proprietary infant formulas 7% lactose, all of these milk products must be replaced immediately by a formula that is free of lactose (e.g., Isomil® or Prosobee®). Such soy formulas contain sucrose, fructose, and galactose-containing oligosaccharides that cannot be hydrolyzed in the small intestine.

Elemental formulas that contain small amounts of galactose such as Alimentum®, Nutramigen®, and Pregestimil® made with casein hydrolysates have been employed in the past without obvious side effects. A formula (Neocate®) that contains neither free nor bound galactose has been used without any side effects [Zlatunich & Packman 2005].

Dietary restrictions on all lactose-containing foods including cow’s milk and other dairy products should continue throughout life; however, managing the diet becomes less important after infancy and early childhood, when milk and dairy products are no longer the primary source of energy. It is debated how stringent the diet should be after infancy [Berry et al 2004, Bosch et al 2004a, Schadewaldt et al 2004], as endogenous galactose production is an order of magnitude higher than that ingested from foods other than milk. Until more prospective evidence-based medicine studies have been performed with a large number of subjects, parents should be educated about the lifelong need for dietary restriction of cow’s milk and dairy products.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Because bone mineral density in children and adults with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia may be diminished, supplements of vitamin D in excess of 1000 IU/day and vitamin K have been advocated [Panis et al 2006b, Batey et al 2013].

For calcium and vitamin D intake for individuals with classic and clinical variant galactosemia, see the recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes (pdf) from the Health and Medicine Division of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Click here for additional dietary reference intake tables.

If routine follow-up visits with a dietitian knowledgeable about metabolic disorders have verified that calcium and vitamin D intake are adequate for age and if plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range but bone mineral density is decreased, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.

Surveillance



See also the management guidelines published by Welling et al [2017] (full text).

Biochemical Testing



Individuals with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia should be monitored routinely [Walter et al 1999] for the accumulation of analytes:

Measure erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at each clinic visit and as needed (e.g., during the introduction of a new food). Concentrations <5 mg/dL are considered within the therapeutic range.

Note: Erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate is a good way to evaluate for acute ingestion of galactose.

Urinary galactitol (a product of an alternate pathway for galactose metabolism) levels may be performed but are not necessary for long-term monitoring.

Note that erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate and urine galactitol may provide comparable information regarding compliance with a lactose restricted diet.

Urinary galactitol analysis is especially valuable in affected individuals who have been given red blood cell transfusions; values >78 mmol/mol creatinine are abnormal.

Urinary galactitol is often not affected by acute dietary ingestion of galactose.

If sudden increases in either erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate or urinary galactitol are detected, dietary sources of excess galactose should be sought or evaluation undertaken for other causes.

Schedule for Individuals with Classic or Clinical Variant Galactosemia




Biochemical genetics clinic visits

Every three months for the first year of life or as needed depending on the nature of potential acute complications

Every six months during the second year of life

Yearly thereafter

Metabolic dietician clinic visits. As above, plus interim visits and phone consultations as necessary

Ophthalmologic evaluations. The timing of follow-up examinations depends on the presence or absence of neonatal cataracts. If absent, an examination may be performed at age one year, age five years, and during adolescence. Note: It is very unusual for a person with classic galactosemia to present after early infancy with cataracts, as cataract development probably requires significant intake of cow’s milk and dairy products.


Speech evaluations

Evaluation by a speech expert at age 18 months (recommended for all affected children)

If the initial evaluation does not reveal a diagnosis of a speech or language disorder, reevaluation every three to 12 months during infancy and early childhood depending on the assessments performed by the developmental specialists and physicians

Developmental evaluations. Affected individuals should undergo a developmental examination by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician at age one year and thereafter every one to three years depending on the extent of delay in one or more spheres of development.

Evaluations for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). Measurement of plasma 17-beta-estradiol and FSH in females is recommended if they reach age 12 years with insufficient secondary sex characteristics or age 14 years with no regular menses [Welling et al 2017].


Evaluations for osteopenia

Measure plasma calcium, phosphorous, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D on a yearly basis and as needed.

Because decreased bone mineral density is prevalent in individuals with classic galactosemia, a DEXA scan is recommended for surveillance at age six years, during puberty, through adolescence, and then every five years during adult life.

Routine metabolic dietetic visits should verify that calcium and vitamin D intake is adequate for age and that plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range. Even so, bone mineral density may be decreased in certain affected individuals for reasons that are not understood. Under these circumstances, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Breast milk, proprietary infant formulas containing lactose, cow’s milk, dairy products, and casein or whey-containing foods

Lactose- or galactose-containing drug preparations

Medicines that contain lactose (tablets, capsules, sweetened elixirs), especially during infancy

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



When the pathogenic variants causing classic galactosemia or clinical variant galactosemia in the family are known, prenatal diagnosis of fetuses at risk may be performed via amniocentesis or CVS to allow for institution of treatment at birth.

If prenatal testing has not been performed, each at-risk newborn sib should be treated from birth and screened for classic galactosemia or clinical variant galactosemia using the erythrocyte GALT enzyme assay and/or genetic testing (if the familial pathogenic variants in the family are known) to allow for earliest possible diagnosis. Note: If there are concerns about the reliability of the prenatal testing, soy-based formula may be given while the diagnostic testing is being performed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Both women with classic galactosemia and with clinical variant galactosemia should be on a lactose restricted diet during pregnancy.

There is no evidence that the outcome of children with classic galactosemia or clinical variant galactosemia is improved when their mothers (who are obligate carriers) were on a lactose-restricted diet during pregnancy. Therefore, unaffected pregnant women who are heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in GALT (carrier females) do NOT require a lactose-restricted diet during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Research suggests that despite exogenous galactose restriction, endogenous galactose production may approach 1.0-2.0 g/day [Berry et al 2004, Schadewaldt et al 2004]. If this is true, "self-intoxication" with galactose may be more of a problem than restriction of galactose from exogenous sources in the management of older children and adults who no longer depend on milk as their primary source of energy.

Approaches to lowering endogenous production of galactose-1-phosphate are under investigation using small inhibitors of the GALK enzyme [Tang et al 2010]. While in vitro studies of GALT enzyme-deficient human fibroblasts demonstrated proof of concept, it is yet to be performed in an animal model. The GALT knockout mice generated by Leslie et al [1992] do not express the human phenotype of galactosemia and except for polyuria due to hypergalactosemia and hypergalactosuria are largely without disease. As mice have lost ARHI (DIRAS3) during evolution [Lai et al 2008, Rubio-Gozalbo et al 2010, Tang et al 2010], a GALT enzyme-deficient mouse model that expresses an ARHI (DIRAS3) signal is needed to test the hypothesis that ARHI gene expression plays a role in phenotypic expression of disease and determine whether inhibition of galactose-1-phosphate production limits or abrogates the “human phenotype.”

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.