http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gale-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with epimerase deficiency galactosemia the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference

Nutrition and feeding assessments

Neurologic examination

Developmental assessment

Liver function testing (serum AST, ALT, albumin, total protein, total and conjugated bilirubin, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time)

Ophthalmology consult to evaluate for cataracts

Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations



Generalized Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia



The acute and potentially lethal symptoms of generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia are prevented or corrected by a galactose/lactose-restricted diet. This means switching infants from breast milk or a milk-based formula to a formula with only trace levels of galactose or lactose, such as soy formula. Of note, some infants with classic galactosemia are prescribed elemental formula, which has even lower galactose content than soy formula. Elemental formula should not be prescribed for infants with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia because the GALE enzyme is required for the endogenous biosynthesis of UDP-galactose; that is, persons with epimerase deficiency galactosemia may require trace environmental sources of galactose. However, the galactose intake needed for optimum outcome remains unknown.

For older children with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia, dietary restriction of galactose/lactose involves continued restriction of dairy products.

Note: Some, but not all, physicians recommend that individuals with classic galactosemia also abstain from non-dairy foods that contain more than trace levels of galactose/lactose (e.g., some fruits and vegetables, organ meats); this more rigorous dietary restriction may not be advisable for persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia.

In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia restriction of dietary galactose/lactose appears to correct or prevent the acute signs and symptoms of the disorder: hepatic dysfunction, renal dysfunction, and mild cataracts. Presumably, as in classic galactosemia, dietary treatment would not correct profound tissue damage resulting from prolonged galactose exposure (e.g., hepatic cirrhosis or mature cataracts). Mature cataracts that do not resolve with dietary restriction of galactose/lactose may require surgical removal.

Peripheral Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia



Individuals with peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia do not require any dietary restriction.

Intermediate Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia



Individuals with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia are typically treated with dietary galactose/lactose restriction, at least in infancy. They may be an (as-yet unknown) increased risk for long-term complications including learning impairment and/or cataracts. Continued breastfeeding or exposure to a milk-based formula containing high levels of galactose/lactose may therefore be inadvisable for these infants; however, insufficient data exist to make firm recommendations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia dietary restriction of galactose/lactose prevents early feeding problems, vomiting, poor weight gain, hepatic dysfunction, and cataracts.

The challenge in treating an asymptomatic newborn with epimerase deficiency galactosemia is that it may take months to obtain the results of tests used to distinguish peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia from intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Additional Testing); furthermore, such tests may not be available. The most conservative approach, therefore, is to advise dietary restriction of galactose/lactose for all infants with epimerase deficiency galactosemia, relaxing the restriction as warranted once a more accurate diagnosis has been confirmed.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Monitor hemolysate gal-1P or urinary galactitol, especially if the diet is to be normalized. Acceptable levels of gal-1P in GALE deficiency are not known but are estimated from experience with classic galactosemia to be <3.5 mg/100 mL in red blood cells.

Follow growth.

Monitor developmental milestones; propose supportive intervention as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia should be on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, certainly as infants and perhaps for life.

Persons with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia may be placed on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, either transiently or long-term. Assessment of hemolysate gal-1P and/or urinary galactitol following a galactose challenge (e.g., 2 weeks on a normal diet) may help determine if an individual should remain on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet for longer periods of time.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If prenatal testing has not been performed (see Genetic Counseling), each at-risk newborn sib should be treated from birth until results of diagnostic testing are available. Diagnostic evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurement of GALE enzyme activity in red blood cells if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. Note: If there are concerns about the reliability of the prenatal testing, soy-based formula may be given while the diagnostic testing is being performed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.