http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gm1-ganglio

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a GLB1-related disorder (GM1 gangliosidosis or MPS IVB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental history and assessment to document past and current motor and cognitive function, as a baseline in the event of future psychomotor and/or cognitive regression

Physical examination for evidence of hepatosplenomegaly

Ophthalmologic examination, especially for evidence of corneal clouding and cherry red spot of the macula

Evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist (including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram) to assess for cardiac involvement

Skeletal survey to determine the extent of skeletal involvement

Flexion and extension x-rays of the cervical spine to assess for atlanto-axial instability

Electroencephalogram to assess for seizure disorder, if indicated

Clinical genetics consultation with genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment and quality of life can be optimized when care is provided by specialists in biochemical genetics, cardiology, orthopedics, and neurology, and therapists knowledgeable about GLB1-related disorders.

Surgery is best performed in centers with surgeons and anesthesiologists experienced in the care of individuals with lysosomal storage disorders.

Occupational therapy to optimize activities of daily living (including adaptive equipment)

Physical therapy to optimize gait, comfort, and mobility including orthotics and bracing to improve mobility and flexibility

Early and ongoing interventions to optimize educational and social outcomes are recommended.


GM1 gangliosidosis

For patients with GM1 gangliosidosis type I or II, physiatry for appropriate mobility interventions, such as strollers and wheelchairs

Speech therapy to optimize oral motor skills and manage aspiration risk

Maintenance of adequate hydration and adequate calories for growth. Consider gastrostomy (G-) tube or naso-gastric (NG) tube placement as needed.

Routine management of secretions and risk of aspiration with attention to risk for pulmonary sequelae

Routine management of chronic urinary tract infections secondary to incontinence and chronic dehydration

Aggressive seizure control

Medical management of cardiac involvement

When disease is advanced, provide access to hospice services for supportive in-home care


MPS IVB

Since MPS IVA and IVB are clinically indistinguishable, details of interventions are based on those recommended for MPS in general or specifically MPS IVA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Immunizations. All individuals with GLB1-related disorders should receive routine immunizations. Influenza and pneumococcal immunizations should be administered on schedule because of the low pulmonary reserve of individuals with MPS IVB and the risk for secondary infections due to chronic disease in children with GM1 gangliosidosis.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for all high-risk patients, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].

Anesthesia. Because children with MPS IVB and those with GM1 gangliosidosis with skeletal involvement (spine anomalies, short neck, large head, and atlantoaxial instability) are at increased risk for complications of anesthesia, the following are recommended [Walker et al 2013]:

Preoperative evaluation should include a history of complications with previous anesthetics, as well as any ongoing problems with airway obstruction, the heart, and respiratory function.

Obtain flexion/extension x-rays of the lateral cervical spine [Muhlebach et al 2011; Tomatsu et al 2011; Author, unpublished observations].

Fiber-optic bronchoscopy and smaller than expected endotracheal tubes are often required [Muhlebach et al 2011].

For procedures lasting greater than 45 minutes, intraoperative spinal cord monitoring may be necessary to detect exacerbation of pre-existing spinal stenosis.

Post-operative management may be complicated by pre-existing sleep apnea and/or pulmonary edema [Morgan et al 2002].

Surveillance



GM1 Gangliosidosis



Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist; yearly and before/after major medical events


Musculoskeletal

Yearly history and physical examination to evaluate for new skeletal abnormalities that might lead to decreased quality of life

Yearly evaluation for cervical spine instability including detailed physical examination and assessment for new neurologic findings, followed by imaging if indicated

Monitoring of hip joint stability re risk of hip dislocation. Obtain straight and frog-leg imaging if there is pain with movement or a change in mobility (which in neurologically compromised patients can present as inability to ambulate, unexplained crying, or pain).

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years, if there is a history of cardiac dysfunction and/or new symptoms

Growth. Monitoring of growth and nutrition by a nutritionist with knowledge of neurodegenerative or metabolic disease

Eye. Evaluation for visual acuity and corneal clouding every 1-3 years

Seizures. Yearly evaluation by a neurologist; consideration of EEG if there is an acute change in mental status, a sudden decline in activity/milestones, or abnormal movements

MPS IVB



Note: The recommendations for MPS IVA are appropriate for MPS IVB since MPS IVA and MPS IVB are clinically indistinguishable.

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist:

Yearly: track progress and optimize ambulation

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, and as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) and three-minute stair climb test (3MSC) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal and nervous systems

Musculoskeletal. Assessment for the following:

Lower-extremity misalignment: yearly clinical examinations to assess lower extremity alignment

Hip dysplasia/subluxation: yearly radiographs of the hips, as clinically warranted

Cervical spine instability

Note: Solanki et al [2013] recommend the following guidelines for monitoring spinal involvement in those with MPS IVA:

Neurologic examination every six months

Plain x-rays of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion/extension) every six months

Plain x-rays of the spine (AP and lateral thoracolumbar) every two to three years if there is evidence of kyphosis and/or scoliosis

MRI neutral position: whole spine every year

MRI: flexion/extension of the cervical spine every one to three years

These guidelines can be modified as appropriate.

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Respiratory. Assessment for the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea: yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Polysomnography if any clinical suspicion exists.

Restrictive lung disease: assessment of pulmonary function when age-appropriate at diagnosis and then yearly. Note: The benefit of non-invasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use of MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]


Eye

Yearly: measurement of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination of cornea; examination of the posterior segment

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy: Retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions at onset, then every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Dental. Evaluation every six months

Hearing. Yearly audiogram

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Because psychotropic medications have been associated with worsening neurologic disease in adults with Tay-Sachs disease (which is caused by deficiency of the second enzyme in the β-galactosidase pathway) [Shapiro et al 2006], use of these medications in individuals with a GLB1-related disorder should be avoided whenever possible [Shapiro et al 2006].

For persons with MPS IVB, excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the ability to ambulate independently. Thus, it is important that nutrition optimize growth while maintaining a lean habitus.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



No FDA-approved treatments for GLB1-related disorders exist.

While there is currently no effective treatment for GM1 gangliosidosis, multiple interventions are promising, based on in vitro studies and animal models.

Although many lysosomal storage diseases have positive outcomes with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), in one individual with the juvenile form of GM1 gangliosidosis diagnosed prior to onset of symptoms, HSCT did not prevent the development of manifestations. This failure was attributed to the inability of sufficient stem cells to cross the blood-brain barrier rapidly enough to affect lipid accumulation in the central nervous system (CNS) [Shield et al 2005].

Due to the inability of large molecular-weight enzymes to cross the blood-brain barrier, investigators have been studying small molecules as possible chaperones for partially functioning β-galactosidase in the CNS. These chaperones are thought to stabilize the residual endogenous enzyme and facilitate transport to the lysosome.

In an in vitro study using fibroblasts from an affected individual, N-octyl-4-epi-B-valienamine stabilized β-galactosidase, reduced lipid accumulations, and improved lipid trafficking [Higaki et al 2011]. Furthermore, oral administration of this compound to mice with GM1 gangliosidosis led to increased enzyme activity and reduced substrate levels [reviewed in Brunetti-Pierri & Scaglia 2008].

A second chaperone compound, the imino sugar N-butyl deoxynojirimycin (miglustat), also showed promising outcomes in a murine model of GM1 gangliosidosis [Elliot-Smith et al 2008]. Miglustat, which is FDA approved for the treatment of Gaucher disease, has been used in a few individuals with the juvenile form of GM1 gangliosidosis of whom some showed improvement [Author, unpublished observation].

In addition, other imino sugar derivatives have shown increased enzyme activity, facilitated localization of β-galactosidase to lysosomes in fibroblasts of affected individuals [Fantur et al 2012], and shown improved enzyme activity in a mouse model of GM1 gangliosidosis [Takai et al 2013].

Considerable progress has been made in gene therapy in a murine model of GM1 gangliosidosis. See animal model.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.