http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type I (GSDI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Serum/plasma concentration of glucose, lactic acid, uric acid, 25(OH)-vitamin D, and lipids including cholesterol and triglycerides

Complete blood count to evaluate for neutropenia in individuals with GSDIb and those with GSDIa due to homozygosity for the p.Gly188Arg pathogenic variant in G6PC

Measurement of length or height and weight and calculation of body mass index

Evaluation of nutritional status

Liver imaging to evaluate for hepatomegaly

Liver function tests

Kidney imaging to evaluate for renomegaly

Kidney function tests

Platelet function assay to evaluate platelet function

Measurement of bone density (after the first decade)

Screening to detect systemic and pulmonary hypertension

Metabolic specialist consultation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Guidelines for management have been published by the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2014] (full text).

Treatment includes care by a metabolic team familiar with the medical issues associated with long-term management of persons with GSD. At a minimum, such a team should include the following:

Metabolic specialist familiar with the multisystem nature of GSDI. This individual should monitor current medical issues while providing anticipatory guidance and feedback regarding potential future medical issues (e.g., malignant transformation of liver adenomas, kidney stone management).

Metabolic nutritionist who monitors nutritional adequacy, weight management, food choices, and timing of cornstarch and food intake, and who works with the individual and/or family to assure understanding of the parameters of compliance at different life stages

Health care provider (nurse, genetic counselor, physician assistant) familiar with the inheritance of GSDI who can address questions related to implications of this diagnosis for other family members and future childbearing of the affected person. Such an individual may focus on health care compliance by assisting affected children to transition to independent understanding and management of their GSDI-related health care issues.

Care teams often establish relationships with additional health care workers including:

Medical social worker to assist with formula acquisition and access to community-based services (e.g., access to regular exercise and physical activity plans) and provide early intervention for long-term health management and wellness;

Psychologist with experience in helping affected individuals cope with eating disorders and chronic illness.

Medical Nutrition Therapy Goals



Maintain
normal glucose levels and prevent hypoglycemia:

Frequent daytime feedings. Small frequent meals and snacks high in complex carbohydrates with additional feedings between meals and before bedtime are recommended (monitoring of blood glucose concentration may help adjust feeding schedules to meet individual needs).

Nighttime intragastric continuous glucose infusion through a nasogastric tube or a gastrostomy tube. An optimal infusion should provide 8-10 mg/kg/min glucose in an infant and 6-8 mg/kg/min glucose in an older child.

Uncooked cornstarch orally can be started during infancy [Wolfsdorf & Crigler 1999, Weinstein & Wolfsdorf 2002]. Cornstarch should be given between meals or before bedtime so as not to interfere with appetite at meal time.

Argo® is the preferred brand in the United States in terms of both taste and sustainability. Other brands should be used with caution, and randomly switching between brands is not recommended. A modified cornstarch, waxy maize extended-release cornstarch, Glycosade®, is available in Europe and the United States for overnight treatment [Ross et al 2016].

There is no consensus on the age at which cornstarch therapy should be initiated but a trial is often introduced between ages six months and one year. Amylase is required to digest cornstarch and may not be present until age two years.

The severity and recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes determines the timing of cornstarch therapy initiation via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube in infancy and childhood and oral ingestion in teenagers and adults.

Note: Recommendations for uncooked cornstarch dosing are: 1.6 g/kg body weight every four hours for infants, 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight every six hours for young children through puberty, and 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight given before bed time for adults. Dosing for modified cornstarch should be decided under the guidance of a metabolic treatment team using frequent glucose monitoring.

Provide
optimal nutrition for growth and development:

Complex carbohydrates (60%-70% of recommended total energy intake) including cornstarch and starches from whole-grain bread, rice, and potatoes for children and adolescents and rice cereals for infants

Note: (1) Intake of sucrose and fructose should be restricted for infants and older children. Avoid sugar, fruits, fruit juice, high-fructose corn syrup, sorbitol, cane juice, and other foods that cannot be broken down into glucose. (2) Intake of lactose and galactose should be limited. One serving per day for an older child usually entails 1.5 ounces of cheese OR 1 cup of yogurt OR 1 cup of skim milk. (3) Blood glucose monitoring for hypoglycemia is important so that overtreatment with cornstarch may be avoided. If excess weight gain occurs, consider decreasing the amount of cornstarch gradually over time and mixing cornstarch in water instead of Prosobee® or Tolerex®.

Protein (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) of high quality, high biologic value (e.g., protein low in fat). Soy formula (Prosobee®) and soy milk (lactose/galactose free) can be used both in infancy and childhood for carbohydrate and protein needs.

Note: (1) Avoid soy milks that are sweetened with sucrose; the ones with rice syrup or brown rice syrup can be taken. (2) Soy milk mixed with cane sugar should be avoided.

Fat (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) as part of a low-fat diet that includes heart-healthy fats such as canola oil and olive oil. Note: Families need explicit guidelines on fat intake as part of monitoring total energy intake and avoiding excessive weight gain.

Calcium and vitamin D supplements to support bone growth and mineralization. If the individual is not on calcium-fortified soy milk, calcium citrate or calcium carbonate with vitamin D is recommended to meet RDA for age needs and to prevent nutritional deficiencies.

Iron supplements in complete multivitamins with minerals (100% RDA iron and zinc) to avoid anemia and iron deficiency

Treatment of Other Manifestations



Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is used to prevent gout when dietary therapy fails to completely normalize blood uric acid concentration, especially after puberty.

Lipid-lowering medications, such as HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and fibrate (e.g., Lipitor®, gemfibrozil), are used when lipid levels remain elevated despite good metabolic control, especially after puberty.

Citrate supplementation may help prevent or ameliorate nephrocalcinosis and the development of urinary calculi.

In young children, an initial dose of 1 mEq/kg/day in liquid form divided into three doses should be instituted. The dose should be increased based on urinary citrate excretion.

In older children and adults, potassium citrate tablets can be started at a dose of 10 mEq/3x/day. Citrate use should be monitored as it can cause hypertension and life-threatening hyperkalemia in affected individuals with renal impairment. Sodium levels should also be monitored.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as captopril are used to treat microalbuminuria, an early indicator of renal dysfunction.

Kidney transplantation can be performed for ESRD.

Hepatic adenomas can be treated with surgery or other interventions including percutaneous ethanol injections and radiofrequency ablation.

Liver transplantation can be considered when other interventions have failed.

Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can be used to treat recurrent infections:

G-CSF may increase the number and improve the function of circulating neutrophils.

G-CSF may improve the symptoms of Crohn's-like inflammatory bowel disease in individuals with GSDIb.

G-CSF should be administered subcutaneously starting at 1.0 μg/kg given daily or every other day. The G-CSF dose should be increased stepwise at approximately two-week intervals until the target absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of greater than 500 to up to 1.0 x 109/L is reached.

Standard management of individuals with platelet dysfunction/von Willebrand disease include antifibrinolytics and deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP), which acts by stimulating factor VIII from endothelial cells and improving von Willebrand factor activity and the platelet release reaction. However, DDAVP should be used with caution due to the risk for fluid overload and hyponatremia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Improve hyperuricemia and hyperlipidemia and maintain normal renal function to prevent the development of renal disease.

Maintain lipid levels within the normal range to prevent atherosclerosis and pancreatitis.

Surveillance



Follow GSDI guidelines published recently through a group of experts in the field [Kishnani et al 2014].

Annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys for nephrocalcinosis should be initiated after the first decade of life.

Surveillance of the liver may include the following:

In younger children (age <16 years), liver ultrasound performed at diagnosis and thereafter every 12 to 24 months. In affected individuals who are 16 years and older, liver computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning using intravenous contrast should be done every six to 12 months to monitor for hepatic adenoma formation [Franco et al 2005].

Hepatic profile: serum AST, ALT, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR, and aPTT, and creatinine every six to 12 months to monitor for liver damage

When hepatic adenoma is detected. Abdominal CT/MRI with contrast should be performed in older individuals or individuals within the pediatric age group once adenomas are detected on ultrasound. Imaging should be repeated every 6-12 months or more often depending on laboratory and clinical findings. Liver imaging studies (MRI/CT scan) should evaluate liver size, adenomas, evidence of portal hypertension, or features suggestive of liver carcinoma (nodules, heterogeneous echogenic shadows) [Franco et al 2005].

Note: Serum AFP and CEA levels are not reliable markers of hepatocellular carcinoma [Shieh et al 2012].

For those individuals treated with G-CSF serial blood counts should be performed approximately every three months to assess response to treatment and, although the risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is low, to evaluate for the presence of myeloblasts in the blood. Any imaging performed for liver surveillance (e.g., ultrasound, CT, or MRI) should include measurements of the spleen to identify and monitor splenomegaly.


Cardiovascular surveillance

Systemic blood pressure measurements should be obtained at all clinic visits beginning in infancy.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension by echocardiography every three years beginning at age ten years (or earlier if symptoms are present) is appropriate.

25(OH)-vitamin D levels should be monitored routinely and treated as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Maintain a low-sucrose, low-fructose diet.

Limit galactose and lactose intake to one serving per day.

Due to potential negative effects of sex hormones on hepatic adenomas, combined oral contraception must be avoided in women with GSDI, especially those with adenomas [Sechi et al 2013, Austin et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Evaluation of sibs of a proband as early as possible allows for prompt diagnosis and treatment with much-improved outcome. Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Evaluation by a metabolic physician soon after birth for symptoms pertaining to GSDI if the family-specific pathogenic variants are not known or if molecular genetic testing is not available.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Although successful pregnancies have been reported in women with GSDI, certain precautions should be taken:

Pre-pregnancy counseling regarding diet to avoid low blood glucose and to stress the importance of blood glucose monitoring prior to and during pregnancy

Baseline ultrasound of liver and kidneys prior to pregnancy

Consideration of referral to high-risk obstetrician

Review of medications prior to conception to weigh risks and benefits:

Exposure to ACE inhibitors in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can cause fetal damage and death.

No data on the use of allopurinol during pregnancy in humans exist; however, high doses have been shown to interfere with embryo development in animal models.

Lipid-lowering drugs may also lead to adverse fetal effects and should be avoided during pregnancy.

Metabolic control should be followed closely throughout the pregnancy. Because carbohydrate requirements may increase with pregnancy, glucose levels should be monitored closely and treated accordingly [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Abdominal ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 weeks. Sechi et al [2013] reported an increase in the size of pre-existent adenomas and the development of new adenomas during pregnancy and recommended monitoring by imaging before, during, and after pregnancy. Resection of large (≥5 cm) or growing adenomas before pregnancy has been recommended [Terkivatan et al 2000].

Renal function should be followed closely, as this may worsen during pregnancy [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Yamamoto et al 2010]. Development of renal calculi has been reported in pregnant women with GSDIb [Dagli et al 2010].

Glucose infusion during labor has been used [Martens et al 2008, Dagli et al 2010, Ferrecchia et al 2014].

Platelet count, hemoglobin, and clotting studies should be performed because of the potential for increased bleeding at delivery [Lewis et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation



Current dietary treatment prevents hypoglycemia and greatly improves the life expectancy of individuals with GSDI. However, long-term complications, such as development of hepatic adenomas that progress to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and progressive renal failure, still occur. The development of new therapies for GSDI has focused on correcting the primary cause of these disorders and avoiding long-term complications. Pilot studies of hepatocyte transplantation have shown that donor cells persist. However, further studies are needed to investigate the long-term efficacy of this approach [Lee et al 2007, Ribes-Koninckx et al 2012]. Gene therapy strategies for GSDIa and GSDIb have focused, most recently, on recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors. These studies have shown promising results in animal models [Chou & Mansfield 2011, Chou et al 2015]. Increased hepatic G6Pase and G6PT activity and improvement of metabolic parameters has been observed using rAAV-mediated G6PC gene transfer in animal models. However, transgene expression decreased over time, indicating that repeated administration may be necessary for long-term treatment in humans. Strategies to integrate the G6Pase transgene into the genome are being investigated, with promising results [Landau et al 2016]. Of note, a relatively low level (3% of normal) of hepatic G6Pase activity is needed for survival and to prevent formation of hepatocellular adenomas [Lee at al 2015]. Correction of renal G6Pase deficiency by gene therapy has been less well studied, and the most efficient methods for transducing kidney cells continue to be investigated [Chou et al 2015]. Identification of AAV serotypes that effectively transduce all affected tissue types (including liver, kidney, and hematopoietic stem cells) would be beneficial [Chou et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.