http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Pompe disease, guidelines have been published for the initial evaluation of individuals with:

Infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) [American College of Medical Genetics expert panel; see Kishnani et al 2006b];

Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) [Cupler et al 2012].


Chest radiography

IOPD. Nearly all affected infants have cardiomegaly on chest x-ray [van den Hout et al 2003]. Further, evaluation of apparent lung volume reduction, areas of atelectasis, and any pulmonary fluid may be helpful in directing other therapies.

LOPD. Baseline radiographic evaluation of the lungs and heart silhouette is indicated but only rarely reveals cardiomegaly.


Electrocardiography (ECG)

IOPD. The majority of affected infants have left ventricular hypertrophy and many have biventricular hypertrophy [van den Hout et al 2003].

LOPD. Based on findings of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD, Sacconi et al [2014] recommended Holter monitoring at initial evaluation.


Echocardiography

IOPD. Typically echocardiography demonstrates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with or without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in the early phases of the disease process. In later stages, dilated cardiomyopathy may be seen.

LOPD. Echocardiographic assessment for dilatation of the ascending thoracic aorta has been recommended [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].


Pulmonary

IOPD. Most infants have varying degrees of respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory status should be established with regard to cough, presence of wheezing or labored breathing, and/or feeding difficulties. Diaphragmatic weakness caused by excessive glycogen deposits results in mild to moderate reduction of vital capacity; however, objective assessment of pulmonary functions in infants is difficult at best. Most infants display respiratory difficulty with feeds or sleep disturbance [Kravitz et al 2005].

LOPD. Affected individuals should be evaluated for cough, wheezing, dyspnea, energy level, exercise tolerance, and fatigability. Formal pulmonary function tests show pulmonary insufficiency. An attempt to assess ventilatory capacity in the supine position can detect early ventilatory insufficiency. Pulse oximetry, respiratory rate, and venous bicarbonate and/or pCO2 should be obtained to assess for alveolar hypoventilation [van der Beek et al 2011, Cupler et al 2012].


Nutrition/feeding

IOPD. Patients should be evaluated for possible feeding difficulties (e.g., facial hypotonia, macroglossia, tongue weakness, and/or poor oromotor skills) [Jones et al 2010, van Gelder et al 2012].

Assessment of growth (i.e., height, weight, head circumference), energy intake, and feeding (including video swallow study) is appropriate.

All infants should be evaluated for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

LOPD. Assessment of nutritional status as baseline is recommended. Assessment of swallowing difficulty by video swallow study may identify barriers to adequate nutrition and risk for aspiration. Gastrointestinal symptoms similar to those reported in patients with irritable bowel syndrome may be underreported in this population and may undermine quality of life.

Audiologic –
IOPD

Baseline hearing evaluation including tympanometry is appropriate. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for a discussion of age-related methods of hearing evaluation.

Sensorineural hearing loss is now documented in children with IOPD, and hearing aids may be of benefit [van Capelle et al 2010].

Disability inventory –
IOPD and LOPD

All patients should undergo assessment of motor skills and overall functioning to guide subsequent therapies and monitor progression of the disease.

Assessment of risk for falls is recommended.

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



Guidelines for the management of IOPD have been put forth by an expert panel from the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2006b]:

Cardiomyopathy. Medical intervention needs to be individualized as use of standard drugs may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease process (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) [Kishnani et al 2006b].

Arteriopathy. Treatment does not differ from that in the general population.

Conduction disturbances. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are at high risk for tachyarrhythmia and sudden death [Tabarki et al 2002]; 24-hour Holter monitoring is useful in characterizing the type and severity of rhythm disturbance. Management includes avoidance of stress, infection, fever, dehydration, and anesthesia. Medical therapy, if indicated, often necessitates a careful balance of ventricular function and should be undertaken by a cardiologist familiar with Pompe disease.

Muscle weakness. Physical therapy is appropriate to maintain range of motion and assist in ambulation.

Proximal motor weakness can result in contractures of the pelvic girdle in infants and children, necessitating aggressive management including surgery [Case et al 2012].

Scoliosis is frequent, particularly in individuals with infantile- or childhood-onset disease [Roberts et al 2011].

Difficulty with communication is common, and speech therapy as well as the use of augmented communication devices may be helpful.

Nutrition/feeding. Infants may need specialized diets and maximal nutrition, with some requiring gastric feedings.

Persons with LOPD may also develop feeding concerns and are often managed on a soft diet, with a few requiring gastric or jejunal feedings.

Respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory support including CPAP and BiPAP may be required. Inspiratory/expiratory training has improved respiratory muscle strength in adults with LOPD [Jones et al 2011].

Macroglossia and severe respiratory insufficiency in the infantile form may necessitate tracheostomy.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



CRIM Status



Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it may be appropriate to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce cross-reactive immunologic material (i.e., who are CRIM-negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment course, optimally before the first infusion [Winchester et al 2008, Kishnani et al 2010, Messinger et al 2012]. Multiple immunomodulation protocols are in use, most of which use rituximab with additional drugs (including mycophenylate mofetil, methotrexate, and sirolimus) [Messinger et al 2012, Elder et al 2013].

Geographic areas in which CRIM-negative status is common include the US and the Middle East [Messinger et al 2012].

Two ways to determine the CRIM status of an individual with Pompe disease are:

Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation performed by an antibody-based method in cultured fibroblasts;

Molecular genetic testing to determine if the pathogenic variants result in total absence of enzyme activity (i.e., are CRIM-negative) [Bali et al 2012].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)



Myozyme® (alglucosidase alfa) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for IOPD infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Lumizyme® was approved by the FDA in 2010 for use in individuals older than age eight years with LOPD. Age restrictions on Lumizyme were removed in 2014.

Myozyme® and Lumizyme® are administered by slow IV infusion at 20-40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks. Many individuals are now treated with the higher dose.

Complications of ERT



Infusion-associated reactions. In clinical studies, infusion reactions were observed in half of those treated with Myozyme®.

The majority of treated children developed IgG antibodies to Myozyme® within the first three months of treatment. Infusion reactions appear to be more common in individuals with IgG antibodies. Some affected individuals with high sustained IgG titers may have a poor clinical response to treatment (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation).

Development of IgE antibodies is less common but may be associated with anaphylaxis requiring life support measures.

Most infusion-associated reactions can be modified by slowing the rate of infusion or administration of antipyretics, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids. For these reasons – and because many individuals with IOPD have preexisting compromise of respiratory and cardiac function – initiation of therapy in centers equipped to provide emergency care is recommended.

Other. Children with IOPD may have difficulty with anesthesia for procedures related to placement of devices for venous access.

Prognosis



IOPD. The rationale for newborn screening (NBS) is that cardiac status and motor development in infants with IOPD treated early with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are better than in controls [Chien et al 2009]; initiation of ERT before age two weeks is associated with significantly improved gross motor function at age 12 months [Yang et al 2016]. Long-term follow-up data are not yet available on this cohort.

In those in whom ERT was initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory assistance, a majority had improved survival, improved ventilator-independent survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor skills compared to an untreated cohort.

Longer-term survivors who underwent early ERT may show sustained improvement in cardiac and motor function [Prater et al 2012]. ERT reduces cardiac mass to varying degrees and improves the ejection fraction, although there may be a transient decrease in the ejection fraction after the first several weeks of ERT [Levine et al 2008]. ERT results in an increase of the PR interval and a decrease in the left ventricular voltage [Ansong et al 2006].

While the long-term prognosis is as yet unknown, available studies suggest better cognitive outcomes than had been predicted. Of note, assessment of cognitive abilities is difficult in children younger than age five years with IOPD; typical assessment tools frequently underestimate the cognitive abilities of these children [Kishnani et al 2009, Nicolino et al 2009, Ebbink et al 2012]. Estimates of cognitive abilities at age 24 months using the Bayley scales showed preservation of cognitive abilities in infants ascertained by NBS and treated early with ERT [Lai et al 2016].

Pivotal trials of ERT on IOPD show convincing delay in the onset of dependence on ventilator support, but most patients who are ventilator dependent remain so . This finding is consistent with experimental evidence demonstrating relative resistance of skeletal muscle (especially type II fibers) to effective glycogen depletion with administered alpha glucosidase. Predictors of a poor response to ERT include increase in muscle glycogen during therapy, high IgG titers to alpha glucosidase, and CRIM negativity.

LOPD. The major morbidities are motor disability and respiratory insufficiency. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of 90 affected individuals age eight years and older who were ambulatory and free of invasive ventilatory support at baseline, those receiving the active agent had better preservation of motor function and forced vital capacity at the 78th week evaluation point [van der Ploeg et al 2010]. Similar findings were demonstrated in an open-label trial [Strothotte et al 2010].

Quality of life, assessed with the Rand Corporation 36-Item Short Form Survey Instrument (SF-36), had declined in adults with LOPD before initiation of ERT and improved in the first two years of ERT [Güngör et al 2016].

Note: Although the timing of initiation of ERT in infants predicted to have LOPD who have been ascertained by newborn screening is not well established, the Taiwan group uses clinical severity to identify those for whom ERT is warranted before age three years [Chien et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Infections need to be aggressively managed.

Immunizations need to be kept current.

Patients and household members should receive annual influenza vaccinations.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) prophylaxis (palivizumab) should be administered in the first two years of life.

Anesthesia should be used only when absolutely necessary because reduced cardiovascular return and underlying respiratory insufficiency pose significant risks.

Surveillance



Close follow up is indicated. Management and surveillance guidelines have been proposed by the ACMG Work Group on Management of Pompe Disease [Kishnani et al 2006b]. Given the wide age range in individuals with LOPD, most of the recommendations can be applied to both IOPD and LOPD.

Twice-yearly clinical review of development, clinical status, growth, and use of adaptive equipment

Assessment of respiratory status with each visit with regard to cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise tolerance:

Chest x-rays at regular intervals

Pulmonary function tests; yearly or more frequently as indicated

Periodic sleep evaluation, which may include regular capnography and pulse oximetry

Monitoring of overall musculoskeletal and functional status to guide therapies aimed at preventing or minimizing physical impairment and its complications. This may include assessment for scoliosis and bone densitometry.

Regular nutritional and feeding assessment

At least annual renal function studies to monitor for secondary complications related to cardiac and/or pulmonary impairment as well as medication effects

Annual cardiology evaluation in those with LOPD and as needed for those with IOPD:

Periodic echocardiography. Aortic dilatation has been detected by echocardiography in late-onset Pompe disease [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring) at regular intervals [Cook et al 2006]. Sacconi et al [2014] noted that enzyme replacement therapy did not prevent development of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD.

Screening for cerebral arteriopathy with aneurysmal dilation and rupture leading to cerebral infarcts (strokes) and death, which have also been reported [Laforêt et al 2008, Sacconi et al 2010]. Screening strategies for these findings are being developed, but care teams should have a high index of suspicion for cerebral arteriopathy if an individual with late-onset Pompe disease develops unexplained stroke-like symptoms [Sacconi et al 2010].

Note: Individuals with LOPD may not be able to tolerate supine positioning in an MRI scanner due to diaphragmatic weakness.

Annual hearing evaluation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Use of standard drugs for treatment of cardiac manifestations may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease. The use of digoxin, ionotropes, diuretics, and afterload-reducing agents may worsen left ventricular outflow obstruction, although they may be indicated in later stages of the disease.

Hypotension and volume depletion should be avoided.

Exposure to infectious agents is to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment with ERT.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the GAA pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Testing of GAA enzyme activity if the GAA pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Most individuals with infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) have not reproduced.

Many adults with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) have reproduced. At least one woman treated with ERT during pregnancy and lactation with no adverse effects on the fetus has been reported [de Vries et al 2011]. As would be expected in a woman with a myopathy and respiratory insufficiency, the growing fetus may pose additional complications to the mother’s health. Close respiratory and cardiac surveillance should be initiated in consultation with maternal fetal medicine specialists.

Therapies Under Investigation



Gene therapy to correct the underlying enzyme defect is under investigation [Raben et al 2002, DeRuisseau et al 2009, Mah et al 2010]. A Phase I/II trial to investigate the ability of AAV-alpha glucosidase to improve ventilation reported outcomes of children with IOPD treated with ERT. In this trial of phrenic nerve injected AAV-alpha glucosidase and ventilatory training, the rate of ventilatory decline was attenuated in a subset of children, particularly those who were not already dependent on ventilatory assistance full time at the time of intervention [Smith et al 2017].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Experience with bone marrow transplantation in both humans and cattle with acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency is limited; to date, such treatment is not considered successful [Hirschhorn & Reuser 2001].