http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/higes

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hyper IgE syndrome (HIES), the following evaluations are recommended:

Dermatologic examination

Chest imaging

Evaluation for scoliosis

Dental examination for possible retention of primary teeth

Treatment of Manifestations



Currently, there is no cure or targeted treatment for AD-HIES, and the mainstay of therapy is prevention of staphylococcal abscesses and pneumonias with anti-staphylococcal prophylactic antibiotics as well as early aggressive treatment of infections. It is important to institute antibiotic therapy at the earliest sign of infection. Many affected individuals progress from minor to major infection rapidly, and systemic signs of infection may be minimal.

Prophylactic antibiotics targeting Staphylococcus aureus and other pyogenic bacteria are primarily used to prevent the pneumonias and their complications.

If structural damage to the lungs (e.g., bronchiectasis and/or pneumatocoeles) occurs, the breadth of antimicrobial coverage is usually extended, as these structural abnormalities become secondarily infected with Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas) or fungi (e.g., Aspergillus).

The combination of prophylactic antimicrobials and aggressive diagnosis and treatment of pneumonias helps to diminish these secondary lung parenchymal abnormalities.

Continued use of antifungal agents to control mucocutaneous candidiasis and to prevent pulmonary disease may be necessary.

The skin disease of eczema and recurrent boils is usually well controlled with antiseptic therapies such as diluted bleach baths (~1/2 - 1 cup of bleach per bath tub of water for 15 minutes 3 times weekly) or frequent swimming in a chlorinated pool.

Adequate skin lubrication is needed with frequent bleach baths.

Medications such as histamine-1 antagonists to control pruritus are helpful for more significant eczema.

Intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin is used with anecdotal improvement for some individuals, especially those who fail to make protective levels of specific antibodies following vaccination challenge; but prospective, randomized controlled studies of immunoglobulin supplementation have not been performed.

There is no known treatment or prevention for the non-immunologic characteristics.

As many individuals have osteopenia and minimal trauma fractures, optimizing of calcium and vitamin D intake is prudent. The role of medications such as bisphosphonates for persons with AD-HIES with osteoporosis is largely unexplored.

Optimal blood pressure management seems appropriate in light of the arterial abnormalities.

Anti-platelet or anticoagulation therapies may be considered for individuals with significant coronary artery aneurysms to prevent myocardial infarction related to clotting with aneurysm.

However, any anti-clotting therapies need to be weighed against the risk of hemoptysis, a recognized complication of fungal or bacterial lung disease in individuals with AD-HIES.

The role of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HSCT) in AD-HIES remains unknown. An adult treated for lymphoma with HSCT had improvement of many of the clinical features of HIES and decreasing IgE concentrations, but then died of transplant-related complications [Nester et al 1998]. A young girl with recurrent infections had full engraftment and reduction of serum IgE concentration that rebounded with the cessation of immunosuppression [Gennery et al 2000]. Recently, two unrelated affected teenagers who received HSCT for non-Hodgkin lymphoma were reported. Their immunologic and non-immunologic features, such as osteoporosis and course facial skin, were corrected [Goussetis et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prophylactic antimicrobials are used to decrease the number of boils and pneumonias. Aberrant healing from pyogenic pneumonias leads to bronchiectasis and pneumatocoeles; therefore, prevention of these pneumonias may lead to better preservation of lung parenchyma and decreased risk of secondary, more difficult to treat pulmonary infections. The role of prophylactic antifungals to prevent pulmonary mold infections is unknown.

Osteoporosis and minimal trauma fractures are frequent findings. The effect of calcium and vitamin D supplementation is not known.

Surveillance



Individuals with AD-HIES often lack systemic signs of infection and feel better than one would expect when actively infected; therefore, a high index of suspicion for infection is necessary to permit recognition of pneumonias and institution of antibiotic treatment prior to development of extensive lung damage.

Periodic chest imaging is helpful, especially if pneumonias have occurred, to assess whether structural lesions to the lung (e.g., pneumatocoeles) have formed.

Because the microbiology of damaged lung tissue may change over time, it is important to obtain sputum samples intermittently and with acute infections, to direct therapy. Sputum samples should be obtained for microbiology during lung infections.

Scoliosis screening of adolescents is indicated to guide any necessary intervention.

Dental visits should ensure that primary teeth are removed in a timely fashion if necessary to allow secondary teeth to emerge.

Periodic laboratory monitoring should be performed for individuals on chronic antimicrobial therapy.

Individuals with AD-HIES have an increased incidence of lymphoma, which should be considered in the evaluation of lymphadenopathy, masses, or bony lesions.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives of a proband with a known pathogenic variant allows for early diagnosis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Cessation of prophylactic antimicrobials is often advised during pregnancy. This may increase the risk of infection and should be taken into consideration. There have been pregnancies without complication, but also instances in which lung disease has worsened after pregnancy, potentially from limited antimicrobial options, delayed radiographic diagnosis, and impaired pulmonary clearance.

Risks associated with pregnancy should be discussed with affected females who have pulmonary compromise, severe scoliosis, or other complications of AD-HIES.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Parents have reported anecdotally that due to the severe eczema of their child, there have been occasions when the health care providers have alerted Child Protective Services reporting that the child is not being kept clean. While skin hygiene is very important, in spite of the best efforts of caregivers, sometimes the skin flares are severe. Questions about parental neglect/abuse have also arisen when a toddler or young child appears with evidence of repeated fractures. Health care providers who are attuned to these possibilities can serve as important advocates for the parents and family.