http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hmerf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure (HMERF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuromuscular neurology consultation, ideally at a center with expertise in inherited muscle disease to coordinate specialized testing

Respiratory medicine consultation to assess pulmonary function and coordinate nocturnal ventilator support if required

Physiotherapy consultation to assess lower limb function and general mobility

Occupational therapy consultation to recommend home and/or office adaptations and mobility aids

Social services consultation to assist with workplace adaptations and/or access to social/disability benefits

Clinical genetics consultation to help coordinate genetic investigations and provide genetic counseling consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



At present no disease-modifying therapy exists. Management is supportive.

For distal leg weakness, use of ankle-foot orthoses can optimize independent ambulation. Later in the disease course other mobility aids such as canes, walkers, or wheelchairs may be required.

Exercises and activities suggested by physiotherapy consultation may be helpful to prevent continued loss of physical function due to inactivity.

Noninvasive ventilation with bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may be indicated for nocturnal hypoventilation initially, followed by mechanical ventilatory support as needed.

Patients have increased susceptibility to respiratory tract infections and, therefore, influenza vaccination should be prioritized.

Given the gradually progressive nature of this disease, occupational therapy and social services support are important.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Pulmonary function testing at intervals of 6-12 months, or guided by patient findings

Reassessment of muscle strength and clinical status annually with a neurologist who can coordinate any additional required services

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Information is insufficient to determine if particular issues in HMERF relate to pregnancy. In general, onset of symptoms occurs after the age of childbearing. However, a pregnant woman with early manifestations of HMERF or at risk for HMERF should be considered high-risk because of the associated respiratory muscle weakness, and the increased physiologic demands of pregnancy. Consultation with a high-risk maternal-fetal medicine specialist is recommended when possible.

From the point of view of the fetus the authors are unaware of any specific issues relating to HMERF, since this is an adult-onset disorder.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.