http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hops

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypophosphatasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentration to assess renal function

Serum concentration of calcium, phosphorus, magnesium

Serum concentration of 25(OH) and 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, nPTH (parathyroid hormone, N-terminal part) to assess rickets

Assessment of pulmonary function in infants with the perinatal type to assist in prognosis and distinguishing between the perinatal (severe) type and the perinatal (benign) type

Radiographs of the skull to assess for craniosynostosis in young children with the infantile form of hypophosphatasia

Baseline dental evaluation

Baseline orthopedic evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Management at all ages focuses on supportive therapy to minimize disease-related complications.

Multidisciplinary management at various ages may include:

Endocrinology to optimize bone homeostasis and avoid exacerbating treatments

Nephrology to monitor calcium homeostasis and examine for nephrocalcinosis

Neurology to prophylactically or prospectively treat seizures and manage myopathy

Neurosurgery or craniofacial team to manage pseudocraniosynostosis

Orthopedics to manage primary and secondary skeletal manifestations

Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R), physical therapy, and occupational therapy to optimize mobility and autonomy

Pain management

Psychological support

Pediatric and adult dentistry to manage tooth loss

The involvement of multiple specialists treating complex interrelated medical issues mandates case management and social work support.

Enzyme Replacement Therapy



The emergence of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with asfotase alfa (Strensiq™) has altered the natural history of severe perinatal and infantile HPP cases; the long-term effects of treatment are not fully known. A new phenotype of “treated perinatal and infantile HPP” is emerging, and the prior designation of “perinatal lethal HPP” may no longer universally apply in the developed world.

In October 2015, the FDA approved asfotase alfa for treatment of patients with perinatal, infantile, and juvenile onset HPP [Alexion –10-23-2015].

Perinatal/infantile HPP study outcomes. In two prospective, single-arm studies (with historical controls used for survival analysis), 68 individuals with severe, perinatal/infantile-onset HPP (age at treatment onset: 1 day – 78 months) completed at least 24-weeks of TNSALP ERT (≤9 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously) [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Survival. Of those requiring respiratory support (n = 26), 21 (81%) survived through the last date of assessment (median age 3.2 years), in comparison to 1:20 (5%) in historical controls.

In the mixed cohort of 68 patients with perinatal/infantile onset HPP receiving asfotase alfa ERT, 54 required mechanical ventilation and of these, 91% survived and 85% were ventilator free at last contact, in comparison to 27% overall survival and 25% ventilator free in the 48 historical controls [Whyte et al 2016] (final data). Clinical trials with ERT have shown improvement in developmental milestones and pulmonary function [Whyte et al 2012].

Bone findings. Radiographs from 64 of these individuals, and four from a third prospective open-label study of juvenile-onset HPP, were evaluated for HPP-related rickets using the 7-point Radiographic Global Impression of Change (RGI-C) scale. Radiographic change of at least +2 (defined as “responders”) were seen in 50/68 (74%) of those treated (see Figure 2), at last assessment (historical comparative data does not exist). Eighteen individuals with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP experienced fractures during the course of treatment; the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures remaining unclear [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Juvenile-onset HPP study outcomes. One prospective open-label, single arm study included eight patients with juvenile-onset HPP and five patients with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP; age at treatment onset was six to 12 years. The patients with juvenile-onset HPP completed at least 48 months of TNSALP ERT (6 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously). The eight juvenile-onset patients were compared with 32 historical controls. By the RGI-C rating of radiographs, all eight patients were deemed responders; two (6%) of the historical controls were rated responders with an improvement of +2 or more at month 54. Gait, assessed using a modified Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment Gait (MPOMA-G), six-minute walk test (6MWT), and step length improved in patients treated with asfotase alfa. 6MWT improved to the normal range in six of six patients assessed by month 48, from none at baseline. The data are at present insufficient to assess the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures in juvenile-onset HPP [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

When Enzyme Replacement Therapy is Not Available or Not Typically Used



Perinatal types. Limited experience exists for asfotase alfa ERT treatment of perinatal HPP in the immediate newborn period, and this therapy may not be readily available. In the immediate perinatal period, if multidisciplinary assessment identifies the perinatal severe type, comfort care and supportive management of infant and family remain an option.

Infantile type. The infantile phenotype has high mortality, with 50% of individuals succumbing to respiratory failure caused by undermineralization of the ribs. In the absence of ERT, supportive management remains.

Calcium homeostasis. Management can further be complicated by recalcitrant hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria, and optimal management of this issue remains unclear: hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria is typically resistant to hydration and furosemide treatment, and bisphosphonates would be contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). In the absence of ERT, calcitonin and steroids could be attempted short term, with limited efficacy [Deeb et al 2000].

Seizures. When present, seizures may respond to treatment with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), one of the natural substrates of alkaline phosphatase, is the active compound by which pyridoxine mediates essential enzyme activity; PLP deficiency in the central nervous system may reduce seizure threshold by reducing neurotransmitter (GABA) synthesis.

Craniosynostosis in those with the infantile phenotype is variable. When identified, involvement of a neurosurgeon to monitor for complications is prudent. Increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis is an indication for surgical release.

Dental care beginning at age one year is important to preserve primary dentition (to support nutrition) and to preserve or replace secondary dentition.


Childhood (juvenile) and adult hypophosphatasia

Osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs.

Bone pain and osteomalacia are managed supportively: NSAIDs appear beneficial [Girschick et al 2006]. Hypophosphatasia is a relative contraindication to treatment with bisphosphonates (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pseudofractures and stress fractures are difficult to manage; internal fixation has been suggested as the optimal orthopedic management. Foot orthotics may help in management of tarsal fractures and pseudofractures in adults.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Low-impact physical activity and exercise may improve general bone health. Supervision by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia is suggested.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Calcium supplementation and vitamin D therapy may prevent secondary hyperparathyroidism in adults. This should only be pursued with close monitoring by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia.

Surveillance



Children with hypophosphatasia should be seen by a pediatric dentist twice yearly, beginning at age one year.

Children with the infantile type of hypophosphatasia are at elevated risk for increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis, and should be monitored for this complication.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Biphosphonates are relatively contraindicated in hypophosphatasia. Although adverse outcomes have not been identified in children with the severe infantile type [Deeb et al 2000], theoretic concern has long been raised based on the structure of bisphosphonates. The phosphate motifs in bisphosphonates have a similar conformation to inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), the natural substrate of TNSALP; thus, treatment with bisphosphonates is thought to be analogous to "adding fuel to the fire." In adults with hypophosphatasia and osteomalacia treated with bisphosphonates, lateral subtrochanteric femoral pseudofractures have been described [Whyte 2009]. As the prevalence of adult hypophosphatasia is not known and many undiagnosed adult patients undoubtedly are treated with bisphosphonates, the frequency of this unusual complication is not known.

Excess vitamin D can exacerbate hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria in children with infantile hypophosphatasia who have hypercalcemia.

Teriparatide (recombinant human parathyroid hormone fragment, amino acids 1-34) at high doses induces osteosarcoma in rats, and may increase the risk of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (a pediatric growth plate tumor) in humans. It is contraindicated in children with hypophosphatasia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Autosomal recessive hypophosphatasia remains an extremely rare and severe condition. The treatment duration and long-term effects of ERT with asfotase alfa remain unknown for perinatal and infantile HPP. Clinical trials are in Phase IV, with patients treated up to 78 months at the time of FDA approval.

For milder autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant childhood (juvenile) and adult-onset HPP, limited information about asfotase alfa exists; clinical trials are underway in children, adolescents, and adults.

Bone marrow transplantation (hematopoietic cell transplantation) was used to treat an eight-month-old girl with severe hypophosphatasia with prolonged, significant clinical and radiologic improvement [Whyte et al 2003]. Seven years after transplantation, the patient was reported to be active and growing, and to have the clinical phenotype of the more mild childhood (juvenile) form of hypophosphatasia [Cahill et al 2007]. In another trial, both bone marrow and allogenic mesenchymal stem cells were implanted in an eight-month old patient, resulting in improvement of respiratory conditions [Tadokoro et al 2009]. However,the patient developed therapy-related leukemia [Taketani et al 2013]. Transplantation of ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells for patients who had previously undergone bone marrow transplantation improved bone mineralization, muscle mass, respiratory function, intellectual development, and survival [Taketani et al 2015].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.