http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hunter

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; also known as Hunter syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

Echocardiogram

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study if sleep apnea is a potential concern

Hearing test

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) study to assess for carpal tunnel syndrome

Head-cervical MRI and/or opening pressure on lumbar puncture to assess for hydrocephalus and spinal cord compression. Because MRI needs to be performed under sedation and/or intubation in individuals with the early progressive form, there is an increased risk of compromising the upper airway. See Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Eye examination

Developmental assessment

Medical genetics consultation

Note: Many of these assessments are age dependent. For example, pulmonary function and sleep studies would not be appropriate in a two year old.

Treatment of Manifestations



Patient management guidelines have been published [Scarpa et al 2011].

At this time, treatment of complications in MPS II is symptomatic.

The involvement of specialists for each affected organ system is required to monitor and treat specific problems (see Clinical Description). Commonly required interventions include the following:

Shunting for hydrocephalus

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy

Positive pressure ventilation (CPAP or tracheostomy)

Carpal tunnel release

Cardiac valve replacement

Inguinal hernia repair

Hip replacement

Developmental, occupational, and physical therapy are often necessary.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) has shown encouraging results in possibly modifying/correcting the non-CNS manifestations; as confirmed in a long-term study [Lampe et al 2014b].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Idursulfase (Elaprase®) is a recombinant form of human iduronate 2-sulfatase that has been approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of MPS II [US Food and Drug Administration 2006a, US Food and Drug Administration 2006b].

Clinical efficacy of ERT was shown in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of 96 patients [Muenzer et al 2006]. When compared to the placebo group after one year of treatment, persons in the weekly idursulfase group demonstrated statistically significant improvement of the primary endpoint (a composite of distance walked and lung function). Based on the better clinical response in the group in which medication was administered weekly compared to group in which it was administered every other week, idursulfase was approved in both the US and EU for the treatment of MPS II at a weekly dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Because this trial only studied individuals with the slowly progressive form of the disease, it yielded little information on outcomes in individuals younger than age five years or with early progressive CNS disease.

Results of a study on ERT in children younger than age five years or individuals with severe pulmonary compromise or severe CNS disease have been published [Muenzer et al 2012].

More recently, in a 3.5 year independent follow-up of 27 individuals with MPS II, Tomanin et al [2014] determined that:

Long-term use of ERT was safe;

ERT efficacy was similar in both a younger age group (age 1.6-12 years at the start of ERT) and an older age group (age 12-27 years at the start of ERT); and

Improvement/stabilization of findings such as GAG level, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otologic disorders, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and cardiac valve regurgitation (except mitral valve) was greater in individuals with the early progressive form compared to those with the slowly progressive form.

Since Elaprase® does not cross the blood-brain barrier, no effect on CNS disease is anticipated; however, there is reason to believe that somatic manifestations of those with severe CNS involvement would benefit from ERT. The young age is not adding any safety concerns, and patients have significant amelioration of somatic symptoms [Lampe et al 2014a].

Infusion-related reactions that may occur with use of Elaprase® ERT are comparable to similar reactions seen with other ERT products used in treatment of lysosomal storage disease and with other infused proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., infliximab). The etiology of the more severe forms of these non-allergic reactions, referred to as anaphylactoid, is unknown. Current evidence suggests that anaphylactoid (as opposed to anaphylactic) reactions are not immune mediated [Mayer & Young 2006].

Infusion reactions are generally mild and include brief, insignificant decreases or increases in heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory rate; itching; rash; flushing; and headache. Mild reactions can usually be managed by slowing the infusion rate for several treatments and then slowly returning to the prior rate.

Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines, as is often done for ERT in other conditions, is not suggested on the label for Elaprase®; however, if mild or moderate infusion reactions (e.g., dyspnea, urticaria, or systolic blood pressure changes of ≤20 mm Hg) cannot be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate, the addition of treatment one hour before infusion with diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (or ibuprofen) to the regimen usually resolves the problem. Pretreatment can typically be discontinued after six to ten weeks.

Severe non-allergic anaphylactoid reactions such as major changes in blood pressure, wheezing, stridor, rigors, or drop in oxygen saturations should be immediately addressed by stopping the infusion and giving appropriate doses of subcutaneous (SQ) epinephrine, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine, and hydrocortisone or methylpredinsolone. Subsequent infusions should then be given at a significantly reduced rate with pretreatment with prednisone 24 hours and eight hours before the infusion, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen or ibuprofen orally one hour before the infusion, and IV methylpredinsolone just before beginning the infusion.

Because of the limitation of the design of the clinical trial, it is not known at this time whether the incidence or severity of infusion-related reactions is different for patients younger than age five years with severe respiratory compromise or with severe CNS disease.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using umbilical cord blood or bone marrow is a potential way of providing sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression of the disease [Guffon et al 2009, Annibali et al 2013]; however, the use of HSCT is controversial because of the associated high risk of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, it remains unclear if treatment early in life significantly reduces the progression of neurologic disease [Mullen et al 2000], and anecdotal case reports published to date have been disappointing, quite unlike the reports of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Hurler syndrome (MPS I). Overall, the efficacy of BMT for MPS II cannot be determined until a number of children with MPS II younger than age two years with known or probable severe CNS disease undergoes transplantation, along with documentation of long-term follow up [Tanaka et al 2012]. Although this study needs to be validated, the use of HSCT is difficult to justify since HSCT and ERT have equal efficacy in restoring growth in children with MPS II [Patel et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Given the risks associated with sedation with/without intubation, anesthesia is best administered in centers familiar with the potential complications in persons with MPS II. Risks associated with general anesthesia include the following:

Ankylosis of the temporomandibular (TM) joint can restrict oral access to the airway.

Visualization of the vocal cords is compromised by the large tongue, GAG-infiltrated soft tissues, and large tonsils and adenoids.

Care must be taken to avoid hyperextension of the neck secondary to atlantoaxial instability and cervicomedullary compression which may be present.

Nasopharyngeal intubation is often necessary. When endotracheal intubation is difficult or when sedation is required for brief procedures, laryngeal mask airway may be indicated.

The risk of airway complications may continue following successful surgery. Extubation may be difficult because laryngeal edema, which has been reported up to 27 hours post surgery, may prevent maintenance of a proper airway [Hopkins et al 1973]. Breathing a helium-oxygen mixture during extubation has been reported to relieve obstruction and improve outcome [Grosz et al 2001].

Surveillance



Guidelines for surveillance have been developed [Scarpa et al 2011].

Modes of surveillance for complications over time depend, like treatment, on organ system and disease severity. Because all persons with MPS II face the same organ failure issues, with the time of failure being dependent on severity, when and how often to monitor for change cannot be generalized. However, the following studies/evaluations are likely indicated on at least a yearly basis beginning in early to mid-childhood:

Cardiology visit with echocardiogram

Pulmonary clinic visit with pulmonary function testing

Audiogram

Eye examination, including examination through a dilated pupil to view the optic disc

Developmental assessment

Neurologic examination

The following are appropriate at baseline and/or when symptoms/age dictates:

Sleep study for obstructive sleep apnea

NCV study for evidence of carpal tunnel syndrome

Head/neck MRI to document ventricular size and cervicomedullary narrowing

Opening pressure on lumbar puncture

Orthopedic evaluation to monitor hip disease

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Although clinical experience suggests that early diagnosis of at-risk males allows initiation of ERT before the onset of irreversible changes and often before significant disease progression [Muenzer 2014], it is unclear at present whether early diagnosis (either by newborn screening or testing of at-risk male relatives) is beneficial as no data are available on whether early ERT improves the outcome of the somatic disease in MPS II. ERT is not expected to benefit children with the CNS form of the disease.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



A number of interventions are being evaluated for potential use in MPS II.

Recently, a phase I intrathecal delivery of iduronate 2-sulfatase was initiated (see Clinical Trials). Preliminary results showed no toxicity of the protein injected intrathetically at the dosage used (10 mg and 30 mg). The GAG concentration in the CSF was significantly reduced but clinical efficacy needed further evaluation [Muenzer et al 2014].

Another ongoing multicenter study is evaluating the effect of a one-year course of monthly intrathecal administration of 10 mg of idursulfase on neurodevelopmental status in children with MPS II and cognitive impairment who have previously received and tolerated a minimum of four months of Elaprase® therapy.

Other therapies under preclinical investigation include more direct delivery of enzyme into the CNS, higher peripheral dosing regimens, small-molecule therapies such as chaperone and substrate reduction, and gene therapy [Beck 2010]. Tissue uptake (including the brain and spinal cord) via the transferrin receptor of a fusion protein between iduronate 2-sulfatase (I2S) and a monoclonal antibody against the mouse transferrin receptor is being studied [Zhou et al 2012].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.