http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hyperchol

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) the following evaluations are recommended in adults and children:

Measurement of pre-treatment lipid values and lipoprotein(a) levels when possible

Exclusion of concurrent illnesses (kidney disease, acute myocardial infarction, infection) that can affect lipid values

Lipid panel including total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides

Consultation with a lipid specialist or clinician with expertise in FH

Recommended in some guidelines: noninvasive imaging modalities in children (e.g., measurement of carotid intima-media thickness) to help inform treatment decisions [Martin et al 2013]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Adults with FH



All individuals with FH should be considered “high risk” for coronary artery disease (CAD) and should be treated actively to lower cholesterol levels. Note that standard Framingham or other risk classification schemes are not applicable [Goldberg et al 2011, Hopkins et al 2011, Stone et al 2014]. The most current recommendations (summarized here) for the management of FH used in the United States are from the American Heart Association [Gidding et al 2015] (full text) and largely reflect earlier recommendations from the National Lipid Association (NLA).

For adults, treatment should begin as soon as possible after diagnosis. All adults with FH require diet/lifestyle management, and almost without exception will also require cholesterol-lowering drug therapy.

Risk factors (e.g., smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension) are the same in FH as in the general population; aggressive management is required to reduce CAD risk, with special attention to smoking cessation.

Regular physical activity, a healthy diet (reduce saturated fat intake, increase intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day), and weight control should be emphasized.

Blood pressure should be treated to 140/90mm Hg (or 130/80 mm Hg in those with diabetes mellitus).

Low-dose aspirin (75-81 mg/day) should be considered in those at high risk for CAD or stroke.

Consider referral to a lipid specialist with expertise in FH if LDL-C concentrations are not reduced with maximal medical therapy (Note: Although it has not been specified, this recommendation generally pertains to LDL-C levels that cannot be reduced by ≥50% with maximal medical therapy over a 6-month period.)

Testing of first-degree and second-degree relatives should be recommended to all individuals with FH (see Evaluation of Relatives at Risk).

For adults with FH age 20 years or older, treatment with statins should be initiated to reduce the LDL-C level ≥50% or to <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) [Hopkins et al 2011, Nordestgaard et al 2013]. Many guidelines suggest a target LDL-C of <100 mg/dL even in those without known CAD as individuals with FH have had a lifelong burden of high LDL-C [Gidding et al 2015].

For persons with FH with any of the following CAD risk factors, drug treatment may need to be intensified (see *Note) to achieve more aggressive treatment goals (LDL-C <100 mg/dL [<2.6 mmol/L] and non-HDL-C <130 mg/dL [<3.4 mmol/L]). Risk factors:

Clinically evident CAD or other atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; the goal is LDL-C level of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L)

Diabetes mellitus or metabolic syndrome

Family history of very early CAD (men age <45 years; women age <55 years)

Current smoking

High lipoprotein(a) (≥50 mg/dL [≥1.3 mmol/L] using an isoform insensitive assay)

The second-line agent for individuals with FH who do not achieve acceptable LDL-C levels is generally ezetimibe. Treatment options for intensification of therapy after ezetimibe or for those intolerant of statins include: bile acid sequestrants and/or PCSK9 inhibitors. Although niacin has been used as an adjunctive therapy in individuals with FH, given recent data, niacin is generally not favored before the other options have been exhausted [Guyton et al 2013, FDA 2016] (see Table 3).

In persons with FH without any of the CAD risk factors listed above, intensification of drug therapy (see *Note) should be strongly considered if 50% reduction in LDL-C is not achieved after six months on maximum statin therapy. For adults, some guidelines call for intensification of treatment if the goal LDL-C of <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) is not achieved [Nordestgaard et al 2013].

*Note: (1) The lipid-lowering therapy should initially be statin-based with titration of doses every few months in order to use the highest tolerated dose of a potent statin, followed by addition of other drugs if the targeted LDL-C level is not achieved. (2) The potential benefit of multi-drug regimens should be weighed against the increased cost and potential for adverse effects and decreased adherence.


Table 3. 

Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH




Class
Primary (1O) and Secondary (2O) Mechanism of Action
LDL-Lowering Response




Statins
↑ LDLR activity (1O)
>35% 1, 2


Cholesterol absorption inhibitors (ezetimibe)
↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)
15% 1, 3


Mipomersen (APOB antisense) 4
Blocks APOB production in the liver
50% 5


MTP inhibitor(lomitapide) 4
↓ microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity (1O)inhibition of LDL production (2O)
50% 5


PCSK9 inhibitors(alirocumab, evolocumab)
↓ LDL-receptor degradation
50% 6


Bile acid sequestrants(cholestyramine, colesevelam)
↓ Bile acid re-absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)
15% 1, 3


Stanol esters
↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)
10% 1, 3





Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.


1. 
Often ineffective in HoFH


2. 

Kastelein et al [2008]



3. 

Rader et al [2003]



4. 
Approved only for adults with HoFH


5. 

Cuchel et al [2014]



6. 

Raal & Santos [2012]



Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH

Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.

Often ineffective in HoFH


Kastelein et al [2008]


Rader et al [2003]

Approved only for adults with HoFH


Cuchel et al [2014]


Raal & Santos [2012]

Children with FH



Guidelines for the management of children and individuals up to age 21 years have been published by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (full text). Children should be considered for drug treatment with statin-based regimens when:

LDL-C levels are ≥190 mg/dL (≥4.9 mmol/L).

LDL-C levels are ≥160 mg/dL (≥4.1 mmol/L) and at least two other risk factors are present.

US-based guidelines from the NLA (full text):

Consultation or referral to a lipid specialist is recommended.

Management of diet and physical activity is recommended at an early age.

Statins are the preferred initial pharmacologic treatment in children. Consideration should be given to starting statin treatment at age eight years or older. In special cases, such as children with homozygous FH, drug treatment needs to be initiated prior to age eight years.

The goal of lipid-lowering therapy in children with FH is a ≥50% reduction in LDL-C or LDL-C <130 mg/dL (<3.4 mmol/L). Note: More aggressive lowering of LDL-C levels should be considered for children with additional CAD risk factors (e.g., family history of CAD, high blood pressure, unhealthy diet or exercise behaviors, obesity).

Children and Adults with Homozygous FH (HoFH)



NLA guidelines for homozygous FH (full text):

Referral to a lipid specialist is indicated.

Early initiation of therapy and monitoring are recommended.

Multiple drug therapy is usually needed. Several different classes of medications are currently being used to treat HoFH (see Table 3).

Since many cholesterol-lowering medications target the LDL receptor, effectiveness in persons with FH with biallelic loss-of function LDLR pathogenic variants can be limited [Cuchel et al 2014]. Statins are often relatively ineffective in the treatment of HoFH because their efficacy largely depends on the upregulation of functional LDL receptors in the liver. In HoFH, both copies of the LDL receptor have absent or greatly reduced activity [Raal & Santos 2012].

High-dose statins, ezetimibe, and bile-acid binding resins may be effective in some persons with HoFH, especially those with some residual LDLR activity.

For HoFH, evolocumab is a PCSK9 inhibitor that showed a 40% mean reduction in LDL-C compared with placebo; however, individuals with two loss-of-function variants saw no response [Raal et al 2015]. PCSK9 inhibitors have not been formally approved in children with FH.

HoFH-specific medications (lomitapide and mipomersen) are effective even with complete loss of LDL receptor function and – though not formally FDA approved for children – should strongly be considered.

Despite these options, many individuals with HoFH (especially those with complete loss of LDL receptor function) will require ongoing LDL apheresis. LDL apheresis (≤2x/week) is often required starting from a young age. Apheresis can lower LDL-C levels by 80% acutely and 30% chronically (weekly or biweekly). Apheresis is offered at a limited number (~40-50) of centers in the United States; many states do not have an apheresis center.

Liver transplantation is also being used in rare circumstances in some centers [Martinez et al 2016]

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Preventive measures include the following:

Statin-based therapy with addition of other medications as needed

Reduced intake of saturated fat

Increased intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day

Increased physical activity

Not smoking

Surveillance



Children. Guidelines for the management of children have been published by multiple national and international organizations [Daniels et al 2008, DeMott et al 2008, Descamps et al 2011, Martin et al 2013] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full texts).

A child who has a family history of FH or of premature CAD, who is heterozygous for the FH pathogenic variant in his or her family, or who has an elevated serum cholesterol concentration should have lipid levels checked starting as early as age two years [Goldberg et al 2011]. It is reasonable to check a non-fasting lipid level first and, if borderline, to follow with measurement of LDL-C. Some guidelines state that elevation of two consecutive measures of LDL-C are needed to confirm a diagnosis of FH [Martin et al 2013].

An LDL-C level of >130 mg/dL (>3.4 mmol/L) in a child is suspicious for FH and an LDL of >160 mg/dL (>4.1 mmol/L) is relatively specific for FH.

During treatment, individuals of any age with:

FH should have lipid levels monitored as recommended;

HoFH should be monitored with various imaging modalities (including echocardiogram, CT angiogram, and cardiac catheterization) as recommended [Raal & Santos 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Smoking

High intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fat

Excessive intake of cholesterol

Sedentary lifestyle

Obesity

Hypertension

Diabetes mellitus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



The CDC has classified FH as a Tier 1 condition indicating a significant benefit from performing family-based cascade screening using cholesterol testing with or without DNA analysis on relatives of affected persons with FH in order to identify previously unknown cases of FH and provide those people with life-saving treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of relatives at risk for FH can reduce morbidity and mortality [Goldberg et al 2011, Ned & Sijbrands 2011, Reiner et al 2011].

The genetic status of at-risk family members can be clarified by EITHER of the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member

Measurement of LDL-C level. Table 4 provides age-specific total cholesterol and LDL-C levels [Williams et al 1993]. Note: Age-specific LDL cut-offs are also available based on more contemporary data from the United Kingdom [Starr et al 2008].


Table 4. 

Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH




Degree of Relatedness to an Affected Individual
First Degree 1
Second Degree 2
Third Degree 3


Cholesterol Levels
Total Cholesterol (LDL Cholesterol) in mg/dL





Age

<20
220 (155)
230 (165)
240 (170)


20-29
240 (170)
250 (180)
260 (185)


30-39
270 (190)
280 (200)
290 (210)


40+
290 (205)
300 (215)
310 (225)





1. 
A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.


2. 
An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.


3. 
A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.



Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH

A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.

An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.

A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.

Of note, all national and international guidelines for FH call for “cascade testing” of relatives at risk (i.e., systematic testing of first- and second-degree relatives of the index case [proband]). Evidence supports the use of genetic testing in cascade testing algorithms to improve the detection of FH [DeMott et al 2008, Wierzbicki et al 2008, Wald et al 2016].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Statins are contraindicated during pregnancy; women with FH who are considering a pregnancy should be counseled of this risk and statins should be discontinued prior to conception.

Pregnant women should incorporate all the other recommended lifestyle changes including low saturated and trans unsaturated fat intake, no smoking, and high dietary soluble fiber intake (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pharmacologic treatment
during pregnancy

Statins are contraindicated in pregnancy due to concerns for teratogenicity. The use of statins during human pregnancy has not definitively been associated with adverse fetal outcome; however, the role of cholesterol in embryologic development has led to theoretic concerns about the effect of these medications on a developing fetus and a recommendation that alternative medications be considered during pregnancy and lactation. Nursing mothers should not take statins.

Bile acid binding resins (colesevelam, cholestyramine) are generally considered safe (Class B for pregnancy). Based primarily on animal studies, cholestyramine use during pregnancy has not been associated with an increased risk of fetal anomalies. However, use of cholestyramine could theoretically cause depletion of maternal fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin K.

LDL apheresis is also occasionally used.

Regarding other agents:

PCSK9 inhibitors. Use during pregnancy has not been well studied.

Ezetimibe. Use during human pregnancy has not been well studied.

Niacin. The use of pharmacologic doses of niacin, an essential vitamin, has not been studied in human pregnancy. The recommended upper limit of niacin intake during pregnancy is 30-35 mgs/day; higher doses have been associated with toxicity.

Therapies Under Investigation



CAD outcome trials of PCSK9 inhibitors are currently underway.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.