http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ipa

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual with AIP-related FIPA, the following evaluations are recommended (for details see Katznelson et al [2011]; full text). Note: The evaluation may have to be individualized depending on the presentation.

Detailed personal history, including findings that may be consistent with the following:

A growth hormone-secreting tumor (stature in relation to the rest of the family, change in facial appearance, change in shoe size, problems with ring sizes, headache, excessive sweating, joint pains, carpal tunnel syndrome)

A prolactinoma (menstrual history, galactorrhea, infertility, low libido, impotence)

A non-functioning pituitary adenoma and mass effects (headache, lack of other pituitary hormones, visual field problems)

Thyrotropinoma (hyperthyroidism with non-suppressed TSH)

Corticotropinoma with Cushing disease (truncal obesity, striae, muscle weakness, thin skin, diabetes mellitus, hypertension)

Review of serial photographs over time to help identify the onset of acromegalic or cushingoid changes if present at the time of diagnosis

Measurement of parental heights

Clinical examination including measurement of height and documentation of presence or absence of features consistent with the endocrine disorders acromegaly, pituitary gigantism, Cushing disease, thyrotoxicosis

Visual field evaluation

Basal pituitary function including: spot GH, IGF-1; prolactin; LH, FSH, testosterone/estradiol; TSH, fT4; 9 a.m. cortisol

Glucose tolerance test (GTT) in persons with findings of acromegaly to identify abnormal GH dynamics. In addition, about 25% of persons with acromegaly have a diabetic GTT. Assess ACTH reserve if necessary.

In adults with acromegaly, colonoscopy at age 40 years with further surveillance at three- to ten-year intervals depending on the presence/absence of adenomas in the initial colonoscopy and IGF-1 levels [Cairns et al 2010]

Pituitary MRI to detect the size and extent of a tumor, if one is suspected

Consultation with specialists in endocrinology

Consultation with specialists in medical genetics to obtain detailed family history (of possible pituitary problems, unusual stature, fertility problems, and/or early death)

Treatment of Manifestations



While there is experience with treating pituitary adenomas in symptomatic persons with FIPA, there is little experience in the management and treatment of persons identified prospectively through clinical screening due to family history of FIPA and/or presence of a heterozygous AIP germline pathogenic variant. The following recommendations are based on those of Biller et al [2008], Jaffe [2006], Katznelson et al [2011], and Melmed et al [2011].

Pituitary adenomas can be treated by surgery, medical therapy, and/or radiotherapy.

Adenomas in persons with FIPA, especially those with AIP-related FIPA, are aggressive. Surgery is usually performed, but often does not fully control the tumor. Transsphenoidal surgery has been performed for large adenomas, while microadenomas with normal clinical and biochemistry findings are monitored closely [Chahal et al 2011]. Large tumors, especially those recurring after surgery, may require radiotherapy when the tumor invades neighboring anatomic structures (such as the cavernous sinus).

Somatotropinomas, particularly in persons with a germline AIP pathogenic variant, often do not respond to medical therapy with somatostatin analogs. Daly et al [2010] showed no tumor shrinkage in AIP-related adenomas and significantly lower reductions in GH secretion (40% vs 75%) and IGF-1 secretion (47% and 56%); in these instances growth hormone receptor antagonist therapy could be initiated [Leontiou et al 2008, Daly et al 2010].

Radiotherapy (conventional or radiosurgery) is an option for treating growing adenomas, for which repeat surgery is unlikely to control hormone levels.

Prolactinomas are usually treated with dopamine agonist therapy (cabergoline being the drug of choice), which can result in tumor regression or in some cases disappearance of detectable lesions. No data suggest that FIPA-associated prolactinomas would respond less favorably to dopamine agonist therapy than do sporadic tumors; however, Daly et al [2010] suggested that prolactinomas in AIP-related FIPA appear to be aggressive and difficult to treat. Persons with AIP-related FIPA and a macroprolactinoma (diameter >10 mm) often undergo surgery.

NFPAs are treated with surgery and, if necessary, radiotherapy. They usually do not respond to traditional somatostatin analogs despite the presence of somatostatin receptors and an often good response in vitro. Dopamine agonist therapy has been tried in some cases. Timely diagnosis, prediction of long-term outcome, and treatment of NFPAs remain a challenge for endocrinologists [Korbonits & Carlsen 2009].

Temozolomide has been successfully used for the treatment of a few aggressive pituitary adenomas; however, there is no experience with its use in persons with AIP-related FIPA.

The increased burden of GH secretion and IGF-1 secretion (defined as the level and duration of increased hormone levels) observed in those with acromegaly is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and metabolic complications [Jayasena et al 2011]. Individuals with long-standing acromegaly often have cardiovascular and rheumatologic/orthopedic complications, which need to be treated accordingly.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Tumor size, surgery, and/or radiotherapy can cause hypopituitarism, which needs careful expert follow up.

Persons on glucocorticoid replacement therapy need to increase their steroid dose when ill or stressed.

Surveillance



No guidelines regarding surveillance of persons with AIP-related FIPA have been established. The following recommendations are based on the authors’ personal experience with more than 200 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic AIP-related FIPA.

Persons with AIP-related FIPA who have had a pituitary adenoma. The following are recommended to monitor for recurrence of the previous adenoma and development of new adenomas.

Yearly clinical assessment and basal pituitary function (IGF-1, spot GH, prolactin, LH/FSH, estradiol/testosterone, TSH, fT4, morning cortisol) and if necessary dynamic testing (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test) to evaluate for hormone excess or deficiency

Repeat pituitary MRI. Note: Frequency depends on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor, and treatment modality.

Persons with acromegaly. Follow established guidelines regarding clinical monitoring for related complications including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and colon cancer.

Persons with hypogonadism. Follow established guidelines. Because long-standing untreated hypogonadism may result in the early onset of osteoporosis, bone density needs to be assessed at baseline and if necessary monitored with DEXA scanning.

Persons with an AIP pathogenic variant and no history of pituitary adenomas. Recommendations follow. Note, however, that long-term experience with asymptomatic AIP heterozygotes is limited; more data are needed to develop appropriate future guidelines.

In a family in which an AIP pathogenic variant has been identified, relatives who have the family-specific AIP pathogenic variant or who have not been tested:


Adults

Baseline. Clinical assessment, pituitary function tests (IGF-1, prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, and fT4), and pituitary MRI

Thereafter

Perform annual clinical assessment and pituitary function tests.

Consider repeating a pituitary MRI every five years if clinical findings and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Consider discontinuing monitoring about age 50 years, after which the likelihood of developing new pituitary adenomas is low.


Children

Yearly beginning at age four years

Measure height and weight with calculation of height velocity. Document pubertal development, Tanner stages

Perform pituitary function tests (as for adults).

Perform baseline pituitary MRI at about age ten years.

Consider repeating the pituitary MRI every five years if clinical and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy may increase the size of a growth hormone-secreting adenoma or a prolactin-secreting adenoma (especially macroadenomas); thus, a pregnant woman with pituitary macroadenoma is at risk of developing visual field defects. In each trimester it is appropriate to inquire about headaches and perform visual field testing.

Therapies Under Investigation



A study that is actively ascertaining individuals with FIPA or childhood-onset pituitary adenoma is listed in ClinicalTrials.gov.

Growth hormone receptor antagonists block the action of endogenous growth hormone, thereby controlling disease manifestations such as headaches, soft tissue enlargement, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and high IGF-1 levels. A growth hormone receptor antagonist has been used successfully in persons with AIP-related FIPA and acromegaly and pituitary gigantism [Goldenberg et al 2008; Author, personal observation]. Although growth hormone receptor antagonists are currently not licensed for pediatric use, several case reports have shown their effectiveness, especially when IGF-1 levels need to be reduced immediately to prevent abnormally rapid growth [Higham et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.