http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lad-ad

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant leukodystrophy with autonomic disease (ADLD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a neurologist for evidence of autonomic dysfunction (e.g., orthostatic hypotension), abnormal tone, and/or tremor

Psychological evaluation and neuropsychological assessment

Assessment by rehabilitation specialists including equipment needs

Evaluation of swallowing function and communication

Gastroenterology evaluation for bowel dysfunction

Urologic evaluation for urinary dysfunction, recurrent urinary tract infection, and erectile dysfunction

Audiologic assessment

Consultation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Primary treatment is not possible, but management of symptoms can improve the comfort and care of individuals with this disorder [Van Haren et al 2015].


Autonomic dysfunction

Neurogenic bladder:

Recurrent urinary tract infections should be addressed with attention to bladder regimens for managing neurogenic bladders and in rare case antibiotic prophylaxis.

Urinary urgency may require spasmolytics (e.g., solifenacine succinate).

Constipation can be managed by good hydration and dietary fiber, although sometimes stool softeners (e.g., docusate) or a laxative is needed.

Hypotensive events can be minimized by pharmacologic treatment (mineralocorticoids such as fludrocortisone or vasopressors such as hydrochloride), compressive stockings, physical therapy (to help with rising from supine positions), and increased salt in the diet.

Feeding difficulties can be managed with speech therapy and appropriate feeding interventions to assure adequate nutrition while preventing aspiration pneumonia.

Sexual dysfunction can be alleviated with sildenafil.

Anhidrosis is managed by avoiding overheating.

Intensive management of infections should include adequate antipyretic treatment, as symptoms may worsen significantly with fever.

Spasticity. Medications that can help reduce muscle tone include oral baclofen or diazepam (GABA agonists) and injectable botulinum toxin for focal muscle spasticity. A good physical therapy regimen can be beneficial in improving joint mobility and function.

Ataxia. Although ataxia is difficult to treat, frequent falls can be managed with strategies to minimize falls and increase strength and adaptive equipment such as walkers or wheelchairs.

Cognitive dysfunction can affect social interactions and financial management. A social worker and financial planner can help anticipate issues of guardianship that may accompany progressive decline.

Family and patient support/advocacy groups can help address psychosocial consequences.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The following are appropriate:

Physiotherapy and orthopedic follow-up to address bone health including Vitamin D and calcium supplementations and management of spasticity to prevent joint contractures and dislocation

Attention to pulmonary care, including the use of measures to address chronic lung disease from recurrent aspiration events

Yearly influenza immunizations

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Because disease manifestations may be exacerbated with fever and infection, care should be taken to avoid whenever possible exposure to those with infections.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.