http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/m-hfm-ov

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with craniofacial microsomia (CFM), the authors recommend the following evaluations:

Upper airway obstruction. Evaluate all individuals with CFM for clinical findings of upper-airway obstruction with physical examination to assess for tachypnea, stridor, stertor, glossoptosis (e.g., tongue-based upper airway obstruction) increased work of breathing with visible retractions, and/or episodic upper-airway obstruction with apnea.

Children with findings of upper-airway obstruction should be referred to a craniofacial center and/or otolaryngologist.

For those without obvious findings of upper-airway obstruction, a sleep history should be obtained from caretakers to screen for airway obstruction during sleep, and a sleep study and/or sleep medicine consultation should be pursued in those with concerning reports.

Clinical feeding and nutrition evaluation. Assess the nutritional status of the infant/child as part of the general physical examination with weight and height plotted on standard growth charts.

If the child demonstrates both normal parameters for age and normal rate of growth, no further studies are needed.

If the child’s rate of growth and/or current measurements is below the fifth percentile, consultation with a clinical dietitian/nutritionist should be considered. Caretakers should be queried regarding feeding history with particular attention to inadequate suction with breast/bottle feeding, nasal regurgitation, coughing or choking during meals, or recurrent pneumonia. If any of these findings are reported, evaluation by a clinical feeding specialist (often occupational therapist or speech pathologist) and/or videofluoroscopic swallowing study is indicated.

Hearing evaluation. An ear-specific diagnostic hearing evaluation (with either brain stem auditory evoked response or otoacoustic air emissions) in the first two months of life is recommended (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss). Timing of subsequent hearing evaluations should be determined by the patient’s results and medical history.

Cervical spine films. Perform screening cervical spine imaging at age three years, or earlier if there are concerns (e.g., torticollis). If there are abnormalities on the radiographs, referral to an orthopedist is indicated.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis and yearly thereafter with annual physical examination. Radiographs should be obtained for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Echocardiogram. If there are concerns based on history or physical examination, obtain an echocardiogram.

Renal ultrasound examination. A screening renal ultrasound examination should be obtained at the time of diagnosis.

Treatment of Manifestations



For optimal outcome children with CFM require timely and coordinated assessments and interventions. Ideally, children should be managed by an experienced multidisciplinary craniofacial team that includes the following (in alphabetical order):

Audiologist

Dietitian

Clinical geneticist and genetic counselor

Nurse coordinator

Ophthalmologist

Oral and maxillofacial surgeon

Orthodontist

Orthopedist

Otolaryngologist

Pediatric dentist

Pediatrician

Plastic and reconstructive surgeon

Psychosocial professionals (psychologist, social worker)

Speech pathologist

The goals of treatment for CFM are to assure adequate respiratory support and nutritional status, maximize hearing and communication, optimize development, improve facial symmetry, and treat dental malocclusion. Treatment is age dependent, with time-sensitive interventions at appropriate stages of craniofacial growth and development. Treatment plans should be individually tailored to ensure the best results.

The phenotype in CFM is quite variable (see Table 1 for associated anomalies). Details of common surgical interventions have been reviewed elsewhere [Birgfeld & Heike 2012]. The following medical issues may need to be addressed in an individual with CFM:

Feeding. Infants with significant micrognathia, macrostomia, or a cleft palate may have difficulty with feeding and may require specialized bottles designed for infants with cleft palate and/or dysphagia (e.g., Habermann feeder, Mead-Johnson Squeeze bottle, Pigeon nipple, Dr. Brown nipples), supplemental nasogastric (NG) feedings, and gastrostomy tube placement. Consultation with an infant feeding specialist and/or dietitian should be considered.


Respiratory

Infants with severe mandibular hypoplasia may have significant upper-airway compromise and require tracheostomy placement and/or early mandibular advancement. Referral to a craniofacial center or otolaryngologist is recommended.

Those children with moderate mandibular hypoplasia may develop obstructive sleep apnea and require either medical (CPAP) or surgical (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy or mandibular surgery) intervention.

Face. Surgical repair is often recommended for facial tags and macrostomia within the first year. Surgery for palatal clefts typically occurs within the first year although this may be deferred for children with respiratory compromise.


Jaw and teeth

Good oral hygiene is especially important for children with CFM. Children should have consistent primary preventative dental care.

Orthodontic evaluations are important to assess for missing teeth, dental crowding, jaw growth, and dental malocclusion. Some children may need one or more dental appliances or braces to optimize facial growth, dental appearance, and function.

Children with mandibular hypoplasia may require a bone graft and/or mandibular distraction osteogenesis to lengthen the mandible and/or create a functional TMJ. In a child without airway compromise, these options may be considered when the child is between ages five and seven years.

The use of functional dental appliances to try and influence facial growth, vertical alveolar growth, and dental eruption in the younger patient may be considered, depending on the patient. When facial and jaw growth is nearly complete (age 13 to 16 years), most children with CFM require orthodontics, and many benefit from a final orthognathic surgery to create skeletal symmetry.


Hearing

All infants with CFM should have a diagnostic hearing evaluation (brain stem auditory evoked response [BAER]) within the first six months of life (regardless of whether the child passed the newborn hearing screen). Timing and type of additional testing depend on results from this initial evaluation and the child’s medical history. Early referral to an otolaryngologist is recommended. Early intervention for infants with hearing loss is important to optimize speech and language outcome.

Children with hearing impairment should receive guidance regarding recommendations for hearing aids, appropriate academic accommodations, and avoidance of ototoxic medications to prevent further hearing loss.

Conductive hearing loss, related to aural atresia in which the ossicles may be poorly formed or absent, may be treated with hearing aids. Children with unilateral conductive hearing loss and normal hearing in the contralateral ear are frequently not treated with amplification; however, their speech and language should be monitored closely.

Prior to planning external ear surgery, the authors recommend obtaining a CT scan to assess the middle- and inner-ear structures to help determine if atresia repair is likely to improve hearing. This surgery typically occurs after age five years. The CT may also reveal cholesteatomas, which occur in a small proportion of children with aural atresia.

Children with unilateral aural atresia should have serial screening (with hearing evaluations and tympanoscopy) to ensure maximal hearing of the unaffected ear.

Individuals with eustachian tube dysfunction should continue to have hearing and otologic status monitored, with a low threshold for placing tympanostomy tube(s).

Speech. Children with CFM may have cranial nerve palsies, clefts of the palate, malocclusion, and muscular deficiencies that can contribute to abnormal speech patterns (including velopharyngeal insufficiency). The authors recommend a speech evaluation prior to age two years, and ongoing monitoring by a speech and language pathologist.

Ears. Surgical options for treating ear malformations include auricular reconstruction or creation of a prosthetic ear. Options for management of microtia include the following:

No action

Prosthetic management, either adhesive or implant-retained

Staged surgical reconstruction, using autogenous rib or a synthetic framework

Because adult ear height is achieved by age six to eight years, surgical reconstruction or prosthetic management is often considered after age six years. Ear reconstruction should be coordinated with jaw surgeries for optimal long-term outcomes.

Eyes. Individuals with congenital or acquired epibulbar dermoids (pinkish-white growth on the sclerae) should be referred to the ophthalmologist. Large epibulbar dermoids and those that interfere with vision may require excision.

Cardiac. Children with physical examination findings suggestive of a cardiac anomaly should receive a timely referral to a pediatric cardiologist.

Renal. Individuals with renal anomalies should be referred to a nephrologist.


Skeletal

Children should undergo screening with four-view cervical spine radiographs (i.e., AP, lateral, flexion, and extension) at age three years when the bones are ossified. Those with anomalies should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis with annual physical examination. The authors recommend obtaining radiographs for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Family and social support. Children with CFM may be at increased risk for psychosocial difficulties [Maris et al 1999]. Social workers can provide support and guidance to children and their families, such as accessing community resources, making decisions about surgery, and adjusting to having facial differences.

Surveillance



Click here (pdf) for an overview of the common medical and surgical management recommendations for children with craniofacial microsomia (Adapted from Birgfeld & Heike [2012], published with permission from Semin Plast Surg).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with any degree of hearing loss. Avoid exposure to ototoxic drugs.

Individuals with cervical spine anomalies. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

Individuals with a single kidney. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).


For subsequent pregnancies of a woman who has had a child with CFM

Avoid vasoactive medications (pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, ibuprofen, and aspirin);

Manage diabetes mellitus to maintain good control and avoid hyperglycemia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.