http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mckd2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-UMOD, the following evaluations are recommended:

Determination of kidney function (measurement of serum creatinine concentration)

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration

Referral to a nephrologist because of the possibility of progression to chronic kidney disease

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations




Hyperuricemia/gout

Acute gout typically responds well to prednisone, short-term nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or colchicine.

Gout prevention with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered.

With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented.

Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required.

In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in UMOD-associated kidney disease are available at present.

Kidney disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs.

Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Allopurinol may slow the progression of kidney disease, although reliable data are not available [Pirson et al 2000, Fairbanks et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol, probenecid, or febuxostat can prevent development of gout.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Surveillance



Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Measurement of serum creatinine concentration at least annually in affected individuals, and more frequently in those with severe disease

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration at least annually

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Drugs known to be nephrotoxic should be avoided. NSAIDs are appropriate for short-term administration for treatment of gout or similar painful conditions. However, patients should avoid chronic daily use.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the familial UMOD pathogenic variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Particularly important are:

Adolescents because of their increased risk for gout, which can be prevented with allopurinol treatment;

Relatives interested in donating a kidney to an affected family member.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No pregnancy issues are particular to ADTKD-UMOD. However, in general, chronic kidney disease, depending on the stage, can affect pregnancy through increased hypertension and increased fetal loss.

Women of childbearing age who are taking medications such as allopurinol or an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor should discuss their medication regimen with their physician prior to conception.

A recent study has suggested that allopurinol use during pregnancy may be associated with fetal malformations. While the study included women who were on many other medications when they became pregnant, allopurinol should be discontinued in women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant [Hoeltzenbein et al 2013].

Similarly, the use of ACE inhibitors during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can result in fetal damage and death. Women who are taking ACE inhibitors prior to pregnancy or at the time of conception should be transitioned to another antihypertensive medication.

Ideally, women should not be taking either allopurinol or an ACE inhibitor during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.