http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/men2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Referral to an endocrinologist

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Biochemical evaluations

Plasma calcitonin

Plasma catecholamines and metanephrines

Serum calcium and parathyroid hormone

Workup to evaluate for metastatic disease in individuals with MTC

CT with contrast for chest and abdomen

MRI of liver with nodal disease or calcitonin >400 pg/mL

Treatment of Manifestations



Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Standard treatment for MTC is surgical removal of the thyroid and lymph node dissection [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009, National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Current NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of therapeutic external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for incomplete tumor resection or extrathyroidal extension with positive margins [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Two kinase inhibitors – vandetanib and cabozantinib – have been shown to improve progression-free survival and in some cases cause disease regression in unresectable or advanced metastatic MTC [Elisei et al 2013, Wells et al 2013].

All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy need thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

Autotransplantation of parathyroid tissue is not typically performed at the time of thyroidectomy unless there is evidence of hyperparathyroidism [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Pheochromocytomas detected by biochemical testing and radionuclide imaging are removed by adrenalectomy, which may be performed using video-assisted laparoscopy. Historically, some specialists recommended bilateral adrenalectomy at the time of demonstration of tumor on just a single adrenal gland because of the strong probability that the other adrenal gland would develop a tumor within ten years. However, because of the risk for adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis following bilateral adrenalectomy, most experts now recommend unilateral adrenalectomy in unilateral tumors and cortical-sparing adrenal surgery with close monitoring of the remnant tissue in persons with one remaining adrenal gland or bilateral pheochromocytoma [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Hypertensive treatment prior to adrenalectomy involves the use of α- and β-adrenergic receptor blockade [Pacak et al 2005].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia diagnosed at the time of thyroidectomy is treated either with resection of the visibly enlarged parathyroid gland(s), subtotal parathyroidectomy, or total parathyroidectomy with forearm autograft [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, in most individuals with MEN 2A, hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed many years after thyroidectomy.

Individuals with biochemical evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism who have undergone prior thyroidectomy should have preoperative localization with excision of the localized hypertrophied parathyroid glands and forearm autotransplantation.

Therapy with medications to control primary hyperparathyroidism should be considered in individuals with a high risk for surgical mortality, limited life expectancy, or persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism after one or more surgical attempts [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Prophylactic thyroidectomy is the primary preventive measure for individuals with an identified germline RET pathogenic variant [Cohen & Moley 2003, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is safe for all age groups; however, the timing of the surgery is controversial [Moley et al 1998]. According to the consensus statement from the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force, the age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is performed can be guided by the codon position of the RET pathogenic variant (Table 4, Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, these guidelines continue to be modified as more data become available.


Table 4. 

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions




ATA 1 Risk Level
Pathogenic Variants 2, 3
Age of Prophylactic Surgery
Age to Begin Screening


For PHEO
For HPT 4




Level D(highest risk)
p.Ala883Phep.Met918Thrp.Val804Met+p.Glu805Lys 5p.Val804Met+p.Tyr806Cys 5p.Val804Met+p.Ser904Cys 5
As soon as possible in 1st year of life
8 yrs
NA


Level C
p.Cys634Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyr
<5 yrs
8 yrs
8 yrs


Level B
p.Cys609Phe/Arg/Gly/Ser/Tyrp.Cys611Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys618Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Cys620Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys630Arg/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Asp631Tyrp.633/9 bp dupp.634/12 bp dupp.Val804Met+p.Val778Ile 5
Consider <5 yrs; may delay if criteria met 5
Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs
Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs


Level A
p.Arg321Glyp.531/9 bp dupp.532 dupp.Cys515Serp.Gly533Cysp.Arg600Glnp.Lys603Glup.Tyr606Cysp.635/insert ELCR;p.Thr636Prop.Lys666Glup.Glu768Aspp.Asn777Serp.Leu790Phep.Val804Leu/Metp.Gly819Lysp.Arg833Cysp.Arg844Glnp.Arg866Trpp.Ser891Alap.Arg912Pro
May delay beyond age 5 yrs if criteria met 6
20 yrs
20 yrs





Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]


1. 
ATA = American Thyroid Association


2. 
p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].


3. 
Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.


4. 
HPT = Hyperparathyroidism


5. 
Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele


6. 
Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC



Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

ATA = American Thyroid Association

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Thyroidectomy for C-cell hyperplasia, before progression to invasive MTC, may allow surgery to be limited to thyroidectomy with sparing of lymph nodes [Brandi et al 2001, Kahraman et al 2003].

For all individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who have not had a thyroidectomy, annual biochemical screening is recommended with immediate thyroidectomy if results are abnormal [Szinnai et al 2003].

Annual serum calcitonin screening [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] should begin at age:

Six months for children with MEN 2B

Three to five years for children with MEN 2A or FMTC

Caution should be used in interpreting calcitonin results for children younger than age three years, especially those younger than age six months [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is not routinely offered to at-risk individuals in whom the disorder has not been confirmed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prior to any surgery, the presence of a functioning pheochromocytoma should be excluded by appropriate biochemical screening in any individual with MEN 2A or MEN 2B. In a prospective study of at-risk family members with the pathogenic variant, 8% had pheochromocytoma detected at the same time as MTC [Nguyen et al 2001].

If pheochromocytoma is detected, adrenalectomy should be performed before thyroidectomy to avoid intraoperative catecholamine crisis [Lee & Norton 2000].

Surveillance



MTC. Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with MTC who have undergone total thyroidectomy and neck nodal dissections have recurrent disease [Cohen & Moley 2003]. Furthermore, thyroid glands removed from individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who had normal plasma calcitonin concentrations have been found to contain MTC [Skinner et al 1996]. Therefore, continued monitoring for residual or recurrent MTC is indicated after thyroidectomy, even if thyroidectomy is performed prior to biochemical evidence of disease.

The screening protocol for MTC after prophylactic thyroidectomy is an annual measurement of serum calcitonin [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. More frequent follow up is recommended for those with residual disease.

Hypoparathyroidism. All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy and autotransplantation of the parathyroids need monitoring for possible hypoparathyroidism.

Pheochromocytoma. For individuals whose initial screening results are negative for pheochromocytoma, annual biochemical screening is recommended, followed by MRI and/or CT if the biochemical results are abnormal [Pacak et al 2005, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Other screening studies, such as scintigraphy or positron emission tomography, may be warranted in some individuals.

MEN 2A. Annual biochemical screening beginning at age eight years has been recommended for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634 and at age 20 years for a pathogenic variant in all other codons [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Screening as for MEN 2A is indicated, as not all families classified as FMTC are MTC-only [Moers et al 1996].

MEN 2B. Annual screening should begin at age eight years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia. Annual biochemical screening is recommended for affected individuals who have not had parathyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation.

MEN 2A. Screening should start at age eight years for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634, and by age 20 years for individuals with other RET pathogenic variants [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Periodic screening should begin at age 20 years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

MEN 2B. Screening is unnecessary as individuals with MEN 2B do not have an increased risk of hyperparathyroidism.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide and veralipride) and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers) have a high potential to cause an adverse reaction in individuals with pheochromocytoma.

Other medications including monoamine oxidase inhibitors, sympathomimetics (e.g., ephedrine), and certain peptide and corticosteroid hormones may also cause complications; tricyclic antidepressants are inconsistent in causing adverse reactions [Eisenhofer et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. The American Society of Clinical Oncologists (ASCO) identifies MEN 2 as a Group 1 disorder, i.e., a well-defined hereditary cancer syndrome for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [American Society of Clinical Oncology 2003]. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known:

MEN 2A.
RET molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk children by age five years. The finding of MTC in the thyroid of a 12-month-old with a RET pathogenic variant suggests that molecular genetic testing should be performed even earlier when possible [Machens et al 2004].

FMTC. Recommendations for families with known FMTC are the same as for MEN 2A.

MEN 2B.
RET molecular genetic testing should be performed as soon as possible after birth in all children known to be at risk [Brandi et al 2001].

The following screening of at-risk family members if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known:

Neck ultrasound examination and basal and/or stimulated calcitonin measurements for MTC

Albumin-corrected calcium or ionized calcium for hyperparathyroidism

Measurement of plasma or 24-hour urine metanephrines and normetanephrines as appropriate [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] for pheochromocytoma

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation



Clinical trials of multikinase inhibitors such as sorafenib, sunitinib, and ponatinib are currently underway. NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of clinical trial participation for individuals who fail standard treatment with vandetanib and cabozantinib [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015].

Sorafenib is FDA approved for use in renal cell and hepatocellular carcinoma. In a Phase II clinical trial of sorafenib, 16 individuals with sporadic MTC had a partial response (1/16) or stable disease (15/16) [Lam et al 2010]. A small Phase II trial of treatment with sunitinib demonstrated objective response in three (50%) of six individuals with metastatic MTC and stable disease in two individuals [Carr et al 2010]. Ponatinib has been shown to inhibit RET kinase activity and diminish medullary thyroid cancer in mice [De Falco et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.