http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/merrf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged red fibers), the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height and weight to assess growth

Audiologic evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Assessment of cognitive abilities

Physical therapy assessment

Neurologic evaluation, including MRI, MRS, and EEG if seizures are suspected

Cardiac evaluation

Medical genetics consultation including genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations



The seizure disorder can be treated with conventional anticonvulsant therapy. No controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different anticonvulsants. Levetiracetam, clonazepam, zonisamide, and valproic acid (VPA) have been used to treat myoclonic epilepsy; however, VPA may cause secondary carnitine deficiency and should be avoided or used with L-carnitine supplementation.

The myoclonus improved substantially in three of four individuals treated with levetiracetam [Crest et al 2004, Mancuso et al 2007]. Clonazepam can also reduce myoclonus.

Physical therapy is helpful for any impaired motor abilities.

Aerobic exercise is helpful in MERRF and other mitochondrial diseases [Taivassalo & Haller 2004].

Standard pharmacologic therapy is used to treat cardiac symptoms.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of affected individuals with heterogeneous mitochondrial diseases, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].

Surveillance



Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals (e.g. every 6-12 months initially) to monitor progression of disease and the appearance of new symptoms.

Annual neurologic, ophthalmologic, cardiology (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.

If normal for three years, less frequent evaluations can be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with MERRF should avoid mitochondrial toxins including aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



During pregnancy, affected or at-risk women should be monitored for diabetes mellitus and respiratory insufficiency, which may require therapeutic interventions.

Therapies Under Investigation



The transfer of nuclear DNA from fertilized oocytes or zygotes harboring a mtDNA pathogenic variant to a recipient enucleated recipient cell could theoretically prevent transmission of mtDNA diseases and proof of this concept has been demonstrated in pronuclear transfers from abnormally fertilized zygotes that were allowed to undergo several replications in vitro [Craven et al 2010].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.