http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/miccap-ms

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with microcephaly-capillary malformation (MIC-CAP) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment to determine the types of services and therapies needed (e.g., physiotherapy, occupational therapy, communication assistance)

Pediatric neurology evaluation

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess for functional vision, strabismus, refractive errors, and optic atrophy

Swallowing/feeding evaluation to assess for dysphagia and aspiration and determine need for enteral feeding

Baseline audiology evaluation

Baseline echocardiogram and abdominal ultrasound examination

Pediatric palliative care consultation and psychosocial support for family

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Development. As for all children with profound developmental disability, infants and children with MIC-CAP syndrome require stimulation and recreation. Given that most have poor vision, regular tactile and auditory stimulation are recommended.

Physical habilitation. Central hypotonia and peripheral hypertonia require care by physicians and therapists specializing in physical habilitation. If the child is non-ambulatory, proper seating and bracing is required to maintain posture and prevent contractures.

Neurologic. Seizure management during infancy requires an experienced pediatric neurology team to manage medically refractory epilepsy. Multiple anticonvulsant medications are frequently required for adequate seizure control. A few individuals have responded favorably to ketogenic diet or corticosteroids.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues (e.g., enteral feeding team to optimize nutrition and weight gain)

Surveillance



Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular follow up with a child neurologist for seizure management

Regular follow up with a complex care/palliative care team or experienced pediatrician to monitor for complications associated with severe neurologic impairment (e.g., aspiration, constipation, contractures, pressure sores)

Periodic reevaluation with a clinical geneticist to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Valproic acid. One individual with MIC-CAP syndrome died from complications of pancreatitis after starting valproic acid for seizures [Carter et al 2011]. However, several other individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome have been treated with valproic acid without adverse effects. Therefore, it is unclear whether or not an association exists between MIC-CAP syndrome and adverse outcomes with valproic acid therapy. The benefits of use of valproic acid for seizure management in some patients may outweigh the potential risk for serious complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.