http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mmd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiminicore disease (MmD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Comprehensive respiratory evaluation including assessment of breathing rate, signs of respiratory distress, ability to maintain oxygen saturations, pulmonary function studies, and sleep studies to rule out nocturnal hypoxia

Assessment of feeding abilities including suck, swallow, gastroesophageal reflux, and maintenance of airway while feeding; evaluation of growth parameters to identify failure to thrive and determine need for interventions including gavage feeds and gastrostomy tube insertion

Spinal x-rays to evaluate for presence of scoliosis; physical examination for joint contractures

Cardiac evaluation for cardiomyopathy/cardiac involvement secondary to respiratory complications

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to develop interventions based on the distribution and extent of weakness

Speech evaluation, especially if dysarthria or hypernasal speech is present

Orthodontic evaluation for palatal anomalies

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment is aimed at prevention of disease manifestations, early diagnosis by regular screening, and aggressive management of complications that may develop. Effective treatment requires a multidisciplinary approach that can improve both quality of life and survival for the affected individual.

Ongoing careful assessment of the potential need for part-time or permanent respiratory support is absolutely critical, as affected individuals may rapidly enter respiratory crisis or may unknowingly suffer from potentially fatal nocturnal hypoventilation.

Feeding support with tube/gavage feeds is needed if oral intake is poor. Failure to thrive may need to be overcome with high-caloric density formulas/feeds. Gastroesophageal reflux (if present) is treated in the usual manner.

Physical and occupational therapy may help to improve/maintain gross motor and fine motor functions.

Speech therapy should be provided for individuals with dysarthria/hypernasal speech.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Annual influenza and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory infections is critical.

Surveillance



Monitoring for potential complications that can influence the prognosis of MmD includes the following:

Frequent and regular monitoring of the spine particularly during childhood and adolescence when scoliosis can rapidly progress during the adolescent growth spurt

Careful monitoring of respiratory function from an early stage because of the risk for insidious nocturnal hypoxia and sudden respiratory failure. Monitoring of respiratory function should include the following:

Close attention to nocturnal hypoventilation symptoms including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance

Lung function tests (FEV1 and FVC)

Sleep studies

Assessment of the need for intermittent or permanent ventilation. Nocturnal ventilation, when indicated, may significantly improve the prognosis.

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk of cardiac impairment secondary to respiratory involvement

Growth should be assessed regularly.

Regular neuromuscular evaluation to assess disease progress is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Risk for malignant hyperthermia. Depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine) and inhalational agents (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, desflurane) can cause malignant hyperthermia and therefore need to be avoided during surgical procedures/childbirth, as RYR1 pathogenic variants are associated with both malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and MmD.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In women with MmD, there is risk for malignant hyperthermia during delivery if inhalational anesthetic agents are used. A woman who has a fetus affected by MmD may develop polyhydramnios during pregnancy and may report a history of poor fetal movements. Abnormal presentation of an affected fetus may complicate delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.