http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mpph

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with megalencephaly-postaxial polydactyly-polymicrogyria-hydrocephalus (MPPH) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination with particular attention to head size (OFC)

In the presence of hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, full spinal MRI to evaluate for syringomyelia or syrinx formation

Assessment by a pediatric neurologist with evaluation of suspected seizures as indicated

Assessment of feeding by a feeding specialist, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist for evidence of chewing and swallowing difficulties and dysphagia

Developmental assessment

Echocardiogram (to evaluate for structural cardiac defects)

Renal ultrasound examination (to evaluate for structural renal defects)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Neurosurgical complications (hydrocephalus and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia). Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management are lacking.

Feeding difficulties such as chewing and swallowing difficulties and dysphagia require evaluation by a feeding specialist and/or gastroenterologist to promote early identification and prompt intervention which may include dietary modification and/or placement of a gastrostomy (G) tube.

Speech therapy is indicated for difficulties with speech, swallowing, and feeding.

Epilepsy may require long-term antiepileptic treatment.

Developmental delays. Initiation of physical, occupational, and speech therapy is recommended within the first year of life.

Surveillance



Given the limited number of individuals reported with MPPH syndrome, no formal surveillance guidelines exist; however, recommended surveillance includes the following:

Follow-up with a pediatric neurologist, at least every six months until age six years, and annually thereafter.

Brain MRI to detect hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia; provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Long-term neurologic follow up is recommended for management of epilepsy.

Routine follow up with a developmental pediatrician is appropriate, given the high risk for developmental delays and/or intellectual disability.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.