http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mps1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I), the following evaluations are recommended:

Skeletal survey to determine the involvement of the spine and degree and extent of joint involvement

Ophthalmologic examination with measurement of visual acuity and intraocular pressure, slit lamp examination of the cornea, and assessment of retinal function by electroretinography and visual field testing

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess ventricular size and function

Hearing assessment

ENT assessment and consideration of ventilating tubes for recurrent otitis media

Consideration of sleep study

Cranial imaging, preferentially MRI, including assessment of possible hydrocephalus

Assessment of spinal cord and peripheral nerve involvement

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Guidelines for the management of MPS I have been developed [Muenzer et al 2009].

Supportive or symptomatic management can improve the quality of life for affected individuals and their families.

Infants with severe MPS I require a stimulating environment to promote early learning, as some skills may be retained during the period of general deterioration.

Skeletal. Physical therapy is a critical aspect of MPS I therapy [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010a]. Range of motion exercises appear to offer some benefits in preserving joint function, and should be started early. Once significant joint limitation has occurred, increased range of motion may not be achieved without hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).

Various orthopedic approaches can be undertaken, particularly in individuals with attenuated disease. Joint replacement and atlanto-occipital stabilization may be necessary. These procedures must be performed at appropriate times in the individual's clinical course and must take into account the presence of other disease complications.

Carpal tunnel syndrome should be treated especially in individuals with attenuated MPS I and individuals with severe MPS I who have had HSCT. Most individuals lack typical symptoms (pain, tingling, or numbness) until severe compression occurs [Haddad et al 1997, Van Heest et al 1998, Bahadir et al 2009]; thus, nerve conduction studies should be used early in the course of disease to identify persons with carpal tunnel syndrome at a time when surgical release may be most beneficial. Surgical decompression of the median nerve results in variable restoration of motor hand activity [Van Heest et al 1998]. Intervention at an early stage, prior to severe nerve damage, optimizes outcome; repeated surgery may be required.

Ophthalmologic. Wearing peaked caps or eye shades can help reduce glare resulting from corneal clouding. Corneal transplantation is successful for individuals with attenuated disease, although donor grafts eventually become cloudy. Individuals with clear grafts may still experience poor vision because of involvement of the retina and/or optic nerve [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Cardiovascular. Cardiac valve replacement should be considered early.

Hearing loss. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy correct eustachian tube dysfunction and decrease upper airway obstruction. Early placement of ventilating tubes is recommended in severely affected individuals. Hearing aids should also be considered.

ENT (otolaryngologic). Sleep apnea may require tracheotomy or high-pressure continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) with supplemented oxygen. Tracheostomy is often required to maintain the airway and control pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

Gastrointestinal system. Some gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea and constipation) can be controlled by diet, including control of the amount of roughage. Increased roughage and the conservative use of laxatives may ease constipation.

Hydrocephaly. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure and progressive ventricular enlargement indicate a shunting procedure. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting in individuals with MPS I who have moderate to severe hydrocephalus is generally palliative and improves quality of life.

Other. Progressive compression of the spinal cord with resulting cervical myelopathy should be aggressively and quickly evaluated in individuals with attenuated disease or those who have had HSCT. Early surgical intervention may prevent severe complications.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)



HSCT is considered standard of care for children with severe MPS I. Outcome from HSCT is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time of diagnosis (and thus, with the age of the patient). Due to the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with severe MPS I.

HSCT should be used only in carefully selected children with extensive pretransplantation clinical assessment and counseling in whom systematic long-term monitoring will be possible [Aldenhoven et al 2015a, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Adults have not undergone HSCT.

Pulmonary and cardiac complications in the peri-transplant period appear to be significant predictors of transplant complications [Orchard et al 2010].

In general, the outcome of children undergoing HSCT is varied and depends on the degree of clinical involvement and the child's age at the time of transplantation. It is generally recommended that HSCT be performed before age two years to maximize benefit.

HSCT has been successful in reducing the progression of some findings in children with severe MPS I [Vellodi et al 1997, Guffon et al 1998, Neufeld & Muenzer 2001, Souillet et al 2003, Staba et al 2004, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Although the heterogeneity of the disease makes the outcomes of HSCT somewhat difficult to interpret, available data show that:

Successful HSCT reduces facial coarseness, and hepatosplenomegaly, improves hearing, and maintains normal heart function;

The skeletal manifestations and corneal clouding continue to progress at the same rate in children treated with HSCT and in untreated children [Weisstein et al 2004, Taylor et al 2008];

The degree to which HSCT relieves neurologic complications other than progressive intellectual decline is not clear: a few reports suggest improvement [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Valayannopoulos et al 2010] whereas others do not [Eisengart et al 2013, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. In children undergoing HSCT before evidence of significant developmental delay (i.e., usually between ages 12 and 18 months), HSCT appears to slow the course of cognitive decline. Children showing significant cognitive impairment prior to undergoing HSCT do not show correction of existing impairment.

HSCT is not curative and does not ameliorate cardiac valvular or skeletal manifestations.

In individuals predicted to have severe MPS I based on the presence of known severe pathogenic variants, use of HSCT resulted in stabilization and improvement of myocardial function with regression of hypertrophy and normalization of chamber dimensions [Braunlin et al 2003]. In that cohort, HSCT did not appear to show significant effects on the presence and progression of valvular involvement.

In part because of increased longevity after HSCT, treated individuals develop increasing pain and stiffness of the hips and knees, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord compression, and progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis [reviewed in Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. As a result, various orthopedic procedures intended to maintain function and gait have been performed post-HSCT [Masterson et al 1996, Tandon et al 1996].

Pathophysiology. The beneficial effect of HSCT is thought to result from the replacement of deficient macrophages by marrow-derived donor macrophages (Kupffer cells; pulmonary, splenic, nodal, tonsilar, and peritoneal macrophages; and microglial cells) that constitute an ongoing source of normal enzyme capable of gaining access to the various sites of storage [Guffon et al 1998, Prasad & Kurtzberg 2010]. As existing damage is not reversed, early HSCT is critical for optimal effect.

One hypothesis regarding the failure of HSCT in treating skeletal manifestations is the relatively poor vascularity of bone tissues [Taylor et al 2008].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)



Laronidase (Aldurazyme®) is currently licensed in the US, Europe, and Canada for use in treating non-CNS manifestations of MPS I. The current dose regime involves premedication with an anti-inflammatory and antihistamine drugs and intravenous weekly infusion of 100 U/kg of Aldurazyme® over four hours. Note that the package insert provides details that may differ by country.

The potential effect of Aldurazyme® on the progression of somatic findings and (more importantly) the effect that Aldurazyme® may have when started very early in the treatment of an individual with attenuated disease remain to be answered. The latter is particularly important as early diagnosis is critical. Aldurazyme® does not cross the blood-brain barrier and thus is not expected to influence the CNS disease in severely affected individuals.

A Phase I open label study included ten individuals with attenuated MPS I treated with human α-L-iduronidase and studied over one year. This study showed improvement in liver size, growth, joint mobility, breathing, and sleep apnea. Increased ability to perform daily functions was reported [Kakkis et al 2001]. A six-year follow up of five of the treated individuals showed sustained improvements in joint range of motion and sleep apnea and no progression of heart disease, but evidence of progression of valvular involvement [Sifuentes et al 2007].

A Phase III double-blind placebo-controlled study included 45 individuals with attenuated MPS I treated for 52 weeks with a 26-week placebo phase [Wraith et al 2005]. This study showed statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function and a six-minute walk test and clear biologic effect with reduction in urinary GAG excretion and liver volume. Patients who had significant sleep apnea at the start of the study improved significantly.

Other case reports representing smaller numbers of treated patients show variable responsiveness to treatment. The heterogeneity of treated patients published to date complicates any conclusions that can be drawn. It appears that the ability of ERT to reverse disease symptoms in individuals with attenuated disease relates closely to the burden of disease prior to commencement of treatment.

All published reports indicate that ERT is well tolerated. Although most individuals treated in either clinical trial developed IgG antibodies, no apparent clinical effects have been reported. These antibodies may, however, hinder therapeutic benefit by promoting more rapid clearance of the enzyme. Follow up of individuals who were part of the Phase I and Phase III studies indicates that immune tolerance is eventually reached [Kakavanos et al 2003, Wraith et al 2005].

A Phase III extension trial included 40 of the individuals from the Phase III trial for an additional four years of treatment [Clarke et al 2009].

Urinary GAG levels decreased 60%-70% before the reduction rate plateaued after 12 weeks (with 15% of patients achieving normal values).

Hepatic volume normalized in 92%.

Respiratory function either improved slightly or remained constant.

Shoulder joint mobility increased gradually, with larger increases being seen in persons with more severe disease.

Timed walk measurements remained largely constant.

Quality of life index improved in most (especially with respect to pain).

Visual acuity improved in 24% although corneal clouding was unchanged.

Growth resumed in approximately 70%; although the growth rate increased with treatment, the final height was still reduced.

The most common reactions were of an immune nature; most were not serious, indicating that Aldurazyme® is generally well tolerated. IgG antibodies to Aldurazyme® were produced in 93% of patients, in inverse correlation to urinary GAG excretion levels; they were not, however, directly related to adverse immune reactions.

Other studies have shown:

Improvement in height and cranial diameter with earlier administration of Aldurazyme® (age <1 year) as compared to later administration (age ≥3 years), despite no measurable improvement in growth rate when treatment was started at age one year [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010b];

Improvement of learning performance in one of three patients and noticeable alteration of MRI profile after 3.5-4.5 years of ERT in 3/3 persons with attenuated disease [Valayannopoulos et al 2010]; however, many more individuals would need to be treated to confirm this finding.

Clear differences between early initiation (age 5 months) and late initiation (age 5 years) of ERT in sibs with attenuated MPS I [Coppa et al 2010].

Pathophysiology. The effectiveness of ERT depends on the ability of recombinant enzymes (supplied intravenously) to enter cells and to localize to the lysosome, the appropriate intracellular site [Russell & Clarke 1999].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is advised for individuals with cardiac abnormalities [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Individuals with MPS I present major anesthetic risks, including death [Moores et al 1996]. It is appropriate for affected individuals to undergo general anesthesia in centers staffed by anesthesiologists experienced in managing individuals with a mucopolysaccharidosis [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. The following are important considerations:

Dysostosis multiplex can lead to instability of the spine, including the atlanto-axial joint. Careful positioning and avoidance of hyperextension of the neck are necessary.

Induction of anesthesia for any purpose can be difficult because of the difficulty of maintaining an adequate airway. Smaller than anticipated endotracheal tubes may be required for endotracheal intubation because the trachea may be narrowed and the vocal cords thickened.

Intubation may require fiber-optic laryngoscopy.

Recovery from anesthesia may be slow and postoperative airway obstruction is a common problem.

Surveillance



The recommended minimal schedule of assessments is highlighted in Muenzer et al 2009].

Persons with MPS I, regardless of disease severity and mode of treatment, should be actively followed at a center that is experienced with the care of individuals with MPS disease.

Aggressive orthopedic management for all patients regardless of treatment choices and disease severity; yearly or more frequent assessment by an experienced orthopedic surgeon is recommended.

Routine median nerve conduction velocity testing because of the high incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome [Van Heest et al 1998]

Annual ophthalmologic assessment with assessment of corneal status and retinal function

Cardiac assessment including annual echocardiogram

Annual assessment by an audiologist as well as by an otolaryngologist to determine the degree and cause of hearing impairment

Early and continuous monitoring of head growth by measuring occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) in infants and children

Cranial ultrasound examination and other brain imaging studies are recommended if a rapid increase in OFC occurs.

MRI can show ventriculomegaly, but imaging studies often cannot reliably distinguish between brain atrophy and brain compression.

Lumbar puncture with measurement of opening pressure of CSF is a preferred method for assessing the degree of pressure elevation [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Annual assessment for evidence of spinal cord compression by neurologic examination with consideration of spinal MRI studies when indicated

Developmental assessment in all patients; consideration of psycho-educational assessment of children with attenuated disease prior to primary school entry

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Sibs of affected individuals should be identified either through molecular genetic testing of IDUA, if both pathogenic variants in the family are known, or assay of IDUA enzyme activity in order to initiate therapy as early in the course of disease as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Key elements of the management of women with MPS I who become pregnant involve assessment and frequent monitoring of cardiorespiratory as well as spinal cord involvement.

Therapies Under Investigation



With the success of ERT for MPS I demonstrated by clinical trials, an increased effort is underway to improve responsiveness to ERT and to develop other forms of therapy directed at areas/organs that may not be responsive to ERT, such as skeletal and neurologic involvement.

Combined ERT and HSCT. Whether long-term combined ERT and HSCT may improve the outcome of a severely affected individual is of interest.

Delivery of enzyme to the CNS. Intravenous infusion of recombinant proteins does not lead to transfer of proteins across the blood-brain barrier. Various means to provide enzyme to the CNS are currently being researched. These approaches include CSF instillation of enzyme via direct injection, continuous pumps, microcapsule implants, and production of chimeric recombinant proteins, enabling passage across the blood-brain barrier.

A clinical trial of intrathecal ERT is currently underway in patients who have evidence of spinal cord involvement. To date, this method has reduced CSF GAG levels and CSF pressure and has been found to be safe. The efficacy of intrathecal ERT is unclear [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Dickson et al 2015a, Dickson et al 2015b].

Stabilization of mutated enzyme with substrate analogs. It is now generally accepted that lysosomal enzymes must be processed through a complex intracellular sorting mechanism prior to transport to the lysosome. Many single-nucleotide variants underlying lysosome enzyme deficiencies lead to disease by altering the folding of the protein after translation, such that the misfolded protein cannot be transported to the lysosome. Small molecule substrate analogs have been shown to stabilize mutated lysosomal proteins in tissue culture and thus enable transport of these enzymes to the lysosome. Once in the lysosome, these mutated enzymes are likely able to metabolize enough substrate to alter the disease course. As most individuals with attenuated MPS I have at least one IDUA pathogenic missense variant, the development of substrate analogs for alpha-L-iduronidase may lead to new forms of therapy for this disorder.

Substrate deprivation. Decreasing the quantity of stored substrate in lysosomal disorders is currently being investigated for the treatment of Gaucher disease [Cox et al 2003]. Potential use of similar molecules that may decrease the production of GAGs or other substances that are stored in MPS disease may have a future role in treatment [Piotrowska et al 2006]. These approaches are still in the animal model phase, with attempts such as silencing of key GAG synthetic enzymes [Kaidonis et al 2010] to certain GAGs.

Gene- and cell-based therapy. Advances in both gene- and stem cell-based therapies for genetic diseases could potentially influence treatment of MPS I [Punnett et al 2004, Di Domenico et al 2005].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.