http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mt-deafness

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of hearing loss and needs in an individual diagnosed with nonsyndromic mitochondrial hearing loss and deafness, the following evaluations are recommended:

A complete auditory assessment (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview)

Examination of the skin for evidence of keratoderma

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment includes the following:

Appropriate rehabilitation, e.g., hearing aids, speech therapy, culturally appropriate language training, and evaluation for eligibility for cochlear implantation [Sinnathuray et al 2003]

Enrollment in educational programs appropriate for the hearing impaired

For mild keratoderma, use of lotions and emollients; for severe keratoderma, dermatologic evaluation

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



MT-RNR1-related aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. Physicians can inquire about a family history of aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss prior to the administration of aminoglycosides, either systemically or locally (e.g., into the cochlea as treatment for Meniere disease). In individuals with a positive family history, alternatives to aminoglycoside treatment should be considered when possible.

In the US, aminoglycoside use is most common in the neonatal intensive care unit; however, the therapeutic imperative of treatment with antibiotics in a neonatal intensive care unit setting does not always lend itself to pre-treatment screening by molecular genetic testing.

Bitner-Glindzicz et al [2009] report a population frequency of 0.19% for the A to G change in a European cohort of children age seven to nine years who had the pathogenic variant but did not have hearing loss because they were not exposed to aminoglycosides; they make an argument for screening on demand to avoid a preventable cause of hearing loss.

In a recent commentary by Boles & Friedlich [2010], the authors suggest a prospective study into the feasibility of screening for these mitochondrial pathogenic variants (especially in busy neonatal units) in order to identify a preventable form of hearing loss.

In the Tianjin Province in China, screening of 58,000 newborns with both audiologic and genetic methods determined that 1.8% of newborns had a pathogenic mitochondrial DNA variant and only one had hearing loss [Zhang et al 2013].

Surveillance



The following assessments are indicated:

Annual audiometric assessment to evaluate stability or progression of hearing loss

Annual examination by a physician to assess for related clinical findings (e.g., palmoplantar keratosis)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Aminoglycosides and noise exposure should be avoided, particularly in individuals with normal hearing who have the m.1555A>G
MT-RNR1 pathogenic variant.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



In a family in which the mtDNA pathogenic variant is known, prospective molecular genetic testing of at-risk maternal relatives allows early detection of those who have inherited the mtDNA pathogenic variant and would benefit from avoiding aminoglycosides to prevent onset of hearing loss.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Use of aminoglycoside antibiotics during pregnancy in a mother who has the MT-RNR1 m.1555A>G pathogenic variant should be considered only in the absence of other treatment options, as these antibiotics exhibit incomplete placental transfer.

Of note, if the mother has the MT-RNR1 m.1555A>G pathogenic variant, she will pass it on to the fetus; hence, use of aminoglycosides should be avoided in the newborn.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.