http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/myotonia-c

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with myotonia congenita, the following evaluations are recommended:

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consultation with a neurologist or other relevant specialist to evaluate the need for pharmacologic treatment

Treatment of Manifestations



Some individuals with minor complaints may only need to accommodate their activities and lifestyles to reduce symptoms [Shapiro & Ruff 2002]. Myotonic stiffness may respond to sodium channel blockers or other pharmacologic treatment options:

Mexiletine, a lidocaine derivative, is the best documented treatment option. In a double-blind randomized trial, mexiletine (200 mg 3x/day) significantly reduced stiffness in a group of 59 patients with myotonia, 34 of whom had myotonia congenita [Statland et al 2012]. In clinical practice, doses generally begin at 150 mg twice a day, increasing slowly as needed up to 200-300 mg three times a day. The most common potential side effects, including epigastric discomfort, nausea, lightheadedness, dizziness, tremor, and ataxia, are reversible with dose reduction.

Other sodium channel blockers such as phenytoin and carbamazepine have been reported to have beneficial effects [Conravey & Santana-Gould 2010].

Compounds with other presumed modes of action such as quinine, dantrolene, or acetazolamide may be beneficial in some cases [Shapiro & Ruff 2002].

See review in Conravey & Santana-Gould [2010] for a detailed description of these treatment options.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Exercise temporarily alleviates myotonia (the warm-up effect). A long-term beneficial effect of gymnastics is sometimes reported by affected individuals; the effect has not been systematically studied.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



In general, anesthesia should be used with caution [Bandschapp & Laizzo 2013]. Particular care must be taken with the use of depolarizing muscle relaxants during anesthesia because they may cause adverse anesthesia-related events. Because life-threatening muscle spasms and secondary ventilation difficulties occurred following a preoperative injection of suxamethonium, Farbu et al [2003] recommended that suxamethonium be avoided in individuals with myotonia congenita.

Note: Non-depolarizing muscle relaxants appear to act normally in individuals with myotonia congenita but do not counteract a myotonic response caused by suxamethonium [Farbu et al 2003].

In rare cases, injections of adrenaline or selective beta-adrenergic agonists in high doses may aggravate myotonia.

The beta-antagonist propranolol has likewise been reported to worsen myotonia [Blessing & Walsh 1977]. Accordingly, beta-agonists and beta-antagonists should be used with caution and particular care should be taken with the use of intravenous fenoterol or ritodrine.

Colchicine may cause a myopathy with myotonia in individuals with renal insufficiency [Rutkove et al 1996] and may thus also, in theory, aggravate the myotonia of individuals with myotonia congenita.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Because individuals with myotonia congenita may be at increased risk for adverse anesthesia-related events, testing of at-risk individuals during childhood to clarify their genetic status is appropriate.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, electromyography can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For an affected mother, a comprehensive birth plan is recommended [Gorthi et al 2013] to minimize the risks of muscular spasms due to factors such as medications, intramuscular injections, and cold.

Therapies Under Investigation



A trial with lamotrigine is ongoing (NCT01939561).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.