http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/myotonic-d2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Routine clinical evaluation of muscle strength and functional status

Examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with DM iridescent posterior subcapsular cataracts in order to establish a baseline

Initial cardiac evaluation including at minimum:

ECG to establish a baseline record for future comparison

Holter monitoring or invasive electrophysiologic testing if the person is either symptomatic or shows significant rhythm or conduction abnormalities on routine ECG

Because of the risk of cardiomyopathy, consideration of echocardiogram and possible cardiac MRI [Spengos et al 2012]

Baseline serologic testing including fasting lipid profiles, glucose, and glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations to assess for evidence of insulin insensitivity and diabetes mellitus

Measurement of serum concentrations of testosterone and FSH in post-pubertal males to assess gonadal function

Thyroid studies. While thyroid dysfunction has not been conclusively and causatively related to the DM2-causing pathogenic variants, hypothyroidism from any cause has been associated with increased muscle weakness and symptoms in individuals with DM2 [Sansone et al 2000, Day & Ranum 2005].

Measurement of the serum activities of CK, transaminases (AST and ALT), and γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT). Serum activities of AST, ALT, and GGT are frequently elevated in individuals with DM2, although it is unclear whether the abnormal levels are hepatocellular or myogenic in origin. Determination of baseline abnormal transaminase and GGT activities resulting from DM2 can help prevent needless investigations of the liver.

Serum protein electrophoresis and immunoprotein electrophoresis to establish a baseline, since the gamma fraction is frequently reduced in individuals with DM2 as a result of low levels of both IgG and IgM. Although these changes have not been associated with clinical problems, determination of abnormal immunoglobulin levels in persons with DM2 can establish individual baseline values and prevent misinterpretation of future studies demonstrating the hypogammaglobulinemia.

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment guidelines for DM2 have been published. See Udd et al [2011] (full text).

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help determine the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses [Johnson et al 1995].

Routine physical activity appears to be beneficial for maintaining muscle strength and endurance in persons with DM2, and as an aid to control musculoskeletal pain.

Myotonia is typically mild and rarely requires treatment [Ricker 1999], though use of mexilitene, which is very effective in controlling some forms of myotonia, has helped control muscle pain in some individuals with DM2.

The effectiveness of medications and combination of medications in pain management varies. No one medication has been consistently effective; medications that have been used with some success include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids (e.g., 5 mg prednisone on alternate days), and tricyclic antidepressants. Low-dose narcotic analgesics, when used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, may help but may also lead to development of tolerance and escalating doses.

Consultation with a cardiologist is strongly recommended for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to the onset of other symptoms. ECG, Holter monitoring, and an echocardiogram should be performed to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Florek et al 1990, Hawley et al 1991]. Due to the increased risk for cardiomyopathy, echocardiography and possibly cardiac MRI should be considered.

The value of defibrillator placement is increasingly evident in individuals with DM2 who have overt arrhythmias, but the role of pacemaker/defibrillators in asymptomatic patients is yet to be determined [Schoser et al 2004b].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. As compared to the more typical senile nuclear cataracts, direct ophthalmoscopy and even slit lamp examination can underestimate the functional significance of cataracts in individuals with DM2 because the alteration of vision depends on location, not just the number of subcapsular opacities.

Testosterone replacement therapy can be beneficial in males with symptomatic hypogonadism.

Direct gastrointestinal manifestations of DM2 are yet to be characterized, but some patients complain of postprandial abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea. As in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), some individuals respond to prokinetic agents such as metochlopromide (Reglan™) and tegaserod (Zelnorm™).

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Anesthetic risk may be increased in those with DM2; therefore, careful assessment of cardiac and respiratory function before and after surgery are recommended [Veyckemans & Scholtes 2013].

Increased weakness in individuals with DM2 has been associated with hypothyroidism; thus, some strength may return if hypothyroidism is treated.

Surveillance



Annual ECG and echocardiogram or possible cardiac MRI is indicated to detect asymptomatic and progressive cardiac conduction defects and cardiomyopathy.

Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring even in the absence of cardiac symptoms.

Fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin level should be measured annually.

Males should be tested for hypogonadism if they become increasingly fatigued or have reduced sexual energy, and should be tested every few years even without symptoms to see if they would benefit from replacement therapy.


Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Increased weakness has been associated with the use of certain cholesterol-lowering medications. In these cases, some strength can return if statin-type cholesterol-lowering medications are eliminated.

Note: Not all individuals with DM2 have an adverse response to statin medications, and thus diagnosis of DM2 is not an absolute contraindication to use of these drugs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.