http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ncl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with one of the neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinoses, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Developmental/cognitive and educational assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Symptomatic treatment can be successful in mitigating the manifestations of NCL. Seizures, sleep-related problems, malnutrition, gastroesophageal reflux, pneumonia, sialorrhea, hyperactivity and behavior problems, psychosis, anxiety, spasticity, Parkinsonian symptoms, and dystonia can be palliated.

Seizures. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) should be selected with caution. The stage of the disease, age of the affected individual, and quality of life are important to consider in evaluating the effectiveness of AEDs.

Lamotrigine (LTG) had a favorable effect on 23/28 individuals with JNCL, 13/19 being continued on monotherapy with 100% control, compared to 70% control for those receiving valproic acid (VPA), 60% control for VPA-clonazepam (CZP), and 60% control for LTG-CZP [Aberg et al 1999, Aberg et al 2000].

Other newer AEDs including levetiracetam and topiramate may also be beneficial [Author, personal experience].

Other. Benzodiazepines may be of benefit for seizures, anxiety, spasticity, and sleep disorders.

Trihexyphenydil improves dystonia and sialorrhea.

Individuals with swallowing problems may benefit from placement of a gastric (G) tube.

Antidepressants and antipsychotic agents are sometimes indicated for those with CLN3 disease.

Surveillance



Routine medical management of children and young adults with complex neurodisability will be relevant to all those affected by NCL. This may include clinical surveillance for the following:

Swallowing difficulties and recurrent aspiration

X-ray surveillance of hip joints and spine

Screening ECG for those individuals with CLN3 disease who are older than age 16 years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Carbamazepine (CZP) and phenytoin may increase seizure activity and myoclonus in NCL and result in clinical deterioration.

Lamotrigine may exacerbate seizures and myoclonus especially in CLN2 disease.

In a series of 60 individuals with JNCL, valproic acid (VPA) was withdrawn in 20% and clonazepam (CZP) in 16% because of side effects [Aberg et al 2000].

Fifty percent of individuals receiving VPA had sleep disturbances or excessive sedation.

CZP stimulates salivation and respiratory secretions, increasing the risk for pneumonia in bedridden individuals, many of whom have gastroesophageal reflux. CZP is a sedative and can cause behavior disturbances.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Crystal et al [2004] initiated gene therapy for children with LINCL caused by pathogenic variants in CLN2. They administered a replication-deficient adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector expressing human CLN2 cDNA directly into the brains of children with either severe or moderate LINCL in an attempt to produce sufficient amounts of TPP-1, to prevent further loss of neurons and hence limit disease progression. The research is ongoing.

Stem cell therapy for phenotypes caused by pathogenic variants in CLN1 and CLN2 is in progress [Author, personal communication].

The drug EGIS-8332, which targets AMPA receptors, improved performance in a CLN3 disease mouse model. Trials in humans have not yet started. Talampanel (LY300164) is a drug which targets the same receptors and is being assessed in a clinical trial to treat epilepsy and Parkinson disease in humans. Plans to test this drug in a mouse model for CLN3 disease are underway at the University of Rochester Medical Center (Rochester, New York, USA).

The University of Rochester Medical Center is also conducting a clinical trial using the immunosuppressant mycophenolate (mycophenolate mofetil, Cellcept®, Myfortic®, mycophenolate sodium or mycophenolic acid) in individuals with juvenile CLN3.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.