http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ndi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI), the following evaluations are recommended:

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for hydronephrosis, dilatation of the urinary tract, and megacystis

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Management is usually best accomplished by a team consisting of a nutritionist, a pediatric (or adult) nephrologist or endocrinologist, and a clinical geneticist.

General management. The essence of management is the provision of free access to drinking water and to toilet facilities. Infants, who are naturally unable to seek out water when thirsty, must be offered water between regular feedings. Children and adults who are heavy sleepers may need to be awakened at night by a family member or an alarm clock in order to drink water and to urinate. As long as an individual's thirst mechanism remains intact and the person is otherwise well, these measures prevent hypernatremic dehydration. Education of friends, teachers, caretakers, and neighbors and a willingness to find creative solutions are helpful.

Polyuria (and thus polydipsia) can be reduced by up to 50% without inducing hypernatremia by the use of one of the following drugs/combinations. Therapy is considered effective when urine output declines below a documented baseline in individuals with ad libitum water intake. Objective measurements of 24-hour urine volume are more valuable than subjective reports of the volume or frequency of voiding, although reduction in the latter provides a benefit to lifestyle.

Thiazide diuretics (i.e., hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide) in standard to high doses. Since these diuretics cause potassium wasting, serum potassium concentration should be monitored and supplemental potassium provided in the diet or pharmacologically as needed. Thiazides are often used in combination with either amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic) or indomethacin.

Note: When thiazide diuretic therapy is initiated, a transient increase in urine output may occur as a result of salt diuresis.

Dietary restriction of sodium to 300 mg/day to maximize the effectiveness of thiazide diuretics in reducing urine output. Although previously a diet low in protein (2 g/kg/day) to reduce the renal osmolar load and obligatory water excretion was recommended, severe limitation of dietary protein may introduce nutritional deficiencies. Thus, it is preferable to prescribe dietary restriction of sodium only.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, to potentially improve urine concentrating ability and reduce urine output. NSAIDs have been used individually and in combination with thiazide diuretics (with or without amiloride). Because NSAIDs have undesirable effects, such as gastric and renal tubular damage, caution is warranted in the chronic use of NSAIDs for treatment of NDI.

Emergency treatment for dehydration. When individuals with NDI present with dehydration or shock, it is essential to establish whether the deficit is primarily in free water (through water deprivation or excessive urine, stool, or sweat) or in extracellular fluid (bleeding, fluid extravasation). The natural tendency of healthcare providers to treat dehydration with normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is dangerous in individuals with NDI if the deficit is primarily in free water.

Acute blood loss or shock may be treated with isotonic fluid until the blood pressure and heart rate are stabilized, after which 2.5% dextrose in water is the preferred solution.

Dehydration associated with free water deficit is treated by gradually replacing the deficit water as well as ongoing urinary losses. Whenever possible, rehydration should occur with the oral intake of drinking water. If administration of IV fluids is required, 2.5% dextrose in water and/or quarter-normal saline should be used.

If significant hypernatremia is present, serum sodium concentration should be monitored and the hydration solution modified to avoid reducing serum sodium concentration faster than 1 mEq/L per hour. Rapid increases or decreases in plasma osmolality can cause seizures, coma, brain damage, and death.

Special situations. Individuals being prepared for surgery are often denied oral intake for many hours and are described as having 'NPO' (nothing per ora) status. In individuals with NDI, an IV must be provided from the beginning of NPO status and the person's oral intake of water for that period, which is typically much larger than that of an individual who does not have NDI, should be given intravenously as 2.5% dextrose in water [Moug et al 2005].

Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megacystis. Treatment involves medical management to reduce urine output and continuous or intermittent bladder catheterization when significant post-void urinary bladder residuals are present.

Psychomotor development. Children with a history of an episode of severe dehydration, delayed developmental milestones, or a delay in establishing the correct diagnosis and management warrant a formal developmental evaluation and intervention before school age.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Prevention of primary manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations) is possible when the diagnosis is made promptly after birth via molecular genetic testing. A genetic diagnosis may be performed after a few days; treatment and monitoring may then start immediately.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prevention or reduction of serious renal, ureteral, or bladder dilatation may be achieved by reduction of urine production by drug therapy and voiding at two-hour intervals.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth and development in infants and children

Periodic measurement of serum sodium concentration to identify unrecognized hyperosmolality and early dehydration

Note: Urine output and urine specific gravity are useless as indicators of hydration status.

Annual renal ultrasound evaluation to monitor for hydronephrosis and megacystis [Shalev et al 2004]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Water intake must not be restricted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to test at-risk infants for the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) as early as possible to allow for prompt diagnosis and treatment to reduce morbidity from hypernatremia, dehydration, and dilation of the urinary tract.

Since autosomal dominant NDI is usually less severe than X-linked or autosomal recessive NDI, genetic testing of sibs of affected children may be performed at a later stage.

Asymptomatic female family members of a male with X-linked NDI who are at risk of being a carrier of the pathogenic variant may undergo genetic counseling and genetic testing when they are of reproductive age.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Carriers of X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may experience a mild increase in urinary output and associated thirst during pregnancy.

No pregnancies in women with NDI resulting from two AQP2 pathogenic variants have been reported to date.

Polyhydramnios is found in a minority of pregnancies in which the fetus is affected by NDI. In cases of severe polyhydramnios and maternal discomfort, frequent amniotic fluid drainage may be necessary [Kollamparambil et al 2011].

Therapies Under Investigation



In an individual with a milder AVPR2 pathogenic variant resulting in a partial response to AVP and DDAVP®, high doses of DDAVP® in combination with a thiazide diuretic significantly decreased urinary volume [Mizuno et al 2003]. Effectiveness and safety of this treatment in partial NDI needs to be explored further.

Because of the known gastrointestinal safety of selective cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors compared to nonselective COX inhibitors (such as indomethacin), use of these drugs has been proposed for the treatment of NDI. The effectiveness of a specific COX-2 inhibitor in decreasing free water losses was demonstrated in male infants with NDI [Pattaragarn & Alon 2003, Soylu et al 2005]. However, in view of the recent discovery that prolonged use of this COX-2 inhibitor can cause severe cardiac side effects, it is not appropriate to use these inhibitors in the treatment of NDI until it has been determined which of the specific COX-2 inhibitors are completely safe.

Because in vitro expression studies reveal that the majority of AVPR2 pathogenic variants in X-linked NDI and all AQP2 pathogenic variants in autosomal recessive NDI result in normal protein that is retained within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), agents that restore plasma routing are under investigation as potential treatments. Promising agents for X-linked NDI are cell-permeable AVPR2 antagonists or agonists that in vitro rescue the intracellular retention of several AVPR2 mutants [Morello et al 2000, Tan et al 2003, Bernier et al 2004, Robben et al 2006, Robben et al 2007, Robben et al 2009]. The feasibility of treatment with these so-called pharmacologic "chaperones" has recently been tested in vivo. In individuals with NDI who have AVPR2 pathogenic missense variants, Bernier et al [2006] showed that treatment with a non-peptide V1a receptor antagonist had beneficial effects on urine volume and osmolality starting a few hours after administration. However, the long-term effect of this drug could not be tested because the clinical development of this V1a receptor antagonist was interrupted during the course of this study as a result of possible interference with the cytochrome P450 metabolic pathway. Confirmation of the putative beneficial effect of pharmacologic chaperones in NDI awaits further in vivo testing.

Aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin, allow read-through of stop codon variants in AVPR2 in vitro, resulting in the production of full-length vasopressin V2 receptor proteins [Schulz et al 2002]. However, in view of the toxic effect of these antibiotics on the kidney, the application of such a therapy to NDI in the future is unlikely.

Another mechanism circumventing the vasopressin type-2 receptor has been tested in vitro. By stimulation of the E-prostanoid receptor EP4, NDI symptoms were greatly reduced in a conditional AVPR2-deletion mouse model [Li et al 2009]. This was due to raised AQP2 levels, most probably as a consequence of cAMP production caused by EP4 stimulation. Recently, a similar effect was seen after stimulation of the EP2 receptor by the agonist butaprost [Olesen et al 2011]. The EP2 receptor is a more interesting candidate for treatment of NDI than the EP4 receptor since EP2 agonists have already been tested in clinical studies for other diseases and have shown promising results concerning safety issues. However, clinical trials in NDI have not yet been performed and are necessary to evaluate the effects and safety of EP2 agonists for this disorder.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.