http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nephron-ov

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nephronophthisis, the following evaluations are recommended [Parisi et al 2007, Simms et al 2011, KDIGO 2013]:

Detailed family history and physical examination including blood pressure, growth parameters, developmental assessment, and dysmorphology examination to evaluate for extrarenal manifestations (Table 3a)

Tests to evaluate the kidneys:

Tests of renal function including serum creatinine concentration, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and electrolytes

Complete blood count (CBC) to evaluate for anemia

Tests to evaluate for the metabolic bone disease of chronic kidney disease (CKD) including serum calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and alkaline phosphatase activity

Urinalysis from first-morning void for specific gravity to test concentrating ability (if feasible), proteinuria

Tests of liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin, and prothrombin time

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate renal findings consistent with nephronophthisis and to evaluate for additional anomalies in liver, bile duct, spleen, and/ or pancreas (including situs inversus)

Referral as needed for evaluation of extrarenal manifestations, including:

Ophthalmologic examination

Brain MRI

Skeletal radiographs

Assessment of psychomotor development and/or behavior

Neurologic assessment

Endocrine assessment

Cardiac ultrasound examination

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



This section discusses only the management of the phenotype of nephronophthisis. Management of other findings associated with syndromic NPH (Table 3a) are beyond the scope of this GeneReview.

Currently no cure for nephronophthisis exists. Treatment is aimed at slowing the progression of CKD and its complications, according to international clinical practice guidelines for chronic renal failure (Kidney Disease – Improving Global Outcomes [KDIGO] 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text):

Correction of water and electrolyte imbalances, especially during intercurrent illness

Treatment of anemia, hypertension, and proteinuria if present. Preferred therapy may differ between adult and pediatric patients [KDIGO 2013].

Growth hormone treatment for children who have severe growth retardation as a result of chronic renal insufficiency and meet criteria for treatment [Wilson et al 2003]

Dialysis or renal transplantation when patients reach ESRD. Renal transplantation is the preferred treatment as disease does not recur in the transplanted kidney [Pistor et al 1985].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Annual influenza vaccination is indicated for patients with CKD. Other vaccinations (e.g., pneumococcal vaccine and hepatitis B) should follow local practice guidelines [KDIGO 2013].

For measures to prevent secondary cardiovascular complications, see KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text).

Surveillance



Evaluations are recommended at least annually. More frequent monitoring is recommended for individuals with advanced-stage CKD, individuals at higher risk of disease progression, or when assessment will affect therapeutic decision making [KDIGO 2013].

Monitoring of blood pressure, growth parameters, and development

Renal function including serum creatinine concentration and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or BUN, electrolytes, CBC, CKD metabolic bone disease including serum calcium, phosphate, PTH and alkaline phosphatase activity

Liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin and prothrombin time

Urinalysis to monitor proteinuria

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate progression of renal disease and possible liver, bile duct, spleen or pancreas anomalies

Routine evaluations for extrarenal manifestations of syndromic NPH that can appear with time, especially ophthalmologic examination for visual acuity, visual field examination, and evidence of retinal dystrophy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Nephrotoxic agents, e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), aminoglycosides, and radiocontrast studies should be avoided.

Individuals with liver function impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medication.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband with NPH in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and surveillance measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the NPH-related pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Monitoring of renal function and blood pressure if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For reviews of management of CKD in pregnancy see Smyth et al [2013] and Piccoli et al [2015].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.