http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/noonan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Noonan syndrome (NS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on NS growth charts

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography and electrocardiography

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Hearing evaluation

Coagulation screen to include CBC with differential, PT/PTT (repeat after 12 months if younger than 12 months at the time of first screening [Romano et al 2010, Roberts et al 2013]

Renal ultrasound examination; urinalysis if the urinary tract is anomalous

Clinical and radiographic assessment of spine and rib cage

Brain and cervical spine MRI if neurologic symptoms are present

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment of the complications of Noonan syndrome is generally standard and does not differ from treatment in the general population.

Management guidelines have been developed by Dyscerne, a European consortium [Noonan Syndrome Guideline Development Group 2010] (full text); a separate set has been published by an American consortium working with the Noonan Syndrome Support Group [Romano et al 2010] (full text) and in the Lancet [Roberts et al 2013].

Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies is generally the same as in the general population. Pulmonary valve stenosis treated with percutaneous balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty has a higher re-intervention rate versus pulmonary valve stenosis without NS [Prendiville et al 2014]. There is substantial early mortality associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; infants presenting before age six months in congestive heart failure have the worst prognosis (2-year survival of 30%) [Hickey et al 2011, Wilkinson et al 2012].

Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

The bleeding diathesis in Noonan syndrome can have a variety of causes. Specific treatment for serious bleeding may be guided by knowledge of a factor deficiency or platelet aggregation anomaly. Factor VIIa has been successfully used to control bleeding caused by hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, thrombocytopenia, and thrombasthenia. It has also been used in an infant with Noonan syndrome whose platelet count and prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, to control severe postoperative blood loss resulting from gastritis [Tofil et al 2005].

Studies of growth hormone (GH) treatment have been published from the UK, Japan [Ogawa et al 2004], the Netherlands [Noordam 2007, Noordam et al 2008], Sweden [Osio et al 2005], and the United States [Romano et al 2009].

The rationale for GH treatment of individuals with Noonan syndrome includes:

Significant short stature compared with normal peers;

Possible impairment of the GH-insulin-like-growth-factor type I (GH-IGF-I) axis; and

Documented response to GH treatment in studies.

In Europe, GH treatment is the standard of care for children with abnormalities of the GH-IGF-I axis and could be used when GH physiology is normal.

No standard dose has been established; no correlation between dosage used and final height is apparent.

Short stature due to Noonan syndrome is an FDA-approved indication for growth hormone treatment.

Short- and long-term studies have demonstrated a consistent and significant increase in height velocity in children with Noonan syndrome who have been treated [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Romano et al 2009].

The increase in height SD varies from 0.6 to 1.8 SD and may depend on age at start of treatment, duration of study, age at onset of puberty, and/or GH sensitivity [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Dahlgren 2009].

Subsequent studies have shown that children with prepubertal NS growth hormone deficiency have been shown to increase their growth rate with growth hormone therapy at a rate equivalent to girls with Turner syndrome but at a lower rate than that seen in idiopathic growth hormone deficiency [Lee et al 2015, Zavras et al 2015].

Surveillance



If anomalies are found in any system (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis), periodic follow up should be planned and life-long monitoring may be necessary; for example, periodic eye examination if a refraction error or strabismus is found, urinalysis if there are structural abnormalities of the collecting system. Despite the apparent increased incidence of hematologic and solid tumor malignancies, no surveillance strategies have been evaluated or recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Aspirin therapy should be avoided because it may exacerbate a bleeding diathesis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.