http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/oca1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete ophthalmologic evaluation, including assessment for the presence of nystagmus, ocular alignment and strabismus, iris pigmentation and transillumination, dilated retinal examination assessing retinal pigment epithelial hypopigmentation and foveal hypoplasia, and best corrected visual acuity (with cycloplegic refraction);

Evaluation of the pigmentation status of the skin, especially the solar-exposed skin, and the adnexa (brows, lashes, and when appropriate extremity hair and pubic hair), linked to a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation for sun-protective clothing, lotions, and future self-care;

Clinical genetics consultation to review natural history, pattern of inheritance and recurrence risks, and to clarify genotype.

Parents should be assured repeatedly that the visual disability with OCA1 does not deteriorate over time, that changes in acuity are usually refractive in nature, that the nystagmus tends to dampen with age (but never disappears), that many children with OCA1B manifest slow improvement in acuity and some plateau by their teen years, and that intellectual disabilities are not a component of this group of disorders.

Treatment of Manifestations



Ophthalmologic care. Correction with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Notably, visual acuity is never correctable to normal, but parents should be advised that the achievable acuity never deteriorates.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory but may be performed if the strabismus is marked. Surgery may improve peripheral binocularity or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn or head tilt, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point to a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position. Nystagmus surgery remains highly controversial; no comparative clinical trial has compared the surgical reduction of amplitude of nystagmus to the outcomes of the natural history of dampened nystagmus with age among those forms of albinism in which increasing pigment occurs normally over time.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from “photophobia,” which is painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among all individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in acuity from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function substantively because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

Most children with albinism should remain in mainstream classrooms, as long as the school attends to their special needs resulting from visual limitation. Preschoool evaluations allow teachers and parents to develop an Individual Education Plan (IEP). Neither Braille nor “white cane” mobility training is needed in the overwhelming majority of children with albinism.

Additional classroom aids may include:

High contrast reading materials (black on white);

Large font texts or xerographically enlarged worksheets;

Preferential seating near the front of the class and work boards;

Selective optical devices, especially mobile ones such as stand magnifiers and monocular telescopes, and closed circuit chip-camera televisions; and

Computers and tablets with zoom-magnification text software.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare, to reduce some photodysphoria, and to provide some sun protection to the face.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Skin care in individuals with OCA1 is guided by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight.

For individuals with OCA1A, the white skin is completely devoid of melanin and needs to be protected whenever exposed to the sun. Sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be substantial in very sensitive individuals, and exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually substantial in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves, pants, and socks) and sun screens with a high SPF value (blocks with SPF 45-50+). Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing validity of numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

For individuals with OCA1B, the amount of skin pigmentation varies and the use of sun screen should correlate with skin pigmentation and the ability to tan. Skin that burns with sun exposure needs protection. An early (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

During the first few years of life, annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error and strabismus

In adults, dermatologic surveillance of unusual skin thickening, hyperkeratosis, and erosive lesions that may be harbingers of skin cancer

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Other than the avoidance of prolonged solar exposure because of the enhanced damage to the skin and increasing cumulative risk of cutaneous neoplasms, no special precautions are needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In classic OCA1 of either type, an affected mother who is pregnant needs no exceptional consideration. Similarly, a pregnancy affected with OCA1 requires no exceptional prenatal care.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.