http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pds

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, the following are appropriate:

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



In the majority of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, once seizures come under control with the addition of daily supplements of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations), all antiepileptic drugs can be withdrawn, and seizure control will continue with daily pyridoxine monotherapy in pharmacologic doses.

Special education programs should be offered.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



The effective treatment of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy requires lifelong pharmacologic supplements of pyridoxine; the rarity of the disorder has precluded controlled studies to evaluate the optimal dose.

The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for pyridoxine is 0.5 mg for infants and 2 mg for adults. In general, individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have excellent seizure control when treated with 50-100 mg of pyridoxine per day. Seizures in some individuals are controlled on much smaller doses and others require somewhat higher doses [Basura et al 2009, Stockler et al 2011].

Affected individuals may have exacerbations of clinical seizures and/or encephalopathy during an acute illness, such as gastroenteritis or a febrile respiratory infection. To prevent such an exacerbation in these circumstances, the daily dose of pyridoxine may be doubled for several days until the acute illness resolves.

Studies have indicated that higher doses may enhance intellectual development; it has been suggested that a dose of 15-30 mg/kg/day may be optimal [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011] and that the dosage should not exceed 500 mg/day [Stockler et al 2011].

Such therapy is required for life; affected individuals are metabolically dependent on the vitamin, rather than pyridoxine deficient. Compliance with pyridoxine supplementation is critical, as status epilepticus may develop within days of pyridoxine discontinuation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The overuse of pyridoxine must be avoided, as a reversible sensory neuropathy (ganglionopathy) caused by pyridoxine neurotoxicity can develop. While primarily reported in adults who have received "megavitamin therapy" with pyridoxine, sensory neuropathy has been reported in two persons with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy [McLachlan & Brown 1995, Rankin et al 2007], one of whom was an adolescent who developed a secondary cause of epilepsy and received a pyridoxine dose of 2 g/day [McLachlan & Brown 1995].

Surveillance



Affected individuals should be followed for the development of clinical signs of a sensory neuropathy, including regular assessments of joint-position sense, ankle jerks, gait, and station [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011].

Regular assessments of intellectual function should be offered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Overuse of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Secondary Complications) is to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Empiric treatment of the affected individual’s newborn sib with pyridoxine supplementation should be offered until testing has been completed.

If the ALDH7A1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing is appropriate.

If the pathogenic variants are not known, the following is recommended:

If a younger sib of a proband presents with encephalopathy or a seizure, pyridoxine should be administered acutely (ideally under EEG monitoring) for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.

α-AASA is a sensitive biomarker for pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy while pipecolic acid is an indirect and less sensitive biomarker. If elevated plasma biomarker concentrations have been demonstrated in the proband, a similar elevation in a younger sib would support a diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.

Note: It would be unlikely for the proband's older sibs who have not experienced seizures to be pyridoxine dependent.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



As recurrence risk for couples who have a child with this disorder is 25%, there is justification to treat the mother empirically with supplemental pyridoxine at a dose of 50-100 mg/day throughout the last half of her subsequent pregnancies and to treat the newborn with supplemental pyridoxine to prevent seizures and reduce the risk of neurodevelopmental disability [Baxter & Aicardi 1999, Bok et al 2010a]. It is important to emphasize, however, that at least one severe phenotype has been described in a family in which prenatal treatment of an at-risk sib did not result in an improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Rankin et al 2007].

Molecular genetic testing of ALDH7A1 can be performed prenatally or after birth; if both pathogenic variants are present, pyridoxine treatment should be continued during pregnancy (if prenatal testing is pursued and reveals the fetus to be affected) and after birth; if not, treatment can be withdrawn.

Therapies Under Investigation



As ALDH7A1 encodes the enzyme α-aminoadipic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (antiquitin), which is involved in cerebral lysine catabolism, it has been proposed that persons with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy may benefit from a lysine-restricted diet. A small number of individuals have been treated in this fashion; improvements in development and behavior along with decreased biomarker levels have been described [Stockler et al 2011, van Karnebeek et al 2012]. A protocol for controlled therapeutic trials of lysine restriction in pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy has recently been proposed [van Karnebeek et al 2014].

L-arginine competitively inhibits lysine transport and can therefore reduce lysine levels. Some individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have difficulty tolerating a lysine-restricted medical diet; in such cases L-arginine supplementation has been offered as an alternative method of lowering lysine levels [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014]. The effectiveness of treating pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy with “triple therapy” (a combination of pyridoxine supplementation, lysine restriction, and L-arginine supplementation) has also been studied [Coughlin et al 2015, Mahajnah et al 2016], with promising results in a small number of treated individuals.

A cellular proof of concept for antisense therapy of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy has been reported [Pérez et al 2013]. Specifically, the silent nucleotide change c.75C>T, a novel splicing variant creating a new donor splice site in exon 1, was rescued in a lymphoblast cell line via antisense therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.