http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pik3ca-overgrowth

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth, the following evaluations are recommended:

A thorough history to identify key features of PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth

A physical examination including a thorough skin, cardiac, abdominal, and musculoskeletal evaluation, as well as a detailed neurologic assessment

Investigations to detect abnormalities before they result in significant morbidity/mortality:

Baseline brain and spinal cord imaging, especially in children with hemimegalencephaly (HMEG) and MCAP syndrome for early detection of cortical dysplasia, ventriculomegaly, and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia.

A cardiovascular assessment including a baseline echocardiogram and electrocardiogram to evaluate for cardiovascular malformations and rhythm abnormalities

A baseline renal ultrasound to evaluate for structural renal abnormalities

Surgical and orthopedic referrals for individuals suspected of having CLOVES syndrome or fibroadipose hyperplasia, and individuals with MCAP syndrome with focal somatic overgrowth or leg-length discrepancy

Treatment of Manifestations



Patients with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Referral to the appropriate specialist(s) is recommended for the following findings:

Significant or lipomatous segmental overgrowth: referral to a surgeon and/or thoracic surgeon (when lipomatous overgrowth involves the trunk)

Leg-length discrepancy secondary to segmental somatic overgrowth

Cardiac abnormalities (i.e., structural cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias)

Renal abnormalities

Intellectual disability and/or difficulties with learning, behavior, or speech, or motor difficulties

Speech, swallowing, and feeding difficulties


Neurologic and neurosurgical manifestations

MCAP syndrome. Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of raised intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data are lacking to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management. In recent years, favorable outcomes have been observed with ventriculostomy of the third ventricle (rather than insertion of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt), suggesting that the neurosurgical management of hydrocephalus in MCAP syndrome is evolving.

HMEG. Individuals are at risk for severe early-onset epilepsy, focal neurologic signs such as hemiparesis, and severe intellectual disability. Epilepsy and intellectual disability may be improved by hemispherectomy [Di Rocco et al 2006, Kwan et al 2008].

Individuals with HMEG and MCAP syndrome with polymicrogyria (PMG) are at increased risk for epilepsy; thus, long-term neurologic follow up is warranted, and many require long-term antiepileptic treatment [Mirzaa et al 2012].

Somatic overgrowth, vascular, lymphatic and musculoskeletal manifestations. CLOVES syndrome and fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH) are associated with severe focal overgrowth, vascular malformations, and orthopedic complications with significant morbidities. Prompt diagnosis (by MR/CT and angiography) is warranted. Most individuals undergo (often several) debulking or orthopedic procedures with significant ensuing complications (see Surveillance).

The following are the main treatment considerations in CLOVES syndrome:

The characteristic truncal lipomatous mass infiltrates surrounding tissues and often requires surgical excision. Severe scoliosis, large truncal mass, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems of the feet and hands, and central phlebectasia/thromboembolism are examples of significant morbidities that need active or prophylactic medical intervention.

Paraspinal and intraspinal extension have significant risk for compression of the cord, thecal sac, and nerve roots, with resultant major neurologic deficits, warranting prompt diagnosis and multidisciplinary care [Alomari 2009a].

Given the risk for thromboembolism in CLOVES syndrome, appropriate prophylactic measures including anticoagulation and caval filtration, particularly in the perioperative period, are recommended. Central and thoracic phlebectasia in individuals with CLOVES syndrome should be considered an indication for placement of a superior vena cava (SVC) filter.

FH is associated with severe progressive overgrowth of fibrous and adipose tissues. While the severity and natural history varied among reported individuals, thorough surgical and orthopedic evaluations are warranted. Most individuals (8/10) underwent extensive debulking or orthopedic procedures.

Surveillance



MCAP syndrome. Provisional surveillance guidelines include regular follow up, no less than every six months until age six years, and at least yearly thereafter. At each visit, the following are recommended with appropriate testing for any positive finding:

A medical history with attention to:

Childhood cancer

Breathing or sleep problems

Seizures or other undefined spells, headaches, or new or worsening neurologic symptoms

A detailed neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI. Based on limited retrospective data available, the risk for hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, or both with low brain stem or high spinal cord compression, appears to be highest in the first two years. Brain MRI is provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Renal ultrasound. Until additional data are available, screening for Wilms tumor following guidelines developed for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be considered (i.e., renal ultrasound examination every 3 months until age 8 years).


CLOVES syndrome

Given the associated morbidities including severe scoliosis, infiltrative lipomatous overgrowth, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems, central phlebectasias and thromboembolism, individuals with CLOVES syndrome require surveillance tailored to their specific needs with particular attention to surgical care [Sapp et al 2007, Alomari 2011, Alomari et al 2011].

Commonly occurring postoperative complications of surgical excision of the truncal lipomatous mass include recurrence, hypervascularity, and infiltrative growth. Therefore, diligent surgical care and monitoring are recommended.

Fibroadipose hyperplasia. Data regarding the natural history of fibroadipose hyperplasia are limited. However, given the extensive degree of somatic overgrowth in most individuals, the same surveillance guidelines for CLOVES are tentatively recommended for individuals with FH [Lindhurst et al 2012].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.