http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pink1-pd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment for presence/severity of atypical signs using the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) rating scale [Goetz et al 2008]

Evaluation of the degree of response to treatment and its potential complications

Assessment for cognitive or behavioral problems

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



To date, the treatment of PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease and no specific guidelines or recommendations have been developed.

Individuals with PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease have a mild form of Parkinson disease that responds well to levodopa and to other dopaminergic agonists.

Response is usually significant and is sustained for low doses of levodopa even after long disease duration. The response may be even better in PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease than in idiopathic Parkinson disease [Valente & Ferraris 2010].

The major problem is the early occurrence of severe levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and fluctuations. Fluctuations can be reduced by the combination of dopamine therapies with low doses of levodopa.

The use of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in PINK1 type Parkinson disease has been described [Moro et al 2008, Johansen et al 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



No measures that eliminate disease manifestations in a symptomatic person or prevent them from appearing in an asymptomatic person have been identified.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa dosage should not exceed the level required for satisfactory clinical response. Dopamine agonists should be employed if not contraindicated to possibly delay the onset of motor fluctuations, as affected individuals often require several decades of treatment.

Surveillance



Neurologic follow up every three to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Owing to the absence of preventive treatment or measures, presymptomatic genetic diagnosis is not medically justified.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



There are no reports specifically addressing pregnancy management in women with PINK1 type Parkinson disease. However, in general, pregnancy may either exacerbate or improve symptoms of Parkinson disease [Shulman et al 2000, Scott & Chowdhury 2005]. L-dopa crosses the placenta and (theoretically) may have an adverse effect on fetal development, as some animal models have shown that high doses of L-dopa administered during pregnancy may induce stillbirth and birth defects including skeletal malformations [Scott & Chowdhury 2005]. However, based on more than 30 cases recorded in the literature levodopa treatment during human pregnancy has not resulted in adverse fetal outcome [Scott & Chowdhury 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.