http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pitt-hopkins

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment to determine the types of services and educational strategies needed. In school-aged children this information is important for the child’s individual education program (IEP).

Assessment for the use of nonverbal communication devices and strategies (given that most patients do not develop useful speech)

Child behavior specialist to aid with behavioral concerns

Pulmonary consultation if history of respiratory pattern abnormality is identified on directed questioning. Polysomnography may be indicated if there is a history of episodic apnea especially when associated with cyanosis (typically alternating with episodes of hyperventilation).

Child neurology evaluation if there are concerns about seizure episodes

Ophthalmology evaluation to evaluate for myopia, astigmatism, and/or strabismus

Gastroenterology evaluation to establish treatment regimen for chronic constipation

Musculoskeletal evaluation to evaluate ambulatory skills and need for special mobility equipment and/or orthotics to aid in foot position

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Developmental. Early infant developmental services (physical, occupational, speech therapies):

Infant feeding assessment to address early hypotonia as needed

Special education services to address delays with focus on life skills

Behavioral modification for self-injurious behavior or anxiety

Pulmonary. Some reports indicate that antiepileptic medications control seizures while leaving the unusual respiratory patterns unchanged Peippo et al [2006] and others have noted some decrease in the frequency of the episodes with the use of anticonvulsants [Takano et al 2010]. Improvement of an abnormal respiratory pattern after treatment with sodium valproate has been reported in a person with PTHS with frequent apneic episodes associated with hypoxemia [Maini et al 2012]. A recent study in two patients with PTHS demonstrated that daily treatment with acetazolamide resulted in decreased frequency and duration of hyperventilatory and apneic episodes and improved oxygen saturation [Verhulst et al 2012].

Neurologic. Treatment of epilepsy appropriate to type of seizure and individualized to the patient

Ophthalmologic. Eyeglasses or surgery as needed for amblyopia

Gastrointestinal. In most patients, regular use of high-fiber diet and/or laxative regimen to address constipation

Musculoskeletal: Orthotics for abnormal foot position to aid in ambulation. Orthopedic treatment of scoliosis as indicated.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues

Surveillance



Appropriate surveillance includes:

Ongoing developmental assessments to tailor educational services to an individual’s strengths

Regular follow up with an ophthalmologist to monitor for high myopia and strabismus

Periodic reevaluation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with PTHS

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.