http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/retinoblastoma

Management



Guidelines for retinoblastoma (Rb) care have been developed [Canadian Retinoblastoma Society 2009] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Rb, the following evaluations are recommended:

Prior to the planning of therapy, the extent of the tumor within and outside the eye should be determined. Each affected eye is assigned a classification, depending on the extent of disease and the risk that the cancer has spread outside the eye. Extent of the tumor is estimated by clinical examination under anesthetic and ultrasound or MRI, particularly focusing on the tumor-optic nerve relationship. Head MRI is also useful to evaluate for a pinealoblastoma, indicating trilateral retinoblastoma.

For very large tumors with risk factors for extraocular disease, bone marrow aspiration and examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may also be performed at diagnosis, or performed when pathologic examination of the enucleated eye reveals optic nerve invasion or significant risks for extraocular extension.

If Rb has spread outside the eye, the stage of cancer will need to be evaluated to determine the most appropriate care of the child.

In those individuals with a family history of Rb, and in uncommon circumstances in which the child presents with strabismus or poor vision, the retinal tumors may be small and detected on clinical examination under anesthesia.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations



Goals of treatment are first preservation of life, and then of sight. As optimal treatment may be complex, specialists skilled in the treatment of Rb from various fields including ophthalmology, pediatric oncology, pathology and radiation oncology collaborate to deliver optimized care.

In addition to eye classification and tumor stage, choice of treatment depends on many factors, including the number of tumor foci (unifocal, unilateral multifocal, or bilateral), localization and size of the tumor(s) within the eye(s), presence of vitreous seeding, the potential for useful vision, the extent and kind of extraocular extension, and the resources available.

Treatment options for the eye include enucleation; cryotherapy; laser, systemic, or local ocular chemotherapy including intra-arterial chemotherapy combined with or followed by laser or cryotherapy; radiation therapy using episcleral plaques; and, as a last resort, external beam radiotherapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



If possible, any radiation (including x-ray, CT scan, and external beam radiation) should be avoided to minimize the lifetime risk of developing late-onset second cancers. Such tests should only be used if absolutely necessary in essential health care.

Surveillance



Further information regarding medical surveillance for those who have had or are at risk of developing Rb is available in the guidelines for retinoblastoma care.

Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Following successful treatment, children require frequent follow-up examination for early detection of newly arising intraocular tumors:

It is recommended that children known to have an RB1 germline pathogenic variant have an eye examination under anesthesia every three to four weeks until age six months, then less frequently until age three years. Clinical examinations with cooperative children are performed every three to six months until age seven years, then annually and eventually biannually for life.

Individuals who have unilateral Rb without an identified heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant are at risk for low-level mosaicism and can develop a tumor in the other eye [Rushlow et al 2009, Temming et al 2013]. This risk is small enough that examination under anesthesia may be replaced with regular clinical examination of the eyes, including clinical ultrasound (a simple, noninvasive procedure).

Individuals with retinomas (premalignant retinal lesions associated with Rb) are followed with retinal examinations and imaging every one to two years, to detect any change early.

Detection of second non-ocular tumors in individuals with retinoblastoma. Because of the high risk for second cancers, including sarcomas, melanoma, and specific other cancers, prompt investigation of any signs or symptoms is indicated. Total body MRI at regular intervals is under investigation to determine when the technology will be specific and sensitive enough for screening for second cancers in persons with a heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



It has been suggested by Fletcher et al [2004] that cancer risks in survivors of heritable retinoblastoma may be reduced by limiting exposure to DNA-damaging agents (radiotherapy, tobacco, and UV light). It is plausible that cancer risks in these individuals may be reduced by limiting exposure to chemotherapy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



The American Society of Clinical Oncologists identifies heritable retinoblastoma as a Group 1 disorder, i.e., a hereditary syndrome for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [American Society of Clinical Oncology 2003]. It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from eye examination by an experienced ophthalmologist and allow for early identification of a retinoblastoma.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known, which reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant [Noorani et al 1996, Richter et al 2003];

Eye examinations by an ophthalmologist experienced in the treatment of retinoblastoma starting directly after birth as described above (see Surveillance, Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Young or uncooperative children may require examination under anesthesia.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There are not many clinical trials for this disorder.