http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/riboflavin-tn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy, the following are recommended:

Evaluation by a neuromuscular specialist with attention to possible weakness, sensory loss, gait disturbance, and need for bracing

Sleep study and pulmonary consultation

Ophthalmologic evaluation with attention to visual acuity and possible optic atrophy

Audiologic assessment

Other consultations depending on clinical problems; for example, orthopedic consultation if scoliosis is present or psychiatry consultation if depression is present

Rehabilitation assessments: physiotherapy, occupational therapy, orthotics, speech and language therapy, wheel chair clinic

Consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Medications



High dose supplementation
of
riboflavin. Because oral riboflavin supplementation is effective (and possibly life saving), it should begin as soon as a riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy is suspected and continued lifelong unless the diagnosis is excluded by molecular genetic testing.

High-dose supplementation of riboflavin between 10 mg and 50 mg/kg/day has been effective in patients with genetically proven riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy and also in some patients in whom the genetic basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy has not been established.

Although no formal placebo control trial has been conducted and the longest course of riboflavin supplementation has been 36 months, riboflavin supplementation: improves symptoms and signs on clinical examination; improves objective testing (vital capacity, brain stem evoked potentials, nerve conduction studies), and normalizes acylcarnitine levels [Foley et al 2014].

Before initiating riboflavin supplementation, perform the assessments in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis.

Oral riboflavin supplementation should be given in gradually increasing doses in order to establish the optimum dose:

Riboflavin 10 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 20 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 30 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 40 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 50 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Note: Some patients are on doses up to 70 mg/kg/day.

Side effects, problems, or deterioration at any point require discussion with the treating clinician.

See Surveillance for recommended follow up of individuals treated with riboflavin supplementation.

Note: Treatments attempted before the basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy was known have included the following:

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been tried in a number of patients with reports of improvement as well as reports of no or non-sustained response [Bandettini Di Poggio et al 2014].

Some patients have reported additional improvement with other multivitamins and coenzyme Q10.

Supportive Care



The following are appropriate:

Respiratory support

Physiotherapy to avoid contractures

Occupational therapy for support in activities of daily living

Orthotics for limb and trunk bracing

Hearing aids and appropriate educational intervention for those with sensorineural hearing loss

Speech and language therapy to avoid choking and respiratory problems

Wheel chair as needed

Low vision aids for those with decreased visual acuity

Routine management of scoliosis to avoid long term respiratory problems

Routine management of depression

Surveillance



At three months and six months after initiation of riboflavin supplementation, recommended follow up is:

General examination

Neurologic examination

Discussion of any problems with riboflavin supplementation

Ideally, obtaining a blood sample for riboflavin/FAD/FMN, acylcarnitine analysis (if previous evaluation demonstrated abnormalities) to determine if these levels are normalizing

After one year of riboflavin supplementation, repeat examination/investigations as detailed in Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis except for consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid dietary restriction of riboflavin. If not possible to avoid dietary restriction, provide riboflavin supplements.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



When the SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on the older and younger sibs of a proband with riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy to identify as early as possible those with biallelic pathogenic variants who would benefit from early treatment with riboflavin supplementation and monitoring for potential complications of the disorder.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Females who have riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy with biallelic pathogenic variants in either SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 should take riboflavin supplements before and during pregnancy and when breast feeding to avoid inducing riboflavin deficiency in the fetus and infant. Recommended doses during pregnancy are 10 mg/kg/day.

Few studies have evaluated for adverse fetal outcome after excessive maternal riboflavin intake during pregnancy. Riboflavin deficiency during pregnancy, however, has been associated with an increased risk of maternal preeclampsia and preterm delivery [Wacker et al 2000, Carmichael et al 2013].

Note: Although no data are available, the authors recommend a diet rich in riboflavin during pregnancy for females who are heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in either SLC52A2 or SLC52A3 as it is unknown if they are at increased risk of developing symptoms due to an increased demand for riboflavin during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.