http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rp-overview

Management of Nonsyndromic Retinitis Pigmentosa



Treatment of Manifestations



Cystoid macular edema (CME). Some therapeutic success has been reported with both systemic and topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (oral acetazolamide [Diamox] or topical dorzolamide); however, rebound edema can occur with continued use [Fishman & Apushkin 2007].

Cataracts. Approximately 50% of individuals with RP develop cataracts that eventually require lens extraction (with visual improvement in the majority). However, since visual acuity can be reduced because of the incipient cataract or concomitant macular sequela of RP (CME or defects of the retinal pigment epithelium), determining which is the major cause of reduced vision can be difficult. In the presence of macular disease, extraction of lenses when cataracts are in the early stage may not always improve the quality of vision, particularly in younger individuals who still have reasonable accommodation for near tasks.

The timing of lens extraction may change as an individual ages and the visual field becomes more constricted: most individuals with RP with a visual field greater than 10° are not greatly incapacitated by mild to modest posterior subcapsular cataracts, whereas those with a visual field of less than 10° usually report significantly improved vision following lens extraction [Jackson et al 2001].

Patients with retinitis pigmentosa are at a greater-than-average risk for postoperative inflammation and induced CME. Thus, it is important at the time of lens extraction to avoid unnecessary manipulation of the iris; following surgery it is important to administer anti-inflammatory agents longer than would be indicated for individuals who do not have RP.

Optical aids. Because of the concern of acceleration of retinal degeneration from short wave-length light exposure, use of UV-A and UV-B blocking sunglasses is recommended. Use of CPF 550 lenses (Corning Photochromic Filter, developed by Corning Medical Optics), which filter out 97%-99% of the spectral and ultraviolet energy below 550 nm wavelength, has been promoted for individuals with RP to increase eye comfort by reducing glare and internal light scatter, to improve contrast, and to reduce adaptation time from light to dark and vice versa.

Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks.

Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields.

Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with RP. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.

Google Glass® allows minification of the visual field so that a wider field of view can be seen by patients with loss of peripheral vision. A relatively new wearable device called eSight® provides a live video stream which can be adjusted in terms of magnification, contrast, color, and brightness, to allow optimal vision for the wearer. However, its current cost limits widespread use.

Retinal prostheses. A number of retinal prosthetic devices that can be implanted in an epiretinal, subretinal, or suprachoroidal location to electrically stimulate either the bipolar cells or retinal ganglion cells have been developed for (for review, see Hadjinicolaou et al [2015]). These devices have had varying success in facilitating the perception of light, shapes, and movement in patients with end-stage RP. One such device, the Argus II®, has been FDA approved and is in clinical use in a limited subset of patients with vision of light perception or worse (no light perception) in the United States and Europe. As such, this is the first FDA-approved treatment for retinitis pigmentosa [da Cruz et al 2016].

Agencies for the visually impaired. In the US, publicly funded agencies at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Other. Prolonged light deprivation is not effective in altering the progression of RP.

Surveillance



Generally Goldmann visual field perimetry (GVF) or full-field static perimetry [Weleber et al 2015] and a full ophthalmoscopic examination with dilation are performed on an annual basis, with more frequent follow up for active complications such as cystoid macular edema.

Modeling of full-field static perimetry with generation of volumetric indices that reflect both the magnitude and extent of visual field sensitivity are used: for monitoring for rate of progression; as endpoints for clinical trials [Bainbridge et al 2015, Weleber et al 2016]; and to explain to patients the effect of disease progression on visual field [Weleber et al 2015].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Vitamin E may adversely affect the course of RP; thus, it is recommended that individuals with RP avoid high-dose supplements (e.g., 400 IU/d) [Berson 2000].

Increased exposure to light has been demonstrated to accelerate progression in animal models of retinitis pigmentosa, particularly those with pathogenic variants in the gene encoding rhodopsin [Naash et al 1996, LaVail et al 1999]; thus, avoidance of bright light and use of UV-blocking sunglasses are recommended for all patients with RP.

Smoking has been demonstrated as a strong risk factor for age-related macular degeneration [Seddon et al 1996, Chew et al 2013], and is thought to contribute to retinal damage in retinitis pigmentosa and other inherited retinal degenerations as well; thus, avoidance of smoking is recommended for all patients with RP.

Pregnancy Management



Women of childbearing age need to be cautioned about potential teratogenic effects of high-dose vitamin A palmitate (see Therapies Under Investigation) to the developing fetus. See Clinical Manifestations for further information about possible progression of disease during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Supplementation



Several trials of nutritional supplements to treat retinitis pigmentosa have been conducted with varying success; the results are often controversial [Massof & Fishman 2010]. Some clinicians recommend treatment with antioxidant vitamins similar to what has been proven to slow progression in age-related macular degneration [Chew et al 2013], while others recommend only those supplements studied specifically in RP.


Vitamin A

Therapy with 15,000 IU per day of vitamin A palmitate has been reported to possibly slow changes in retinal function as detected by ERG [Berson et al 1993, Massof & Finkelstein 1993]. However, clinical measures such as visual acuity and visual field appear unaffected by vitamin A. Of note, the only preparation tested has been vitamin A palmitate.

High-dose vitamin A should not be used for individuals with ABCA4-deficient Stargardt disease or ABCA4-deficient autosomal recessive RP because it increases the accumulation of the toxic byproduct A2E [Radu et al 2008].

Vitamin A palmitate therapy is not recommended for those under age 18 years.

Although liver toxicity with long-term use of vitamin A at 15,000 IU per day has not been noted [Sibulesky et al 1999], routine monitoring of serum vitamin A concentration and liver function has been recommended for any individual on vitamin A palmitate therapy.

Women of childbearing age need to be cautioned about potential teratogenic effects of high-dose vitamin A palmitate.

Because long-term high intake of vitamin A daily has been reported to increase several-fold the risk of osteoporosis, bone density should be monitored with such supplementation [Melhus et al 1998, Feskanich et al 2002, Michaëlsson et al 2003].


Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)

DHA therapy (1200 mg/day) showed no effect on disease course in patients receiving vitamin A palmitate [Berson et al 2004a], although high RBC concentration of DHA correlated with slower decline in visual field sensitivity [Berson et al 2004b].

DHA 400 mg/day showed no effect on visual acuity or visual field in males with xlRP, although RBC concentration of DHA correlated with preservation of cone ERG function [Hoffman et al 2004].

A systematic literature review reported some improvement in outcomes with omega-3 fatty acid supplementation, but meta-analysis was not possible and additional studies are required [Hodge et al 2006].

A later study using a food questionnaire to estimate DHA intake in patients with RP taking vitamin A palmitate demonstrated a slower decline in visual acuity in patients with high DHA intake [Berson et al 2012].


Lutein

One study of oral supplementation with 20 mg/d lutein for six months demonstrated increased macular pigment in approximately 50% of individuals with RP or Usher syndrome but no change in central vision [Aleman et al 2001].

A Phase I/II clinical study showed that lutein supplementation had a significant effect on visual field, but no effect on visual acuity or contrast sensitivity [Bahrami et al 2006].

A more recent clinical trial of lutein supplementation over four years in individuals also receiving vitamin A palmitate demonstrated no toxic effects from lutein and a slower loss of mid-peripheral visual field than in untreated individuals [Berson et al 2010].

Gene Therapy



Gene therapy is being actively pursued for a number of retinal degenerations; published clinical trials have demonstrated limited success in patients with RPE65-deficient Leber congenital amaurosis, severe early-childhood onset retinal dystrophy (SECORD), and disorders with infantile onset or early-childhood onset that are closely related to retinitis pigmentosa [Bainbridge et al 2008, Maguire et al 2008, Jacobson et al 2012, Testa et al 2013, Bainbridge et al 2015, Jacobson et al 2015, Weleber et al 2016].

An ongoing trial is evaluating gene therapy for autosomal recessive MERTK-related RP.

Stem Cells



Multiple studies have investigated embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells which can be differentiated in vitro into retinal cell types and transplanted into animal retinas (for review, see Jayakody et al [2015]).

A Phase I/II clinical trial reported no safety concerns of transplanting stem cell-derived retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells in a small group of patients with Stargardt disease, an inherited macular dystrophy, and age-related macular degeneration; however, to date no similar clinical trials have been performed for RP [Schwartz et al 2015].

Other



Triamcinolone injection. A study demonstrated a short-term benefit which was lost after a few months [Scorolli et al 2007].

Intravitreal VEGF inhibitors bevacizumab and ranibizumab. Preliminary data show some success in reducing macular edema and improving visual acuity [Artunay et al 2009, Yuzbasioglu et al 2009].

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy was shown to preserve visual acuity, visual field, and ERG response in people with RP as compared to vitamin A therapy over a ten-year period [Vingolo et al 2008].

Neurotrophic factors have shown promise in treating several animal models of RP. An intraocular implant which secretes ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) demonstrated safety in Phase I trials but showed no therapeutic benefit in Phase II trials [Dandekar et al 2004, Emerich & Thanos 2008, Birch et al 2013].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.