http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rws

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LQTS, the main focus in the management of individuals with LQTS is to identify the subset of individuals at high risk for cardiac events. For this risk stratification the following evaluations are recommended:

ECG evaluation. Individuals with a QTc interval >500 ms are at higher risk for an event; individuals with QTc interval >600 ms are at extremely high risk [Priori et al 2003, Goldenberg et al 2008] Overt T-wave alternans, especially when present despite proper beta-blocker therapy, is also associated with a higher risk of cardiac events [Priori et al 2013]. Individuals with a pathogenic variant who have a normal QTc interval are at low risk [Priori et al 2013].

Medical history. Individuals with syncope or cardiac arrest in the first year of life [Schwartz et al 2009, Spazzolini et al 2009] or younger than age seven years [Priori et al 2004] are at higher risk. These individuals may not be fully protected by pharmacologic treatment. Individuals with arrhythmic events while on proper pharmacologic treatment are also at higher risk [Priori et al 2013]. Asymptomatic individuals with pathogenic variants or individuals with prolonged QT intervals who have been asymptomatic at a young age (age <40 years) are at low risk for events later in life, although females remain at risk after age 40 years [Locati et al 1998].


Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



All symptomatic persons should be treated (see Priori et al [2013]). Complete cessation of symptoms is the goal. Management is focused on the prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death through use of the following:

Beta blockers are the mainstay of therapy for LQTS, including asymptomatic individuals with prolonged QT intervals and individuals who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Some individuals have symptoms despite the use of beta blockers [Moss et al 2000]. However, a majority of cardiac events that occur in individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype “on beta-blockers” are not caused by failure of the medication, but in fact by failure to take the medication (non-compliance) and/or the administration of QT-prolonging drugs [Vincent et al 2009]. It is suspected that the same holds true for individuals with LQTS type 2, but that has not been systematically studied. It is therefore important that:

Inadequate beta blocker dosing is prevented by regular adjustments in growing children with evaluation of the efficacy of dose by assessment of the exercise ECG or ambulatory ECG;

Beta blockers are taken daily, and strategies are in place in case of missed doses;

QT-prolonging drugs (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) are not administered to persons with LQTS without careful consideration of risk versus benefit by the individual(s) and physician(s).

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) are recommended in individuals with LQTS resuscitated from a cardiac arrest, although children with a LQTS type 1 phenotype with an arrest while not receiving beta blockers can be treated with beta blockers or with left cardiac sympathetic denervation [Alexander et al 2004, Vincent et al 2009, Jons et al 2010]. ICDs can be useful for those individuals with beta-blocker-resistant symptoms or a contraindication for beta blocker therapy (severe asthma) [Zareba et al 2003, Priori et al 2013].

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) is recommended for high-risk patients with LQTS in whom ICD therapy is refused or contraindicated and/or in whom beta blockers are either not effective, not tolerated, not accepted, or contraindicated [Schwartz et al 2004, Priori et al 2013]. LCSD can be useful in individuals who experience events while on therapy with beta blockers or ICD [Priori et al 2013].

Sodium channel blockers can be useful as additional pharmacological therapy for individuals with a LQTS type 3 phenotype with a QTc interval >500 ms in whom this additional compound is shown to shorten the QTc interval by >40 ms [Priori et al 2013].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Beta blockers. Beta blockers are clinically indicated in all asymptomatic individuals, including those who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Males who have a pathogenic variant and who have been asymptomatic before 40 years are at low risk of cardiac events. In these individuals the necessity of beta-blockers can be discussed [Locati et al 1998].

ICD. In general, ICD implantation is not indicated for asymptomatic individuals with LQTS who have not been tried on beta blocker therapy. Prophylactic ICD therapy can be considered for asymptomatic individuals suspected to be at very high risk, such as asymptomatic individuals with two or more pathogenic variants on molecular testing [Priori et al 2013]. LQTS-related sudden death in a close relative is not an indication for an ICD in surviving relatives [Kaufman et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Examine the past medical history for asthma, orthostatic hypotension, depression, and diabetes mellitus because these disorders may be exacerbated by treatment with beta blockers.

Although the incidence of arrhythmias during elective interventions such as surgery, endoscopies, childbirth, or dental work is low, it is prudent to monitor the ECG during such interventions and to alert the appropriate medical personnel in case intervention is needed.

Surveillance



Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects; doses should be altered as needed. Dose adjustment including efficacy testing is especially important in growing children.

Individuals with an ICD implanted should have regular, periodic evaluations of ICDs for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes should be avoided for all individuals with LQTS. See CredibleMeds® (free registration required) for a complete and updated list. Epinephrine given as part of local anesthetics can trigger arrhythmias and is best avoided.

Since electrolyte imbalances may also lengthen the QTc interval, identification and correction of electrolyte abnormalities is important. These imbalances can occur as a result of diarrhea, vomiting, metabolic conditions, and imbalanced diets for weight loss.

Lifestyle modifications are advised based on genotype. For individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype avoidance of strenuous exercise – especially swimming without supervision – is advised. In individuals with LQTS type 2 phenotype reduction in exposure to loud noises such as alarm clocks and phone ringing is advised. In individuals at high risk for cardiac events or with exercise-induced symptoms competitive sport should be avoided [Priori et al 2013]. For some individuals participation in competitive sports may be safe. It is therefore recommended that all individuals with LQTS who wish to engage in competitive sports have their risk evaluated by a clinical expert [Johnson & Ackerman 2012, Priori et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Presymptomatic diagnosis of at-risk relatives followed by treatment is necessary to prevent syncope and sudden death in those individuals who have inherited the pathogenic variant and/or have ECG findings consistent with LQTS. At-risk family members should be alerted to their risk and the need to be evaluated.

Relatives at high potential risk for LQTS who require further testing include members of a family:

That has documented LQTS;

In which evaluation for LQTS has not been performed.

Presymptomatic diagnosis for at-risk asymptomatic family members can be performed by one
or both of the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known

If the pathogenic variant is not known or if genetic testing is not possible, QTc analysis on resting and in case of normal QTc also QTc analysis on exercise ECGsNote: The diagnostic accuracy by QTc analysis is considerably improved by evaluation of the exercise ECG QTc intervals, in addition to the resting ECG, using the QTc values listed in Table 1.

Relatives at low potential risk who do not require further testing include members of a family in which the connecting ancestor:

Has a low probability of LQTS based on QTc interval (see Table 1) and has not experienced LQTS-type events; or

Has a normal QTc interval and no evidence of a pathogenic variant in one of the genes known to cause LQTS; or

Does not have the family-specific pathogenic variant, if known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The post-partum period is associated with increased risk for a cardiac event, especially in individuals with the LQTS type 2 phenotype. Beta blocker treatment was associated with a reduction of events in this nine-month time period after delivery [Seth et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation



Gene-specific therapies (mostly for LQTS type 3 phenotype) have been investigated, especially in individuals with cardiac events despite beta blocker, ICD, or LCSD therapy. Examples are mexiletine [Schwartz et al 1995], flecainide [Moss et al 2005], and ranolazine [Moss et al 2008]. Follow-up experience with these drugs is still limited.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Most affected individuals live normal lifestyles. Education of adult individuals and the parents of affected children, especially about beta blocker compliance, is an important aspect of management.