http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/salih-myo

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Salih myopathy, the following are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Assessment of strength and joint mobility by physical and occupational therapists

Assessment of cardiac function with particular attention to possible cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, which are often fatal complications

Comprehensive respiratory evaluation including assessment of respiratory rate and pulmonary function

Spinal x-rays to evaluate for presence of scoliosis in the second decade

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment involves prompt management of disease manifestations using a multidisciplinary approach that includes specialists in pediatric neurology, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, orthopedics, cardiology, and pulmonology.

Stretching exercises and physical therapy help prevent contractures and promote mobility. Assistive mechanical devices including orthotics, canes, and walkers can be used as needed.

Attention to education by providing school technical aid is important since cognition is normal. Stimulation and emotional support can improve school performance and the sense of social involvement.

Parents and/or caregivers should be made aware of the symptoms of heart failure, arrhythmia (including presyncope and syncope), and thromboembolic disease, and of the need to urgently seek medical care when any of these symptoms appear.

Training of caregivers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be suggested once the symptoms of cardiomyopathy start.

Adequate posture should be maintained when lying prone and sitting. Garchois brace (made of plexidur, a rigid but light and heat-deformable material) is used to reduce the degree of deformity and slow the progression of scoliosis [Wang et al 2010].

Cardiac transplantation should be considered for progressive dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure refractory to medical therapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Annual influenza vaccine and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Lower respiratory tract infections should be treated aggressively when they occur.

Surveillance



Monitor as follows:

Every six months: cardiac function (by ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording and echocardiography) starting at age five years.

Yearly: respiratory function, using pulmonary function testing or spirometry.

As needed: orthopedic complications (foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity) by clinical examination and x-rays as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Ibuprofen (Brufen®):

Give with care in those with evidence of cardiomyopathy. A patient who had reduced LVEF developed edema following its administration [Subahi and Salih, unpublished observation]

Avoid in those with congestive heart failure.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs by clinical examination and/or molecular genetic testing is important in order to monitor motor development and cardiac function so that treatment can be instituted early.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



If a fetus is diagnosed prenatally to have Salih myopathy, special considerations are needed at and following delivery since muscle weakness may manifest during the neonatal period.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.