http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca28

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 28 (SCA28) the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination (including scales to evaluate the severity of cerebellar ataxia and to allow subjective follow up)

Cerebral MRINote: MRI is part of the routine evaluation of persons with ataxia; however, in SCA28 no association between the extent of cerebellar atrophy and disease severity or progression has been proven.

Speech assessment

Examination by an ophthalmologist

Evaluation of cognitive abilities

Treatment of Manifestations



At present, only symptomatic treatments are available. These include the following:

Crutches (less often canes) and walkers

Home adaptations including grab bars for the bathtub or shower chairs and raised toilet seats as needed

Speech/language therapy for dysarthria and swallowing difficulties

Physical therapy to ameliorate coordination difficulties, especially with tasks such as eating, dressing, walking, and bathing

Surgical intervention as needed for severe ptosis

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Psychological support helps affected individuals cope with the consequences of the disease.

Weight control can facilitate ambulation.

To avoid complications such as aspiration pneumonia, thickened feeds or gastrostomy should be considered.

Surveillance



Annual assessment of the cerebellar ataxia using SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia), CCFS (Composite Cerebellar Functional Severity Score), or similar scales should be performe to evaluate stability or progression of the disease.

Monitoring of speech and swallowing difficulties is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Alcohol consumption and sedatives such as benzodiazepines may exacerbate gait ataxia and coordination difficulties.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.