http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca6

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and proper management of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6), the following evaluations are recommended:

Medical, neurologic, family and social history

Neurologic examination, including use of a rating scale to be used annually to assess progression

Brain MRI to gauge the extent of atrophy of cerebellum or other structures

Swallow evaluation for aspiration risk and counseling

PT evaluation to assess risk of falling, to determine whether assisted ambulation is necessary, and to advise regarding exercise.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Management is supportive.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Acetazolamide may eliminate episodes of ataxia, but does not delay or slow the overall progression.

Vestibular suppressants may reduce vertigo and/or osscilopsia.

Ophthalmology consultation is indicated for refractive or surgical management of diplopia.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy stems the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Physical therapy should be targeted to maximizing compensation and strength.

Canes, walking sticks, and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech disturbances occasionally occur and may be managed as in other settings. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Before dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify safest behaviors and the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Clonopin may be used for REM sleep behavior disorders (RBD) unless sedative effects increase imbalance in the morning. Note: RBD is rare in individuals with SCA6.

Continuous positive airway pressure may be used for sleep apnea.

Surveillance



Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist, with consultations as needed by physiatrist and physical and/or occupational therapist. Driving ability should be assessed by professionals periodically.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties such as ethanol or certain medications may produce marked increases in incoordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



Although the disease rarely manifests during years of fertility, measures to support imbalance should by enhanced in symptomatic pregnant women.

Therapies Under Investigation



Gazulla & Tintore [2007] suggested gabapentin and pregabalin as potential therapeutic agents.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Tremor-controlling drugs are not usually effective in reducing cerebellar tremors.

Patients and their families should be informed about natural history, treatment, mode of inheritance, genetic risks to other family members, and consumer-oriented resources.