http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sedt

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (X-linked SEDT), the following is noted:

The radiographic survey necessary for an accurate diagnosis also serves to document the extent of disease at the time of presentation.

Individuals with X-linked SEDT need to be assessed for the possibility of clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Medical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations



Surgical intervention may include joint replacement (hip, knee, shoulder) or spine surgery (correction of scoliosis or kyphosis).

Chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to any surgical procedure involving general anesthesia to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Surveillance



Affected individuals should be followed annually for the development of joint pain and scoliosis.

Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to school age to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the TRAPPC2 pathogenic variant in the family is known, presymptomatic testing of at-risk males allows early diagnosis and may obviate unnecessary diagnostic testing for other causes of short stature and/or osteoarthritis.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.