http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sgs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographs to detect skeletal manifestations that may require attention by an orthopedist (e.g. severe scoliosis, C1/C2 abnormality)

Brain MRI

Echocardiogram

MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to identify arterial aneurysms and arterial tortuosity throughout the arterial tree should be considered [Carmignac et al 2012]

Surgical evaluation for hernia repair, if indicated

Developmental assessment

Ophthalmology examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Management of SGS is best conducted through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and craniofacial team.

The following are appropriate:


Cardiovascular

If aortic dilatation is present, treatment with beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications should be considered in order to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Surgical intervention for aneurysms may be indicated.


Hernia

Surgical repair of abdominal hernias may be indicated.


Craniofacial

Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team; treatment is the same as in all disorders with these manifestations.


Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary.

Clubfoot deformity may require surgical correction.

Pectus excavatum may be severe; rarely, surgical correction is indicated for medical reasons.


Physiotherapy

Physiotherapy may help increase mobility in individuals with joint contractures.


Special education

A developmental assessment will help with placement in a special education center or in a special education program in a regular school.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is recommended for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria for individuals with cardiac complications.

Surveillance



All individuals with SGS should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with this condition.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, which may lead to catastrophic complications in those with cardiovascular issues or cervical spine anomalies/instability

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system, including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint pain or injury

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.