http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sost

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasias, the following evaluations are recommended:

Formal audiologic evaluation

Neurologic evaluation for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of increased intracranial pressure and/or proptosis

Assessment of the necessity for surgical correction of syndactyly in individuals with sclerosteosis

Radiographic and imaging studies

Dental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations



The bones in sclerosteosis are thick and dense; surgical intervention may be difficult and prolonged. Standard neurosurgical instruments may not be sufficient (i.e., drill bits may be too short and power tools may be damaged by the dense bone) [du Plessis 1993]. In addition, bone regrowth occurs and may cause recurrence of symptoms.

Management is based on surgical decompression of the entrapped cranial nerves that can cause recurrent facial paralysis similar to Bell's palsy (from age two years onwards). Trigeminal nerve decompression can help if facial pain is severe.

Craniectomy is required if intracranial pressure becomes elevated (from age five years onwards but usually in young adulthood). In South Africa this procedure is undertaken at an increasingly younger age.

Middle ear surgery to correct conductive hearing loss and the provision of hearing aids may be helpful. Brain stem implantation of electrodes is indicated if there is obliteration of the internal auricular canal and damage to the auditory nerve.

Spinal cord decompression may occasionally be needed in adulthood to alleviate backache.

Surgical correction of syndactyly may be necessary in early childhood in order to improve function and cosmetic appearance in those with sclerosteosis.

Mandible reduction may be performed for cosmetic reasons or if mouth closure is impaired as a result of overgrowth of the mandible. Tooth extraction may be difficult. Management by an orthodontic or craniofacial team is recommended.

Surveillance



Annually from infancy onwards for the following:

Audiologic assessment

Assessment for increased intracranial pressure and medullary compression

Neurologic and otologic examination for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Dental and orthodontic evaluation of tooth malalignment and malocclusion on an individual basis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



The following are appropriate:

Clinical appraisal and lateral skull radiograph as indicated

Molecular genetic testing of the parents if the SOST mutations have been identified in the proband

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Surgery for proptosis has not been successful [De Villiers & du Plessis 1995].