http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sox2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SOX2-related eye disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Examination by an experienced pediatric ophthalmologist

High-resolution cranial MRI for brain/pituitary malformations, optic nerve/chiasm/tract assessment

Endocrinologic evaluation to include corticosteroid, gonadotrphin, growth hormone, and thyroid function tests to assess pituitary function

Baseline neurodevelopmental assessment

Audiometry

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Visual impairment. The general management of visual impairment is not specific to anophthalmia or microphthalmia (see Anophthalmia/Microphthalmia Overview). Care includes:

Early referral to an experienced multidisciplinary team

Consideration of use of expanders to stimulate growth of the orbit and periorbital tissues. Because accurate assessment of visual function is necessary, optically clear expanders should be used.

Referral to special educational services for visually impaired infants


Other

Referral to endocrinologist for growth or hypogonadism concerns

Referral to physiotherapist if any evidence of motor impairment exists

Referral to special educational services for neurodevelopmental problems as needed

Consideration of use of melatonin for regulation of circadian rhythm if sleep pattern is abnormal

Parent/caregiver training in seizure management

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Many neonates can have an adequate MRI without general anesthesia using the “feed and wrap” method. In this case, assess morning cortisol levels prior to any subsequent anesthetic if this MRI reveals pituitary hypoplasia. If an anesthetic is required before adequate intracranial imaging is available, an endocrinologic evaluation is indicated.

Surveillance



The following measures are suggested:

Annual hearing test

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference every three to six months during childhood

Neurodevelopmental assessment annually for the first five years of life

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.