http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spg3a

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 3A (SPG3A), the following evaluations may be indicated:

Orthopedic evaluation in persons with early onset of SPG3A who have developed musculoskeletal complications including scoliosis or foot deformities

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation in children with early onset of disease

Urologic evaluation in persons with prominent urinary bladder hyperactivity

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies in persons with associated axonal neuropathy or neurogenic pain in the lower extremities caused by possible lumbo-sacral radiculopathy secondary to lumbar hyperlordosis and degenerative vertebral changes

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Therapy for spasticity, distal weakness, and urinary bladder dysfunction, the primary manifestations of SPG3A, is symptomatic.

Spasticity can be treated with:

Oral baclofen or tizanidine

Chemodenervation with botulinum A or B toxins; may be tried in those who do not tolerate oral antispasticity medications

Intrathecal baclofen pump; a good alternative for patients who improve on oral baclofen but cannot tolerate a therapeutic dose because of systemic adverse effects

Each of the above therapies should be combined with intensive physical therapy focused on stretching and strengthening exercises.

The role of surgical therapy for spasticity (including hamstring and heel cord lengthening and release of the adductor longus) remains unknown, but such treatment should be considered if contractures appear. See also Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Distal weakness, typically affecting foot dorsiflexion, can be ameliorated by ankle-foot orthoses; referral to orthotic services may be helpful.

Urinary urgency can be treated with anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Musculoskeletal abnormalities including muscle tendon contractures, scoliosis, and foot deformities are the secondary complications most likely to occur, resulting from long-standing spasticity and weakness. Intense and regular therapy for spasticity, including physiotherapy, can delay and minimize the appearance of these complications. The higher incidence of orthopedic problems in patients with SPG3A may be related to early age of onset and these patients should be followed by an orthopedist if problems are present.

Urinary bladder incontinence can be a secondary complication of a neurogenic bladder and urologic care may be needed.

Patients with advanced disease may experience falls with a risk of traumatic injury. A walking aid (cane, walker, or wheelchair) may need to be considered in patients experiencing falls.

Surveillance



There is no consensus regarding the frequency of clinical follow-up visits, but every person with HSP should be reevaluated once or twice a year to identify new complications early and to initiate aggressive therapy as indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The use of regional anesthesia, such as spinal or epidural anesthesia, during delivery in affected women with spinal cord involvement has traditionally been avoided due to the theoretic risk of exacerbating the degree of weakness and spasticity. However, several cases of successful regional anesthesia in affected individuals with hereditary spastic paraplegia have been reported [Thomas et al 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.