http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spondylocostal-d

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive spondylocostal dysostosis (AR SCDO), the following are recommended:

Assessment of respiratory function, especially if tachypnea and/or feeding difficulties suggest the possibility of respiratory insufficiency

Evaluation for other (e.g., renal and cardiac) anomalies

Evaluation of a male child for the presence of inguinal hernia

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



In the majority of individuals treatment is conservative because the vertebral and rib malformations cause progressive difficulties:

Respiratory support, including intensive care as needed, to treat acute respiratory distress and chronic respiratory failure

Routine treatment of inguinal herniae

Surgical intervention as needed if scoliosis is significant. External bracing, for example by use of an expandable prosthetic titanium rib [Ramirez et al 2010], may be attempted but experience is limited.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The most significant secondary complication is chronic respiratory failure caused by reduced lung capacity, which can result in pulmonary hypertension and cardiac failure. Expert management of these clinical problems is indicated.

Surveillance



Growth, development, respiratory function, and spinal curvature should be monitored.

The parents/care providers of young males need to be alert for the signs of inguinal hernia and its potential complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Virtually all individuals with SCDO have relative truncal shortening, and some have generalized short stature. For affected women pregnancy may give rise to exaggerated intra-abdominal pressure problems, though there is no published research on this issue. As the spine is distorted there are likely to be concerns with offering spinal and/or epidural anesthesia. However, spinal anesthesia has been successfully administered [Dolak & Tartt 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.