http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ssadh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuroimaging (MRI)

EEG

Developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The management of SSADH deficiency is most often symptomatic, directed at the treatment of seizures and neurobehavioral disturbances.

Seizures. Antiseizure medications employed for the treatment of SSADH deficiency tend to be broad spectrum, although valproate is avoided when possible because of inhibition of potential residual enzymatic activity [Shinka et al 2003]. Vigabatrin, an irreversible inhibitor of GABA-transaminase, inhibits the formation of succinic semialdehyde [Matern et al 1996]. However, vigabatrin has shown inconsistent results [Howells et al 1992, Gropman 2003], suggesting that it is not effective at inhibiting peripheral GABA-transaminase, leading to a peripheral supply of 4-hydroxybutyric acid to the brain and thus decreasing its own efficacy. Brain MRI signal changes, particularly prominent in the thalamus and basal ganglia, have been seen in infants treated with relatively high doses of vigabatrin [Pearl et al 2009c].

However, reports of uncontrolled, nonblinded trials of vigabatrin in two affected children described a decrease in plasma GHB concentrations and clinical improvement (specifically in verbal communication) in one child age eight years [Casarano et al 2012] and slow clinical improvement (although not unexpected based on natural history) in a child age 2.5 years [Escalera et al 2010].

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Methylphenidate, thioridazine, risperidal, fluoxetine, and benzodiazepines have been used for the treatment of increased anxiety, aggressiveness, and inattention [Gibson et al 2003].

Beneficial non-pharmacologic treatments include physical therapy directed at developing strength, endurance, and balance; occupational therapy for improvement of fine motor skills, feeding, and sensory integration; and speech therapy [Gropman 2003].

Surveillance



Regular neurologic and developmental assessments are indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Valproate is generally contraindicated as it may inhibit residual SSADH enzyme activity [Shinka et al 2003]. However, Vanadia et al [2013] reported an individual with SSADH deficiency who had refractory epilepsy after possible limbic encephalitis. The refractory epilepsy was finally controlled with magnesium valproate. One year after initiation of magnesium valproate therapy, the affected individual remained seizure free and had marked behavioral improvements, including decreases in aggression, coprolalia, and non-recognition of danger. In addition, the EEG demonstrated improved background organization.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Biomarkers have been studied with plans for utilization in clinical trials. Positron emission tomography (PET) with [11C]flumazenil (FMZ), a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist, showed reduced binding in cortical, basal ganglia, and cerebellar regions of interest versus controls consistent with downregulation of GABA receptors [Pearl et al 2007]. Transcranial magnetic stimulation similarly showed downregulation of GABAergic activity in affected individuals versus controls [Pearl et al 2009a]. A single case of improvement in gait, coordination, and energy was reported as an abstract in a 30-month-old male administered 200 mg/kg/day of taurine [Saronwala et al 2008]. However, an open-label study of eighteen individuals with SSADH deficiency treated with taurine did not show significant improvement in adaptive behavior scores. This study was assigned a class IV level of evidence because it did not involve a control group [Pearl et al 2014].

SGS-742, a GABA-B receptor antagonist, demonstrated in the murine model a significant effect on electrocorticography when compared with topiramate [Pearl et al 2009a]. Liver-mediated gene therapy in the mouse model did lead to reductions in GHB levels in liver, kidney, serum, and brain extracts [Gupta et al 2004]. A clinical trial of SGS-742 is currently enrolling (ClinicalTrials.gov).

Recent data demonstrated that administration of rapamycin to an SSADH-deficient mouse model reduced mTOR activity, reduced the elevated numbers of mitochondria in the liver and brain (due to improved mitophagy), and normalized aberrant antioxidant levels; mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin may lead to the treatment of many diseases, including SSADH [Lakhani et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Animal experiments utilizing the murine model have demonstrated partial efficacy involving the amino acid taurine, vigabatrin, and GABAB and GHB receptor inhibitors [Gupta et al 2004].

A murine trial has demonstrated some efficacy of the ketogenic diet [Nylen et al 2008], although the mechanism of the observed changes (and thus the potential for success in a human trial) is unknown [Knerr & Pearl 2008].