http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tbc1d24-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TBC1D24-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:


DOORS syndrome

Clinical genetics consultation, including dysmorphology examination

Neurology consultation

Audiology consultation

Otolaryngology consultation

Ophthalmology consultation

Dental consultation

Heart ultrasound

Renal ultrasound examination

FIME, PME, EIEE16, and TBC1D24-related nonsyndromic deafness syndromes (DFNA65 and DFNB86). One should consider some of the above evaluations depending on the clinical signs since the clinical overlap of all TBC1D24-related conditions has not yet been fully studied.

Treatment of Manifestations



Deafness. Consider hearing aids or cochlear implants as needed for hearing loss (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview). Cochlear implants at age one have been beneficial in one individual with DOORS syndrome [Campeau et al 2014].

Developmental delay. Early educational intervention, physical, occupational and speech therapy is recommended because of the high risk for motor and cognitive delay.

Seizures. Symptomatic pharmacologic management is warranted, as no controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different antiepileptic drugs in TBC1D24-related disorders.

The management of epilepsy in many genetic epilepsies is complex; general recommendations from the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence are available online.

Renal anomalies. Refer to an urologist or nephrologist as indicated.

Heart defects. Manage according to the anomalies detected.

Surveillance



Neurology evaluation with EEGs are appropriate, depending on seizure frequency and/or progression of clinical manifestations.

Perform yearly audiologic evaluation to assess for possible progression of hearing loss and/or the efficacy of hearing aids.

Yearly dental evaluation is appropriate.

Individuals with epilepsy, irrespective of cause, should have periodic ECGs as interictal and ictal abnormalities may predispose to sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Heterozygotes for a TBC1D24 pathogenic variant causing autosomal dominant deafness, DFNA65, should avoid excessive ambient noise as it may exacerbate hearing loss.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Molecular genetic testing for the familial TBC1D24 pathogenic variant(s) in older and younger sibs of a proband is appropriate in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment of seizures and/or deafness.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Polyhydramnios is often noted in DOORS syndrome [James et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.