http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tcs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an infant diagnosed with Treacher Collins syndrome, the following assessments are recommended:

The airway for evidence of choanal atresia/stenosis and/or micrognathia and glossoptosis predisposing to obstruction of the oropharynx

The palate for clefts

Swallowing function

Hearing through formal audiologic examination (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Ophthalmologic evaluation with attention to extraocular movement, corneal exposure, and visual acuity

If hearing loss is documented during the first six months of life, a craniofacial CT scan (axial and coronal slices) can be performed to document the anatomy of the head and neck and the external auditory canal, middle ear, and inner ear.

Assessment for dental anomalies should be made when teeth have erupted.

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of each individual and preferably done by a multidisciplinary craniofacial management team that typically comprises a medical geneticist, plastic surgeon, head and neck surgeon, otolaryngologist, oral surgeon, orthodontist, audiologist, speech pathologist, and psychologist.

Major management issues can be stratified by three age groups and graded for severity [Hayashi et al 2007, Thompson et al 2009]:

Birth to 2 years: airway and feeding difficulties

3 years to 12 years: speech therapy and integration into education system

13 years to 18 years: orthognathic surgery

Procedures for surgical intervention for the airway, if needed, are standard, primarily for improving the respiratory function or restoring patency of the nostrils and distraction of the mandible [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006, Jayasekera 2007]. If a diagnosis of TCS is suspected prenatally, airway management at birth should be considered [Morillas et al 2007]. Management of the airway in neonates typically includes special positioning of the infant or tracheostomy. With proper management, life expectancy approximates that of the general population.

Gastrostomy may be needed to assure adequate caloric intake while protecting the airway [Marszalek et al 2002].

Bone conduction amplification, speech therapy, and educational intervention are indicated for treatment of hearing loss. The bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA) is an alternative for individuals with ear anomalies [Marres 2002].

Craniofacial reconstruction is often necessary [Posnick 1997, Zhang et al 2009]. Generally, bone reconstruction precedes soft tissue corrections. Reconstruction can prevent the progression of facial asymmetry. Recommendations by Posnick [1997] for reconstruction include the following:

Repair of cleft palate, if present, at age one to two years [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006]

Zygomatic and orbital reconstruction when the cranio-orbitozygomatic bony development is complete (~age 5 to 7 years)

Maxillomandibular reconstruction

Type I (mild) and type IIA (moderate) malformation: age 13 to 16 years

Type IIB (moderate to severe malformation): at skeletal maturity

Type III (severe malformation): age six to ten years

Orthognathic procedures are typically indicated before age 16 years.

Misaligned teeth often require orthodonture.

Nasal reconstruction, if needed, should follow orthognathic surgeries.

External ear reconstruction should be performed after age six years and should precede reconstruction of the external auditory canal or middle ear.

External auditory canal and middle ear reconstruction should be performed for affected individuals with bilateral microtia and/or narrow ear canals.

Coloboma of the lower eyelid may be treated with botulinum toxin and subsequent surgery, if necessary [Warner et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Surgical outcome may be improved with incorporation of stem cells in therapeutic treatment of craniofacial abnormalities, particularly in bone and cartilage; however, such surgery is experimental and controversial [Trainor et al 2009].

Suppression of p53 during embryogenesis, also controversial, may prevent neurocristopathies [Jones et al 2008, Trainor et al 2009]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.