http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/td

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in a newborn diagnosed with thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of respiratory status by respiratory rate and skin color; arterial blood gases may be helpful in infants who survive the immediate postnatal period.

Assessment of the presence of hydrocephaly or other central nervous system abnormalities by CT or MRI

Medical genetics consultation and genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations



Management concerns are limited to the parents' desire for extreme life-support measures and provision-of-comfort care for the newborn.

Newborns require respiratory support (with tracheostomy and ventilation) to survive.

Anesthesia management concerns are described by Thompson et al [2011] and include:

Intubation with the cervical spine in a neutral position using a flexible fiber-optic scope

Utilization of evoked potential monitoring (somatosensory evoked potentials [SEPs] and motor evoked potentials [MEPs]) during the procedure to evaluate safety during intraoperative manipulations

Avoidance of volatile anesthetic agents and muscle relaxants which could affect the evoked potential recordings

Other measures:

Medication to control seizures, as in the general population

Shunt placement, when hydrocephaly is identified

Suboccipital decompression for relief of craniocervical junction constriction

Hearing aids, when hearing loss is identified

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of neurologic status on physical examination

Orthopedic evaluation upon the development of joint contractures or joint hypermobility [Wilcox et al 1998]

Audiology assessment

CT to evaluate for craniocervical constriction in long-term survivors if respiratory insufficiency is potentially the result of compression of the brain stem at the craniocervical junction

EEG for seizure activity

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



When TD has been diagnosed prenatally, potential pregnancy complications include prematurity, polyhydramnios, malpresentation, and cephalopelvic disproportion caused by macrocephaly from hydrocephalus or a flexed and rigid neck. Cephalocentesis and cesarean section may be considered to avoid maternal complications.

Management of an affected pregnancy is directed by the level of parental desire for heroic life-saving measures and is often highly center-specific. It can be addressed on three levels:

Maternal. Surveillance for cephalopelvic disproportion, polyhydramnios, and/or preterm labor; avoidance of emergency C-section for fetal distress

Fetal. Surveillance for malpresentation, periodic prenatal ultrasound monitoring of head circumference, MRI for fetal lung volume, and/or fetal stress testing

Familial. Establishment of a perinatal plan for assessment, care, and/or withdrawal of care after delivery

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.