http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tfap

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with familial transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete neurologic assessment including baseline nerve conduction studies

Evaluation of the heart:

Echocardiogram, the most useful noninvasive test for cardiac amyloidosis, for visualization of ventricular wall thickness, ventricular septal thickness, and hyperrefractile myocardial echoes (so called "granular sparkling appearance")

Electrocardiogram (ECG) to evaluate for characteristic findings of cardiac amyloidosis including low voltage in the standard limb leads and QS pattern in the right precordial leads with or without conduction blocks

Myocardial technetium-99m-pyrophosphate scintigraphy to visualize amyloid deposition in heart [Ikeda 2004]

Gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the brain and spinal cord to evaluate CNS amyloidosis [Mitsuhashi et al 2004]

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Evaluation of renal function

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Carpal tunnel release surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome

Vitrectomy for vitreous involvement

Cardiac pacemaker implantation for second-degree or third-degree AV block and sick sinus syndrome.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX). The only effective therapy for the neuropathy of familial TTR amyloidosis is orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX), which removes the main production site of the amyloidogenic protein. Successful OLTX results in rapid disappearance of variant TTR protein from the serum and thus halts the progression of peripheral and/or autonomic neuropathy. It has been shown by pre- and postoperative sural nerve biopsy that myelinated nerve fibers regenerate after OLTX [Ikeda et al 1997].

Recommended clinical criteria for OLTX in individuals with TTR amyloid polyneuropathy [Takei et al 1999, Adams et al 2000] include the following:

Age younger than 60 years

Disease duration less than five years

Either polyneuropathy that is restricted to the lower extremities or autonomic neuropathy alone

No significant cardiac or renal dysfunction

As of the end of June 2010, 1913 individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis, approximately 90% of whom were heterozygous for the Val30Met variant, had undergone liver transplantation (www.fapwtr.org/ram_fap.htm) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003, Herlenius et al 2004, Stangou & Hawkins 2004]. The five-year survival rate was significantly higher in individuals with the Val30Met variant than in those with other pathogenic variants (80% vs 57%, p=0.001) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003]. The most common causes of postoperative death were cardiovascular events (29%) and septicemia (26%) [Ikeda et al 2003].

Poor outcomes of transplanted individuals based on ten years' experience [Ikeda et al 2003] include:

Poor nutritional condition (mean body mass index <600)

Severe polyneuropathy (Norris score <55/81)

Permanent urinary incontinence

Marked postural hypotension

A fixed pulse rate

OLTX is not effective in the non-neuropathic forms of familial TTR amyloidosis (i.e., cardiac amyloidosis, leptomeningeal amyloidosis, and familial oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis [FOLMA]).

Cardiomyopathy was reported to progress after OLTX in some individuals with specific pathogenic variants other than Val30Met (Ala36Pro, Glu42Gly, and Ser77Tyr) (see Table 5) [Dubrey et al 1997, Stangou et al 1998, Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. It is presumed that amyloid cardiomyopathy may accelerate after OLTX by progressive deposition of wild-type TTR on a template of amyloid derived from variant TTR [Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. Therefore, it is critical to assess the severity of cardiac amyloidosis when considering OLTX [Coutinho et al 2004, Juneblad et al 2004].

Individuals with leptomeningeal involvement may not be candidates for liver transplantation because amyloidogenic TTR variants that cause intracranial amyloid deposits are considered to be derived from the choroid plexus.

Vitreous opacities may also progress after OLTX, possibly as the result of de novo production of variant TTR in the retinal epithelium.

Note: Because liver involvement in familial TTR amyloidosis is minimal, the liver of an individual with familial TTR amyloidosis can be grafted into an individual with liver cancer or end-stage liver disease (so-called "domino" liver transplantation). Since 1995, more than 330 domino liver transplantations have been performed. Several individuals who had received a liver graft from heterozygotes with familial TTR amyloidosis developed symptomatic systemic TTR amyloidosis [Stangou et al 2005, Goto et al 2006, Barreiros et al 2010, Lladó et al 2010, Obayashi et al 2011, Adams et al 2011]

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Cardiac pacing for persons with familial TTR amyloidosis with conduction block helps prevent sudden death.

Surveillance



Serial nerve conduction studies can be used to objectively monitor the course of the polyneuropathy.

Serial electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level can be used to monitor the course of cardiomyopathy and conduction block.

Modified body mass index (mBMI) can be used to monitor nutritional status.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Since most individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis have decreased temperature and pain perception, affected individuals should not use local heating appliances, such as hot-water bottles, which can cause low-temperature burn injury.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, it is appropriate to offer clinical diagnostic evaluations to identify those family members who will benefit from early treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Strategies of potential molecular therapies for familial TTR amyloidosis include the following [Saraiva 2002, Ando 2003, Sekijima et al 2008]:

Inhibition of synthesis of variant TTR

Stabilization of variant TTR

Inhibition of aggregation of amyloidogenic intermediates

Disruption of insoluble amyloid fibrils

Drugs that stabilize the TTR tetramer and prevent dissociation into monomers and drugs that disrupt TTR amyloid fibrils into amorphous materials have been designed [Saraiva 2002, Miller et al 2004, Almeida et al 2005].

Phase I and II clinical trials of diflunisal showed that diflunisal increased serum TTR stability in persons with familial TTR amyloidosis beyond the level of normal controls without adverse effects. A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled multicenter/multinational clinical trial is currently underway to determine whether diflunisal will alter the progression of familial TTR amyloidosis [Sekijima et al 2006, Tojo et al 2006]. This study is currently fully enrolled; results are anticipated in December, 2012.

Recently, tafamidis(Vyndaqel®), a small molecule that binds TTR tetramer selectively and potently, has been developed as a TTR kinetic stabilizer to ameliorate familial TTR amyloidosis. In a dose escalation Phase I study in healthy volunteers, tafamidis was found to be safe and well tolerated. In addition, tafamidis showed strong TTR stabilization effects in plasma of study participants. Phase II/III studies of tafamidis showed efficacy in delaying peripheral neurologic impairment compared with individuals treated with placebo. In addition, tafamidis resulted in improved nutritional status (modified body mass index, mBMI) of the study participants.

Based on these findings, the European Commission approved tafamidis for the treatment of familial TTR amyloid polyneuropathy in adult individuals with stage 1 symptomatic polyneuropathy in November 2011. Tafamidis will be available by prescription in Europe in early 2012.

Inhibition of variant TTR mRNA expression by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) [Love et al 2010] and antisense oligonucleotide [Benson et al 2006] is also under investigation.

In July 2010, Alnylam pharmaceuticals initiated dosing in a Phase I human clinical study with siRNA. The Phase I study was designed as a randomized, placebo-controlled, single-dose escalation study in individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis. The administration of siRNA(ALN-TTR01) resulted in statistically significant reductions in serum TTR protein levels in affected individuals. Lowering of serum TTR protein was found to be dose dependent, rapid, and durable after just a single dose.

Isis pharmaceuticals is currently evaluating oligonucleotide targeting of TTR amyloidosis (ISIS-TTRRx) in a Phase I study.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Plasma exchange, affinity column binding with a monoclonal antibody, and use of a special column with affinity for TTR were considered as possible methods for elimination of amyloidogenic TTR from the blood circulation. Serum TTR levels decreased significantly immediately after treatment, but then returned to the same levels as before treatment because of the rapid turnover of TTR. Therefore, these methods were concluded not to be effective for familial TTR amyloidosis.

4’-iodo-4’-deoxydoxorubicin (IDOX) has been reported to bind to several types of amyloid and lead to the catabolism of amyloid in deposits. In a multicenter clinical trial, IDOX was administered to persons with AL amyloidosis; however, no obvious benefit could be detected.