http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tubulin-ov

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a tubulinopathy, the following are recommended:

Pediatric neurology consultation including interpretation of MRI to provide as much prognostic information as possible; EEG if episodic clinical events of uncertain cause or suggestive of epilepsy are present

Evaluations by a physical therapist, occupational therapist, speech therapist, and developmental specialist in infancy and the preschool years because of the high risk of gross and fine motor delays, delayed speech and language development, and intellectual disability

Assessment of special educational needs

In the context of gross and fine motor delays and multiple disabilities, evaluation of:

Growth, feeding, and nutrition

Respiratory status

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Nerve conduction study (NCS) if progressive neuropathy is suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of children with multiple disabilities and medically refractory epilepsy is recommended for long-term management.

Supportive management, including an individualized therapy plan that includes physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy for oculomotor deficits and/or strabismus should begin at the time of diagnosis to ensure the best possible functionality and developmental outcome. Of note, it is appropriate to institute measures early on to manage potential complications of spasticity (i.e., joint contractures or reduced range of motion), which can increase the risk for decubitus ulcers as well as affect mobility and hygiene.

Failure to thrive in infants with the more severe brain malformations (i.e., lissencephaly, generalized polymicrogyria) is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, followed by gastrostomy tube placement as needed.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures based on the specific epilepsy type are indicated. In general, seizures should be treated promptly by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently worsens feeding and increases both the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed and the risk for pneumonia.

Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

For those with CFEOM, see detailed discussion of nonsurgical and surgical treatment (including extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery) in Congenital Fibrosis of the Extraocular Muscles.

For patients with severe cortical malformations (lissencephalies, polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia, microlissencephaly), it is usually appropriate to discuss the level of care to be provided in the event of a severe intercurrent illness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.