http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ucd-overview

Acute Management of a Urea Cycle Disorder



The extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a urea cycle disorder can be estimated by the rapidity of onset of neurologic symptoms, the degree to which the brain is involved, and to a lesser extent the plasma ammonia concentration.

The NIH-funded Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium provides expert diagnosis and treatment of urea cycle disorders as well as clinical and therapeutic studies.

Once a diagnosis of a UCD is made, treatment of acute manifestations can be started.

Subsequent treatment should be tailored to the specific urea cycle disorder. See:

Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency (OTC deficiency);

Citrullinemia Type I (ASS1 deficiency);

Argininosuccinic Aciduria (ASL deficiency);

Arginase Deficiency (hyperargininemia, ARG1 deficiency);

Ornithine Translocase Deficiency (ORNT1 deficiency, hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome);

Citrin Deficiency.

For NAGS deficiency see Ah Mew & Caldovic [2011].

Chronic management of CPS1 deficiency is similar to that of OTC deficiency; however, some patients with CPS1 deficiency may also benefit from therapy with oral N-carbamylglutamate [Diez-Fernandez et al 2013, Ah Mew et al 2014].

Treatment of Acute Manifestations



Care of an individual with a urea cycle disorder should be provided by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a tertiary care center.

In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following:

Rapidly return plasma ammonia concentrations to normal physiologic levels. This is necessary even without a definitive diagnosis, given the toxic effect of elevated plasma ammonia concentration. The best way to reduce plasma ammonia concentration quickly is by dialysis. The faster the flow rate, the faster the clearance. The method employed depends on the affected individual's circumstances and available resources. In general, the best choice for an individual patient is whatever method the local treating team is most comfortable with and can implement most quickly. The various renal replacement modalities are reviewed by Gupta et al [2016].

The fastest method is use of pump-driven dialysis, in which an extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) pump is used to drive a hemodialysis machine.

Intermittent hemofiltration (both arteriovenous and venovenous) and hemodialysis are more likely to be available than ECMO-driven dialysis.

Continuous renal replacement therapies have lower clearance than intermittent dialysis, but are less prone to interruption and may be better tolerated in sick neonates.

Clearance with peritoneal dialysis is substantially lower than with hemodialysis; therefore, hemodialysis (if available) is typically preferred. However, published outcome data are limited.

Intermittent dialysis can usually be discontinued when plasma ammonia concentration falls below 150 µmol/L, but may vary based on clinical evaluation by a clinician experienced in the treatment of metabolic disease. Affected individuals often experience a "rebound" hyperammonemia that may require further dialysis. This may be attenuated with the use of continuous renal replacement therapies following intermittent HD [Gupta et al 2016].

Perform pharmacologic interventions to allow alternative pathway excretion of excessive nitrogen (see Table 5).

Nitrogen scavenger therapy (sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate) is available as an intravenous infusion for acute management and an oral preparation for long-term maintenance.

Deficient urea cycle intermediates need to be replaced depending on the diagnosis; these can include arginine (IV infusion) and/or citrulline (oral preparation).

Note: Continuous arginine hydrochloride (HCl) infusion requires central access, as extravasion from a peripheral IV has on multiple occasions resulted in severe cutaneous necrosis.

Sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate can be infused through a peripheral IV; however, central access is preferred.

In persons with NAGS deficiency and in some with CPS1 deficiency, replacement of n-acetylglutamate with the analog molecule carbamyl glutamate (Carbaglu®) can improve the clinical symptoms or in NAGS deficiency can be almost curative. This compound is available in the US and should be added to the treatment regimen in a patient without a clear diagnosis at initial presentation. Dosing in adults and children is 100 mg/kg/day to 250 mg/kg/day divided into two to four doses. The only form currently available is an oral preparation; thus, administration of the medication by nasogastric/jejunal tube is necessary in the treatment of acute manifestations.


Table 5. 

IV Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol




Deficiency
Patient Weight
Components of Infusion Solution
Dosage Provided
Administration


Sodium phenylacetate& sodium benzoate 1, 2
Arginine HCl injection, 10% 2
Sodium phenyl-acetate
Sodium benzoate
Arginine HCl





CPS & OTC


0-20 kg

2.5 mL/kg
2.0 mL/kg
250 mg/kg
250 mg/kg
200 mg/kg
Loading 3Maintenance 4



ASS1 & ASL

2.5 mL/kg
6.0 mL/kg
250 mg/kg
250 mg/kg
600 mg/kg



CPS & OTC


>20 kg

55 mL/m2
2.0 mL/kg
5.5 g/m2
5.5 g/m2
4000 mg/m2



ASS1 & ASL

55 mL/m2
6.0 mL/kg
5.5 g/m2
5.5 g/m2
12000 mg/m2





1. 
Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile dextrose injection 10% before administration.


2. 
Before dilution


3. 
>90-120 minutes


4. 
>24 hours; arginine infusion not to exceed 150 mg/kg/h



IV Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile dextrose injection 10% before administration.

Before dilution

>90-120 minutes

>24 hours; arginine infusion not to exceed 150 mg/kg/h

Treat catabolic state with calories from glucose, fats, and essential amino acids. The introduction of nutrition support in the following manner is necessary for patients on dialysis or hemofiltration in order to resolve the catabolic state while avoiding overuse of enteral feeds.

Complete restriction of protein should not exceed 12-24 hours because depletion of essential amino acids results in protein catabolism and nitrogen release. Frequent (often daily) quantitative assessments of plasma amino acid concentrations can help optimize nutritional management by allowing the clinician to maintain adequate levels of essential amino acids without having to provide excess nitrogen. Maintenance of appropriate levels of essential amino acids is necessary to reverse the typical catabolic state because most acutely ill patients either present with essential amino acid deficiency or become deficient quickly.

Enteral nutrition is preferred; however, intravenous (total parenteral nutrition) is an option if the patient is so clinically unstable that adequate enteral intake is impossible. Intolerance of enteral feeding should not lead to further depletion of essential amino acids.

The placement of a nasogastric/jejunal tube at admission is warranted for slow drip administration of solutions of essential amino acids and infant formulas and administration of cofactors like carbamyl glutamate (analog of n-acetylglutamate).

Multiple other strategies to combat catabolism can be used, including low-dose continuous infusion of insulin with maintenance of adequate glucose delivery by high continuous delivery of carbohydrate-containing fluids; however, caution is advised since patients are often exquisitely sensitive to either the glucose or insulin.


Reduce the risk for neurologic damage

Use intravenous fluids (≥10% dextrose with appropriate electrolytes) for physiologic stabilization.

Use cardiac pressors as necessary while avoiding overhydration.

Consider the use of continuous bedside EEG to detect subclinical seizures. Patients in deep coma may have subclinical seizures that are non-convulsive and therefore not apparent.

Note: In patients with prolonged hyperammonemic coma and evidence of severe neurologic damage, the relative risks versus benefits of all the treatments discussed above should be considered on an individual basis.