http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/weaver

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant, the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Thorough history to identify clinical features associated with Weaver syndrome

Physical examination with particular attention paid to growth measurements and skeletal findings: camptodactyly (in the newborn period), scoliosis, and pectus deformities. The presence of an abdominal mass warrants immediate investigation.

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to identify other family members who could be affected; where possible, measurement of parental heights

Treatment of Manifestations



Educational support. For individuals with developmental delay and/or learning disability, referral for learning/behavior/speech assessment and support may be indicated.

Camptodactyly. Occasionally toe camptodactyly may require surgical intervention. Physiotherapy may also be beneficial.

Ligamentous laxity. Physiotherapy may be of some benefit to those individuals experiencing joint pain secondary to ligamentous laxity.

Scoliosis. If scoliosis is present a referral to orthopedics for further evaluation and monitoring is appropriate.

If additional clinical issues are detected through the history and/or examination, the appropriate specialist referral(s) should be made.

Surveillance



Regular review by a pediatrician is recommended for young children with EZH2-related Weaver syndrome to monitor developmental progress, camptodactyly (for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia.

If scoliosis is present, monitor as per the orthopedic recommendations.

The clinician may wish to review less frequently older children/teenagers who do not have medical complications.

Current data suggest that there may be a slightly increased relative risk for the development of neuroblastoma in individuals with heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variants. Although the numbers are too small to quantify the absolute tumor risk, it appears to be low. In addition, given that neuroblastoma surveillance has been inconsistent with no data to support the modality of surveillance, screening interval or duration, the current recommendations include clinical vigilance and thorough investigation of any symptoms that may be tumor related.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In general, pregnancies in which the mother and/or fetus has a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant are uncomplicated. Families and their health care providers should be aware that an affected baby may be large so that appropriate delivery plans can be made; in addition, information about the EZH2-related overgrowth phenotype should be provided.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.