http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/whs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of growth parameters and plotting on growth charts

Evaluation of cognitive, language, and motor development and social skills

Waking/sleeping video-EEG-polygraphic studies in childhood (mainly ages 1-6 years) to detect atypical absence seizures that may be subtle [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2009]

Evaluation for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux with referral to a dysphagia team

Physical examination for skeletal anomalies (e.g., clubfoot, scoliosis, kyphosis); if anomalies are present, referral for orthopedic and physical therapy evaluation (including full biomechanical assessment)

Ophthalmology consultation in infancy even in the absence of overt anomalies

Examination of the heart (auscultation, electrocardiogram, echocardiography) in infancy

Testing for immunodeficiency (particularly plasma Ig levels, lymphocyte subsets, and polysaccharide responsiveness); although limited data on immunodeficiency in individuals with WHS are available, such testing should be considered when clinically appropriate.

Complete blood count to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Comprehensive evaluation by an otolaryngologist and comprehensive audiologic screening (brain stem auditory evoked responses) as early as possible to allow appropriate interventions

Renal function testing and renal ultrasonography in infancy to detect structural renal anomalies and/or vesicoureteral reflux [Grisaru et al 2000]

Baseline liver ultrasound to evaluate for hepatic adenoma

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Because almost 95% of individuals with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome have multiple seizures, most often triggered by fever, and almost one third later develop valproic acid-responsive atypical absence seizures, it is appropriate to start treatment with valproic acid soon after the first seizure. Atypical absence seizures are well controlled on valproic acid alone or in association with ethosuccimide [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2009].

Sodium bromide has recently been proposed as the initial treatment for the prevention of the development of status epilepticus [Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Clonic, tonic-clonic, absence, or myoclonic status epilepticus can be well controlled by intravenous benzodiazepines (Diazepam) [Battaglia & Carey 2005, Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Because individuals with WHS have distinctive EEG abnormalities not necessarily associated with seizures [Battaglia et al 2009], it seems appropriate to withdraw antiepileptic drugs in individuals who have not experienced seizures for five years.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is also appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices such as the "Haberman feeder" can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with a cleft palate prior to surgical repair.

Gavage feeding may be indicated in individuals with poorly coordinated swallow.

Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner.

In one study, almost 44% of individuals with WHS were managed with gastrostomy and, occasionally, gastroesophageal fundoplication [Battaglia & Carey 2000].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., clubfoot, scoliosis, kyphosis) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner.

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Sleeping problems. If no medical factors (e.g., otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, eczema, obstructive sleep apnea) are involved and if sleeping problems are reinforced by parental attention, the 'extinction of parental attention' is an effective behavioral treatment [Curfs et al 1999].

Hepatic adenomas. Medical treatment (either surgery or chemotherapy) varies in relation to the number and size of the adenomas.

Other structural anomalies (e.g., diaphragmatic, gastrointestinal, dental) should be addressed in a standard manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for vesicoureteral reflux.

Intravenous Ig infusions or continuous antibiotics may be indicated for those with antibody deficiencies.

Surveillance



Systematic follow up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Ferrarini et al 2003, Battaglia et al 2008, Battaglia 2010].

Complete blood count annually to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Annual renal function testing, including serum BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C; urinalysis; and creatinine clearance test

Consideration of routine liver ultrasonography to evaluate for liver adenomas

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Carbamazepine may worsen atypical absence seizures [Battaglia & Carey 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.