http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/williams

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Williams syndrome (WS), and to guide medical management, the following evaluations are recommended [Committee on Genetics 2001, Committee on Genetics 2002]:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on Williams syndrome growth charts

Cardiology evaluation

Full clinical evaluation by a cardiologist with experience in treating WS

Measurement of blood pressure in all four limbs

Echocardiogram, including Doppler flow studies

Electrocardiogram

Additional cardiovascular imaging studies (computed tomography, magnetic resonance angiography, or cardiac catheterization) may be required in individuals with diminished pulses, bruits, or signs of diffuse thoracic aortic stenosis.

Urinary system evaluation

Ultrasound examination of the bladder and kidneys

Serum concentration of BUN and creatinine

Urinalysis

Calcium determinations

Serum concentration of calcium or ionized calcium

Calcium/creatinine determination on a spot urine sample (See Sargent et al [1993] for normal values.)

Thyroid function tests

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Baseline audiologic evaluation

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation, including assessment of motor, speech, language, personal-social, general cognitive, and vocational skills

Assessment of behavior including attention, anxiety, and adaptive skills

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Cognitive/behavioral. Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommended therapies include speech/language, physical, and occupational therapy. Consider hippotherapy (use of equine movement during speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy).

Verbal strengths can be used to assist in learning spatial tasks.

Phonics methods are recommended to teach reading [John & Mervis 2010].

Mastery of daily living skills contributes to adult well-being and should be encouraged.

Psychological evaluation, polysomnography, and psychiatric evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Behavior in young children may be addressed using techniques based on applied behavior analysis [Mervis & John 2010].

Behavioral counseling and psychotropic medication are often used to manage behavior problems, especially attention deficit disorder and anxiety, which require pharmacologic treatment in approximately 50% [Cherniske et al 2004].

Self-calming techniques can help manage anxiety.

Cardiovascular. Surgical correction of SVAS is performed in 20%-30% [Kececioglu et al 1993, Bruno et al 2003, Collins et al 2010b]. Surgical treatment of mitral valve insufficiency or renal artery stenosis may be required.

Hypertension is usually treated medically. In one series, calcium channel blockers were used successfully [Bouchireb et al 2010]. Antihypertensive therapy also results in improvement in vascular stiffness [Kozel et al 2014]. Lifelong monitoring of the cardiovascular system by a cardiologist familiar with treating WS is recommended.

Hypercalcemia. Management of hypercalcemia involves the following:

Hydration status should be assessed; increase water intake as indicated.

The diet should be adjusted with the help of a nutritionist so that the calcium intake is not higher than 100% of the recommended daily intake (RDI) [Ross et al 2011]. If the serum concentration of calcium remains elevated, dietary calcium should be reduced; but the serum concentration of calcium must be monitored. Parents should be counseled not to restrict dietary intake of calcium without medical supervision.

Vitamin supplements containing vitamin D should be avoided. If vitamin D deficiency is suspected, it is important to check vitamin D levels prior to initiating therapy, and calcium levels must be monitored during treatment. Absorption of calcium from the gut is increased in Williams syndrome (cause unknown) and vitamin D promotes calcium absorption.

Refractory hypercalcemia may be treated with oral steroids.

Intravenous pamidronate has been used successfully to treat infants with severe symptomatic hypercalcemia [Cagle et al 2004, Oliveri et al 2004].

Referral to an endocrinologist and/or nephrologist is recommended for treatment of persistent hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and/or nephrocalcinosis.

Eye, ear, nose, and throat. Hyperopia is treated with corrective lenses; strabismus is treated with patching of one eye or surgery; dacrostenosis is treated as in the general population.

Recurrent otitis media may be treated with tympanotomy tubes.

Hypersensitivity to sounds may be treated with ear protection when increased noise levels can be predicted.

Dental care may require assistance with daily brushing and flossing. Dental cleaning frequency should be increased to every four months in adolescents and adults. Orthodontic referral should be considered for treatment of malocclusion.

Gastrointestinal.The treatment of feeding problems in infancy and abdominal pain in children and adults depends on the cause (e.g., G-E reflux, hypercalcemia, hiatal hernia, and/or diverticulitis). Infants often benefit from feeding therapy.

Constipation must be aggressively managed at all ages due to the increased risk for early onset diverticulosis/diverticulitis. Treatment usually includes dietary increase in water and fiber followed by osmotic laxative treatment. Severe abdominal pain may indicate diverticulitis and/or intestinal perforation, which may occur at a young age in WS.

Urinary tract abnormalities. Individuals with febrile urinary tract infections will likely require investigation of the lower urinary tract such as voiding cystourethrogram to direct treatment.

Endocrine. Early puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist [Partsch et al 2002, Pober 2010]. Hypothyroidism is treated with oral thyroxine therapy; subclinical hypothyroidism typically is monitored but does not require treatment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The following are indicated:

Exercise and a balanced diet to avoid insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus

Range of motion exercises to prevent or ameliorate joint contractures

Because of the increased risk for myocardial insufficiency in individuals with biventricular outflow tract obstruction, especially during induction of anesthesia [Horowitz et al 2002] and because there is an increased risk for adverse events with sedation or anesthesia in WS, anesthesia consultation for surgical procedures. Guidelines for sedation and anesthesia risk assessment and anesthetic management for WS have been published [Burch et al 2008, Matisoff et al 2015, Latham et al 2016]. Electrocardiogram prior to surgery.

Awareness of the risk for myocardial insufficiency and cardiac arrest; for surgical procedures, use of a center equipped for cardiopulmonary resuscitation

Surveillance




Table 3. 

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome




Interval / Age
Test/Measurement




In infants – toddlers
Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 yearsThyroid function test yearly until age 3 years



Annual / all ages 1
Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismusHearing evaluationMonitoring of blood pressure in both armsMeasurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysisCardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life



Every 2 years
Serum concentration of calciumThyroid function and TSH level



Every 10 years
Renal and bladder ultrasound



In adults
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenosesEvaluation for cataracts






1. 
Except as noted


2. 
If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.



Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 years

Thyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Medical evaluation

Vision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing evaluation

Monitoring of blood pressure in both arms

Measurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysis

Cardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Serum concentration of calcium

Thyroid function and TSH level

Renal and bladder ultrasound

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2

Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenoses

Evaluation for cataracts

Except as noted

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Children with WS should not be given multivitamins because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancies in women with WS are high risk. They should be monitored for the development of pregnancy-induced hypertension, arrhythmias, and heart failure. Regular urinalyses should be performed in late gestation due to the increased risk for urinary tract infection. Ultrasound monitoring of the fetus is suggested [Lin et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.