http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/xla

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), the following evaluations are recommended:

A complete blood count with differential

Chemistries that include renal and liver function tests, total protein, albumin, and CRP

Quantitative serum immunoglobulins and titers to vaccine antigens as baseline measurements prior to initiation of gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Baseline chest and sinus x-rays

If the patient is able to cooperate, base line pulmonary function tests

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Individuals with XLA should receive specialty care at a center with expertise in this disorder.

If individuals develop acute infections, they should be treated with a course of antibiotics that is at least twice as long as that used in otherwise healthy individuals. Generous use of antibiotics is recommended and treatment should be given without any unnecessary delay.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Bacterial Infections



Gammaglobulin substitution therapy is the mainstay of treatment for individuals with XLA. Most individuals in the United States are given approximately 400 mg/kg of gammaglobulin every four weeks. In the past, the majority of individuals received their gammaglobulin by intravenous infusion every two to four weeks. In the last few years, an increasing proportion of individuals have been receiving gammaglobulin by weekly subcutaneous injections. Both routes provide good therapeutic concentrations of serum IgG. The choice of route may depend on factors related to the convenience of the physician and patient [Berger 2004].

A variety of brands of gammaglobulin are available; none has proven to be superior to others as measured by efficacy or side effects. Occasionally, individuals with XLA have a reaction to gammaglobulin, consisting of headaches, chills, backache, or nausea. These reactions are more likely to occur when the individual has an intercurrent viral infection or when the brand of gammaglobulin has been changed. Such reactions may disappear over time.

Chronic prophylactic antibiotics are used in some centers for prevention of bacterial infections.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Children with XLA should only be given inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and not oral polio vaccine.

The sibs of children with XLA should also be given IPV rather than oral polio vaccine (in order to avoid infecting their affected sib with live virus).

Surveillance



At least once a year:

A complete blood count with differential, chemistries, and quantitative serum immunoglobulins to monitor gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Chest x-rays or CTs and sinus films

Note: Chronic lung disease can develop in the absence of an acute pulmonary infection [Quartier et al 1999].

If the patient is stable, the serum IgG does not need to be evaluated with every infusion of gammaglobulin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Live viral vaccines, particularly oral polio vaccine, should be avoided in individuals with XLA.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk male relatives as soon after birth as possible so that gammaglobulin substitution therapy can be initiated promptly and administration of live viral vaccines can be avoided. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing for the known family-specific BTK pathogenic variant;

Analysis of the percentage of B cells in the peripheral circulation.

Note: Serum immunoglobulins will not be helpful in the evaluation of a newborn or infant because maternal IgG crosses the placenta.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Research studies exploring gene therapy for XLA have been conducted in mice [Kerns et al 2010, Ng et al 2010, Bestas et al 2014], but it is not clear when this type of treatment may be available for humans.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.