http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/xp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), the following evaluations are recommended (reviewed in Tamura et al [2014]).


Skin

Perform baseline examination of the skin (including all sun-exposed as well as sun-shielded areas) for evidence of sunlight-induced damage including pigmentary changes, precancerous lesions, and skin cancers.

For examination of the scalp, use a hair dryer (on a cool setting) to blow the hair aside.

Examination of the lip and adjacent tip of the tongue for signs of sun damage, including actinic cheilitis (a type of actinic keratosis or leukoplakia occurring on the lips) and prominent telangiectasia, which may precede the development of cancer in these areas [Butt et al 2010].

Baseline clinical color photographs of the entire skin surface with close-ups (including a ruler) of individual lesions to facilitate follow-up and detection of early skin cancers.


Eyes

Examine the lids and anterior UV-exposed portions of the globe for evidence of sun-induced damage including ectropion, entropion, inflammatory masses (pterygia, pinguecula), clouding of the cornea, and cancer of the lids, conjunctiva, or cornea. Eversion of the lids may be necessary to detect cancers of the mucosal surface.

Use the Schirmer test to detect dry eyes. This test involves measurement of the extent of absorption of tears into filter paper placed under eyelids for a few minutes [Brooks et al 2013].


Neurologic

Deep tendon reflex testing

Measurement of the occipital frontal circumference (OFC), to determine if microcephaly is present

MRI of the brain and nerve conduction velocities, if other neurologic problems are detected

Auditory. Baseline audiometry evaluation to screen for the sensorineural hearing loss, which may be present as a component of the XP-associated neurologic abnormalities [Totonchy et al 2013]

Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The treatment of manifestations is reviewed in Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. Premalignant lesions (e.g., small actinic keratosis) may be treated by freezing with liquid nitrogen.

Larger areas of sun-damaged skin can be treated with field treatments such as topical 5-fluorouracil or imiquimod preparations. Rarely, therapeutic dermatome shaving or dermabrasion has been used to remove the more damaged superficial epidermal layers. This procedure permits repopulation by relatively UV-shielded cells from the follicles and glands.

Cutaneous neoplasms are treated in the same manner as in individuals who do not have XP. This involves electrodesiccation/curettage or surgical excision. Skin cancers which are recurrent or in locations at high risk for recurrence are best treated with Mohs micrographic surgery. Because multiple surgical procedures are often necessary, removal of undamaged skin should be minimized. Severe cases have been treated by excision of large portions of the facial surface and grafting with sun-protected skin.

While individuals with XP are not abnormally sensitive to therapeutic x-rays, and individuals with XP have responded normally to full-dose therapeutic x-radiation for treatment of inoperable neoplasms [DiGiovanna et al 1998], cultured cells from a few individuals with XP were found to be hypersensitive to x-radiation [Arlett et al 2006]. When x-radiation therapy is indicated, an initial small dose is advisable to test for clinical hypersensitivity.

Oral isotretinoin or acitretin can be effective in preventing new neoplasms in individuals with multiple skin cancers [Kraemer et al 1988]. Because of its toxicity (hepatic, hyperlipidemic, and teratogenic effects; calcification of ligaments and tendons; premature closure of the epiphyses), oral isotretinoin or acitretin should be reserved for individuals with XP who are actively developing large numbers of new tumors. Some individuals may respond to lower doses of isotretinoin or acitretin with less toxicity.

A few case reports have described regression of skin cancers with use of imiquimod cream in individuals with XP [Giannotti et al 2003, Nagore et al 2003, Roseeuw 2003]; however, no controlled studies have been reported.

Eyes. Methylcellulose eye drops or soft contact lenses have been used to keep the cornea moist and to protect against mechanical trauma in individuals with deformed eyelids.

Corneal transplantation has restored vision in individuals with severe keratitis with corneal opacity. However, the immunosuppression necessary to prevent rejection of the transplant may increase the risk for skin cancer.

Neoplasms of the lids, conjunctiva, and cornea are usually treated surgically.

Hearing. Hearing aids can be of great help for individuals who have sensorineural hearing loss with learning difficulties in school (see Totonchy et al [2013] and Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Treatment of XP depends on early diagnosis and immediate, aggressive avoidance of sun and other UV exposure. This involves avoiding or minimizing outdoor exposure at times when UV radiation is present (when the sun is out or during daytime through clouds).

Clinical suspicion of XP should prompt immediate sun-protective measures until the diagnosis is confirmed or an alternative explanation is determined.

Individuals should be educated to protect all body surfaces from UV radiation by wearing protective clothing including hats, long sleeves, long pants and gloves, broad-spectrum, high sun-protective factor (SPF) sunscreens, UV-absorbing glasses, and long hair styles. The eyes should be protected by wearing UV-absorbing glasses with side shields. Some individuals have custom-made hats with UV-absorbing face shields to permit visibility outdoors while protecting the face from UV.

Because the cells of individuals with XP are hypersensitive to UVA and UVB (found in sunlight) and UVC (found in some artificial light sources), it is useful to measure UV light in an individual's home, school, or work environment with a light meter so that high levels of environmental UV (e.g., halogen lamps) can be identified and eliminated if possible. While no standards exist for perfectly safe UV exposure in individuals with XP, the use of UV meters can alert individuals to unexpected sources of high levels of environmental UV.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Vitamin D is produced in the skin by a reaction involving exposure to UV radiation. Active adults with XP and skin cancers received sufficient vitamin D in their diet in the past to result in normal serum concentrations of the active form (1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D) [Sollitto et al 1997]. However, children protected from sunlight very early in life have had low serum concentration of 25 hydroxy vitamin D; one child became susceptible to bone fractures [Ali et al 2009; Author, personal observation]. Dietary supplementation with oral vitamin D is recommended for persons with low serum concentration of serum vitamin D [Reichrath 2007; Author, personal communication].

Surveillance



See Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. A physician should examine the skin of an affected individual at frequent intervals (every ~3-12 months, depending on the severity of skin disease).

Affected individuals or their parents should be educated to look for abnormal pigmented lesions or the appearance of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. Individuals should be examined frequently by a family member who has been instructed in recognition of cutaneous neoplasms.

Eyes should be examined regularly for signs of UV exposure and damage.

Neurologic. Routine neurologic examination is indicated because of progressive neurologic abnormalities that are present in a minority of individuals with XP and may not be detected in young children.

Hearing. Periodic audiograms. Serial audiograms at regular intervals may also be useful for assessing the presence or absence of progressive neurologic degeneration, especially in those with a history of acute burning on minimal sun exposure [Totonchy et al 2013].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



UV exposure from sunlight and artificial sources of UV radiation should be avoided (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Artificial sources of UV. Certain light sources (e.g., mercury arc, halogen, and other lamps) can be unrecognized sources of UV. Although such light sources are often shielded, in open areas such as gymnasiums they can be a source of UV if the shield has been breached. UV meters are readily available to enable monitoring of areas to identify unexpected UV sources.

Cigarette smoke. Because cells from individuals with XP are also hypersensitive to environmental mutagens, such as benzo[a]pyrene found in cigarette smoke, prudence dictates that individuals with XP should be protected against these agents. One individual with XP who smoked cigarettes for more than ten years died of bronchogenic carcinoma of the lungs at age 35 years [Kraemer et al 1994]. The authors recently cared for another individual with XP who smoked and developed lung cancer in the fifth decade of life.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the family-specific pathogenic variants have been identified, molecular genetic testing for at-risk sibs is possible.

Clinical evaluation to identify affected sibs of a proband may be difficult, especially in an infant or young child. In this case, sun protection may be recommended for sibs until a definitive laboratory diagnosis is obtained.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The systemic retinoids isotretinoin and acitretin are used as skin cancer chemopreventive agents in individuals who are actively developing large numbers of skin cancers, and thus may be used by some women with XP [Kraemer et al 1988]. Systemic retinoids are known to be teratogenic to a developing fetus and pose a high risk for birth defects. Therefore, women who are using systemic retinoids should be appropriately counseled about pregnancy risks and the need for effective contraception; regular monitoring with pregnancy tests is indicated. Systemic retinoids should be administered only by physicians who are knowledgeable regarding their risks and benefits.

To access isotretinoin in the US, women and their prescribing providers must be enrolled in the iPLEDGE program to minimize the potential for fetal exposure. Pregnancy avoidance is initiated before therapy, continues during therapy, and extends post-treatment until the drug is cleared from the body. While both drugs may be effective in preventing skin cancers, acitretin may take longer to be eliminated from the body, requiring an extended period (3 years) of post-therapy pregnancy avoidance to minimize teratogenic risk.

Therapies Under Investigation



The bacterial DNA repair enzyme T4 endonuclease V in a topical liposome-containing preparation has been reported to reduce the frequency of new actinic keratoses and basal cell carcinomas in individuals with XP in one research study [Yarosh et al 2001]. As of 2016, this treatment is not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.

Oral vismodegib (Erivedge®), an inhibitor of the hedgehog pathway, has been approved by the FDA for treatment of metastatic basal cell carcinoma or locally advanced basal cell carcinoma that has recurred following surgery. This drug has also been approved for use in individuals with basal cell carcinoma who are not candidates for surgery or for radiation therapy (see FDA package insert). This treatment may be appropriate for some individuals with XP, however, no studies on the efficacy of this drug in those with XP have been published. Oral vismodegib is also a teratogen, leading to embryo-fetal death, midline defects, missing digits, and other birth defects in an exposed embryo or fetus; effective contraception during and after vismodegib treatment is advised in both women and men.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Use of cotton swabs to obtain specimens from conjunctival lesions for cytologic examination for malignant cells is being evaluated [Brooks et al 2013].