Prevention of pregnancy loss. The current data on antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss are limited to several observational studies and two randomized trials.

In one study, 50 women with thrombophilia (including 20 factor V Leiden heterozygotes) and recurrent pregnancy loss were treated with enoxaparin throughout 61 subsequent pregnancies. The live birth rate was 75% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 20% in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2000].

Another study reported a similar live birth rate of 77% with enoxaparin prophylaxis compared to 44% in untreated historical controls, suggesting a threefold greater likelihood of a favorable outcome. The beneficial effect of anticoagulation was most pronounced in women with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, although the small number of individuals studied precluded definitive conclusions [Carp et al 2003].

A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women with factor V Leiden, the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or protein S deficiency and a single unexplained fetal loss. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin, suggesting a 15-fold higher likelihood of a successful outcome. In the subgroup of women with heterozygous factor V Leiden (n=72) the live birth rate was 94% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 33% with aspirin, suggesting a 34-fold higher likelihood of a successful pregnancy outcome [Gris et al 2004].

A prospective randomized trial (Live-Enox) compared two different prophylactic doses of enoxaparin in thrombophilic women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss (including 55 heterozygous for factor V Leiden). Both prophylactic doses (40 mg/day and 80 mg/day) achieved similar high live birth rates of 84% and 78%, respectively. These rates were substantially higher than the 23% live birth rate in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005b].

No prospective randomized trials including an untreated control group confirming the benefit of low molecular weight heparin in preventing pregnancy loss in thrombophilic women have been performed. However, the concordant results of the studies cited above suggest that anticoagulation may improve pregnancy outcome in thrombophilic women.

Antithrombotic prophylaxis may be considered in selected women with factor V Leiden and unexplained pregnancy loss after an informed discussion of the risks and the data suggesting benefit [Walker et al 2005].

ACCP 2008 and recent obstetric consensus guidelines and expert opinion do not routinely recommend antithrombotic therapy for women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy loss because of the lack of sufficient evidence confirming benefit [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008, Rodger et al 2008].

Several randomized trials with a no treatment or placebo arm are currently underway. Until the results are available, the risks and benefits of antithrombotic therapy and limited evidence of an improved pregnancy outcome should be discussed with the patient to allow an informed decision.

Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in thrombophilic women with other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited. In the Live-Enox study, the incidence of preeclampsia, placental abruption, and fetal growth retardation was substantially lower with enoxaparin prophylaxis than in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005a]. A study of thrombophilic women with prior fetal loss who received either enoxaparin or aspirin during a subsequent pregnancy showed that those who received enoxaparin had newborns with significantly higher birth weights and fewer classified as small for gestational age [Gris et al 2004]. However, neither study was designed to evaluate these complications as primary outcomes.

A recent pilot randomized trial compared dalteparin to no treatment in a group of women without thrombophilia and a prior history of placental-mediated complications. Prophylactic dose dalteparin significantly reduced the incidence of the composite outcome of severe preeclampsia, low birth weight, placental abruption, and fetal death after 20 weeks. However, the study design excluded women with factor V Leiden [Rey et al 2009].

ACCP 2008 guidelines recommend low-dose aspirin throughout pregnancy for women at high risk for preeclampsia. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin is not routinely recommended for thrombophilic women with a history of preeclampsia or other adverse pregnancy outcomes [Bates et al 2008]. An obstetric expert consensus panel was also unable to make recommendations on the efficacy and safety of low molecular-weight heparin in this group [Duhl et al 2007].

Decisions about antithrombotic therapy in women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy complications should be based on an individual risk/benefit assessment. Assessment of the maternal thrombotic risk during pregnancy should also be incorporated into the decision regarding prophylaxis.
