Newborn screening has made presymptomatic diagnosis possible, allowing for early, aggressive education on management issues, such as management of fevers. The use of prophylactic penicillin, immunization, and education emphasizing access to healthcare have significantly decreased morbidity and mortality in children, primarily by reducing deaths from sepsis.

Penicillin prophylaxis prevents 84% of life-threatening episodes of childhood Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis [Gaston et al 1986]:

By age two months, all infants with SCD should receive penicillin V potassium prophylaxis, 125 mg orally, twice a day.

At age three years, the dose is increased to 250 mg orally, twice a day, and then continued until at least age five years.

Prophylaxis for those allergic to penicillin can include erythromycin or azithromycin but care should be taken to avoid medications that alter metabolism and increase the risk of prolonged QTc syndrome [Gerber et al 2009].

Immunizations. Timely administration of vaccines is essential. Clinicians should follow the recommended vaccine schedule for functionally asplenic individuals, which includes additional vaccines such as the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, and an altered schedule for meningococcal vaccines. Persons with sickle cell are considered high priority for annual influenza vaccine [Yawn et al 2014].

Folic acid supplementation should be considered to support the increased RBC synthesis secondary to the high RBC turnover in sickle cell.

Iron overload. Individuals receiving prophylactic as well as chronic transfusions are at risk for iron overload and should be monitored closely, initially by tracking the amount of blood transfused and monitoring serum ferritin concentration. Those with high exposures or documented iron overload should have an assessment of organ iron accumulation. With its increasing availability and safety and the ability to assess iron in multiple organs while avoiding sampling bias, quantitative radiographic evaluation such as T2*-weighted MRI is increasingly replacing biopsy [Wood 2007]. The noninvasive nature of monitoring iron overload via MRI or SQUID has led to significant improvements in the outcome of individuals with iron overload [Coates 2014]. Both oral or subcutaneous iron chelation therapy are recommended for those with documented excessive tissue iron deposition, with patient acceptance and use of medications being the main limiting factor [Coates & Wood 2017].
