Cardiorespiratory

Evaluation by pulmonary and cardiac specialists before surgeries [Finder et al 2004]

Administration of pneumococcal vaccine and influenza vaccination annually [Finder et al 2004]

Nutritional. Assessment if:

Planning to commence steroids [Davidson & Truby 2009]

Dysphagia is present

Patient is chronically constipated

Major surgery has been planned

Patient is malnourished

Muscular

Physical therapy to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Exercise

All ambulatory boys with DMD or those in early non-ambulatory phase should participate in regular gentle exercise to avoid contractures and disuse atrophy.

Exercise can consist of a combination of swimming pool and recreation-based activities. Swimming can be continued in non-ambulatory patients under close supervision, if medically safe.

If patients complain of muscle pain during or after exercise, the activity should be reduced and monitoring for myoglobinuria should be carried out. Myoglobinuria within 24 hours after exercise indicates overexertion leading to rhabdomyolysis.

Bone health

Assessments [Bushby et al 2010b, Darras 2011]:

Blood

Measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphorus, and activity of alkaline phosphatase

25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) level in springtime or biannually

Magnesium and parathyroid hormone levels may be considered

Urine (calcium, sodium, creatinine)

Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning

At baseline (age ≥3 years) or at start of corticosteroid therapy

Repeated annually in those at risk (history of fractures, chronic corticosteroid therapy) and those with DEXA Z score <-2

Spine radiograph

If back pain is present

To exclude vertebral compression fracture

To assess degree of kyphoscoliosis if present on physical examination

Bone age if growth failure occurs (height for age < 5th percentile or if linear growth is faltering) in persons on or off corticosteroids

Interventions:

Exposure to sunshine and a balanced diet rich in vitamin D and calcium to improve bone density and reduce the risk of fractures. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with a dietician.

Vitamin D supplementation should be initiated if the vitamin D serum concentration is <20 ng/mL [Bachrach 2005, Biggar et al 2005, Quinlivan et al 2005] and should be considered in all children if levels cannot be maintained [Bushby et al 2010b]. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with an endocrinologist and in accordance with country-specific pediatric guidelines.

Intravenous bisphosphonates; recommended in persons with symptomatic vertebral fracture(s), but a bone health expert should be consulted.

Use of oral biphosphonates for prophylaxis or treatment remains controversial.
