Establishing the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). To determine whether an individual has either classic or intermediate MSUD, it is useful to focus on concentration ratios among the BCAAs and between leucine and other essential and non-essential amino acids. Regulated concentration ratios among the full complement of circulating amino acids are one indication of in vivo residual BCKAD enzyme activity. These ratios are normally maintained within a narrow range by balanced transport of branched-chain and other essential amino acids across common carriers (LAT1/2), intracellular transamination equilibria, and coordinated activity of multiple catabolic pathways [Boado et al 1999, Matsuo et al 2000, Killian & Chikhale 2001, Umeki et al 2002, Brosnan 2003].

The following plasma concentration ratios are the most representative of amino acid regulation: leucine:isoleucine, leucine:valine, leucine:tyrosine, leucine:phenylalanine, leucine:glutamate, and leucine:alanine (mol:mol) [Strauss et al 2006, Strauss et al 2010, Mazariegos et al 2012]. In MSUD, plasma leucine concentration has the strongest reciprocal relationship to plasma alanine and glutamine concentrations (Spearman correlation coefficient -0.86 and -0.62, respectively; p<0.0001; see Figure 1) [Strauss et al 2010].

Severe BCKAD deficiency (classic MSUD) affects amino acid homeostasis at multiple levels and causes frequent and variable disturbances of plasma amino acid concentration ratios.

In milder intermediate forms of MSUD, plasma BCAAs may be chronically elevated but plasma amino acid concentration ratios tend to be preserved.

Note: (1) The majority of individuals with MSUD cared for by the authors are known to harbor a classic "Mennonite" variant in BCKDHA (c.1312T>A) and, thus, newly diagnosed children are not routinely tested for residual BCKAD enzyme activity [Strauss et al 2010]. (2) It is often difficult or impossible to establish whether or not an individual has clinically important residual BCKAD enzyme activity in vivo, even when the precise pathogenic variants are known.
