For an individual diagnosed with a DICER1-related disorder, the two considerations for evaluations following initial diagnosis are:

The extent of disease spread (staging) for malignant or potentially malignant DICER1-related disorders;

The presence of other synchronous DICER1-related conditions.

Extent of Disease Spread (Staging)

Pleuropulmonary blastoma types I and IR. No metastatic potential is associated with this type; thus, the only additional evaluation is for synchronous DICER1-related disorders (see Surveillance).

Pleuropulmonary blastoma types II and III

Brain MRI to evaluate for metastatic disease

Radionuclide bone scan to evaluate for metastatic disease, followed by plain radiographs for areas of concern

PET scan for diagnosis of solid or cystic and solid tumors, response to therapy, and follow-up. Note, however, that its use has not been validated in PPB.

Echocardiography as needed to define intracardiac extension of tumor, tumor thrombi, or pericardial effusion

Rarely, spine MRI for a paraspinal or intraspinal extension

In the event of systemic embolization and any suggestion of vascular involvement (facial plethora, vena cava syndrome, cardiac murmur): investigation with vascular ultrasound examination

CT of the abdomen to assess for liver metastases

Note: Bone marrow evaluation is almost never performed, as bone marrow involvement is extremely rare.

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors

Intraoperative staging should be performed according to FIGO staging criteria and should include peritoneal cytology and assessment of preoperative or intraoperative rupture. Care should be taken to avoid rupturing the tumor if possible.

Spread of ovarian stromal tumors to the chest without extensive abdominopelvic disease is unlikely; however, baseline evaluation with chest CT is reasonable given the concern for synchronous conditions.

Ciliary body medulloepithelioma. Staging includes brain MRI to evaluate for direct intracranial extension and metastatic disease.

Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) of the cervix or other sites. Staging includes MRI or CT to evaluate extent of primary tumor and for presence of metastatic disease in lymph nodes, liver, and lungs.

Pituitary blastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology examination.

Pineoblastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and CSF cytology examination.

Evaluations for Synchronous 

One or more of the disorders associated with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant may be present at the time of diagnosis or they may develop later in life. Evaluations to be performed for individuals newly diagnosed with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant are included in Surveillance.
