To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Pompe disease, guidelines have been published for the initial evaluation of individuals with:

Infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) [American College of Medical Genetics expert panel; see Kishnani et al 2006b];

Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) [Cupler et al 2012].

Chest radiography

IOPD. Nearly all affected infants have cardiomegaly on chest x-ray [van den Hout et al 2003]. Further, evaluation of apparent lung volume reduction, areas of atelectasis, and any pulmonary fluid may be helpful in directing other therapies.

LOPD. Baseline radiographic evaluation of the lungs and heart silhouette is indicated but only rarely reveals cardiomegaly.

Electrocardiography (ECG)

IOPD. The majority of affected infants have left ventricular hypertrophy and many have biventricular hypertrophy [van den Hout et al 2003].

LOPD. Based on findings of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD, Sacconi et al [2014] recommended Holter monitoring at initial evaluation.

Echocardiography

IOPD. Typically echocardiography demonstrates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with or without left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in the early phases of the disease process. In later stages, dilated cardiomyopathy may be seen.

LOPD. Echocardiographic assessment for dilatation of the ascending thoracic aorta has been recommended [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

Pulmonary

IOPD. Most infants have varying degrees of respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory status should be established with regard to cough, presence of wheezing or labored breathing, and/or feeding difficulties. Diaphragmatic weakness caused by excessive glycogen deposits results in mild to moderate reduction of vital capacity; however, objective assessment of pulmonary functions in infants is difficult at best. Most infants display respiratory difficulty with feeds or sleep disturbance [Kravitz et al 2005].

LOPD. Affected individuals should be evaluated for cough, wheezing, dyspnea, energy level, exercise tolerance, and fatigability. Formal pulmonary function tests show pulmonary insufficiency. An attempt to assess ventilatory capacity in the supine position can detect early ventilatory insufficiency. Pulse oximetry, respiratory rate, and venous bicarbonate and/or pCO2 should be obtained to assess for alveolar hypoventilation [van der Beek et al 2011, Cupler et al 2012].

Nutrition/feeding

IOPD. Patients should be evaluated for possible feeding difficulties (e.g., facial hypotonia, macroglossia, tongue weakness, and/or poor oromotor skills) [Jones et al 2010, van Gelder et al 2012].

Assessment of growth (i.e., height, weight, head circumference), energy intake, and feeding (including video swallow study) is appropriate.

All infants should be evaluated for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

LOPD. Assessment of nutritional status as baseline is recommended. Assessment of swallowing difficulty by video swallow study may identify barriers to adequate nutrition and risk for aspiration. Gastrointestinal symptoms similar to those reported in patients with irritable bowel syndrome may be underreported in this population and may undermine quality of life.

Audiologic –

IOPD

Baseline hearing evaluation including tympanometry is appropriate. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for a discussion of age-related methods of hearing evaluation.

Sensorineural hearing loss is now documented in children with IOPD, and hearing aids may be of benefit [van Capelle et al 2010].

Disability inventory –

IOPD and LOPD

All patients should undergo assessment of motor skills and overall functioning to guide subsequent therapies and monitor progression of the disease.

Assessment of risk for falls is recommended.

Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.
