Ophthalmologic care. Correction with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Notably, visual acuity is never correctable to normal, but parents should be advised that the achievable acuity never deteriorates.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory but may be performed if the strabismus is marked. Surgery may improve peripheral binocularity or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn or head tilt, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point to a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position. Nystagmus surgery remains highly controversial; no comparative clinical trial has compared the surgical reduction of amplitude of nystagmus to the outcomes of the natural history of dampened nystagmus with age among those forms of albinism in which increasing pigment occurs normally over time.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from “photophobia,” which is painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among all individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in acuity from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function substantively because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

Most children with albinism should remain in mainstream classrooms, as long as the school attends to their special needs resulting from visual limitation. Preschoool evaluations allow teachers and parents to develop an Individual Education Plan (IEP). Neither Braille nor “white cane” mobility training is needed in the overwhelming majority of children with albinism.

Additional classroom aids may include:

High contrast reading materials (black on white);

Large font texts or xerographically enlarged worksheets;

Preferential seating near the front of the class and work boards;

Selective optical devices, especially mobile ones such as stand magnifiers and monocular telescopes, and closed circuit chip-camera televisions; and

Computers and tablets with zoom-magnification text software.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare, to reduce some photodysphoria, and to provide some sun protection to the face.
