A multidisciplinary team including specialists from the following fields is recommended: hematology, gastroenterology, medical genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, immunology, dentistry, child development, psychology, and social work as needed [Dror & Freedman 2002, Rothbaum et al 2002, Durie & Rommens 2004, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a].

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be treated with the same oral pancreatic enzymes commonly used in treatment of cystic fibrosis; dose should be based on results of routine assessment of pancreatic function and nutritional status. Steatorrhea often resolves in early childhood, but pancreatic enzyme levels can remain low; routine monitoring (see Surveillance) is recommended.

Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) is recommended.

Blood and/or platelet transfusions may be considered for anemia and bi- or trilineage cytopenia.

Hematologic abnormalities. If recurrent infections are severe and absolute neutrophil counts are persistently 500/mm3 or less, treatment with prophylactic antibiotics and granulocyte-colony stimulation factor (G-CSF) can be considered.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) should be considered for treatment of severe pancytopenia, bone marrow transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome, or AML. Chemotherapy can be utilized as a bridge to HSCT in individuals with SDS and AML; however, sustained complete remission is problematic and prompt continuation to HSCT remains imperative. Although earlier reports indicate that survival is fair, cautious myeloablation and newer reduced intensity regimens have demonstrated improved outcomes in small cohorts [Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007, Bhatla et al 2008].

Note: Bone marrow abnormalities are not treated unless severe aplasia, myelodysplastic changes, or leukemic transformation are present.

Skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal manifestations of SDS may range from clinically asymptomatic to severe, and can evolve or progress over time. Severe manifestations such as asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy due to rib cage restriction will require subspecialty care including pediatric pulmonary and orthopedic specialists. Other rib and joint abnormalities may require surgical intervention if severe and consultation with an orthopedic surgeon familiar with SDS for those with skeletal dysplasia may be beneficial.

Growth. Children with poor growth and delayed puberty benefit from ongoing consultation with an endocrinologist, who may also consult with orthopedists regarding possible surgical management of asymmetric growth and joint deformities.

Other

Bone densitometry should be considered if clinically indicated, or in early adulthood.

Cognitive, learning, and behavioral complications can be features of SDS, and remedial interventions are considered beneficial.
