There is no known treatment for the underlying defect in CHF: no therapies can repair the primary ductal plate malformation or reverse the fibrosis or biliary tree abnormalities. Therapies based on extrapolations from other forms of liver disease, anecdotal reports, and deductive reasoning are used to manage the complications of the underlying defect [Shneider & Magid 2005].

The most important manifestations of CHF are variceal bleeding, hypersplenism, cholangitis and, to a lesser extent, biliary stones, cholangiocarcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Variceal bleeding. The management of varices has been reviewed [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008, Ling et al 2011, Shneider et al 2012]. Care should be provided by those experienced in the management of PH.

Primary prevention (prior to any variceal bleeding) entails screening for varices and treating medium or large varices with nonselective beta blockers with the dose titrated to pulse and blood pressure. If beta blockers are not tolerated, variceal banding should be considered. Management in children is not as well defined as in adults. Affected children should be referred to tertiary centers with experience in the management of varices in children.

Standard procedures for management of variceal bleeding include obtaining adequate initial intravenous access, resuscitation, transfusion without over transfusion, octreotide, antibiotic prophylaxis, proton pump inhibition, and endoscopy when stabilized.

Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding (once bleeding has already occurred) consists of banding of esophageal varices, histacryl injection of gastric varices, and continued use of nonselective beta blockers. Because banding devices do not fit on the smallest endoscopes, small children with variceal bleeding often undergo sclerotherapy instead.

Individuals who have had repeated variceal bleeding (especially if gastric varices are present) should be considered for surgical portosystemic shunting rather than repeated variceal ligation [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Such intervention is best performed in a center experienced with this procedure.

Although controversial, consideration of a surgical shunt in an individual with CHF who has never had variceal bleeding may be reasonable if PH is likely to progress and liver transplantation is unlikely given the intact hepatic synthetic function in certain settings. For example, a surgical shunt would be a strong consideration in an individual with large varices that have never bled if appropriate expert care is not available for emergent management of variceal bleeding.

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) are widely available. However, it is the authors’ opinion that use of TIPS is not indicated outside of an emergency; because of their intrinsic occlusion rate, particularly when considered over long periods of time, TIPS may require repeated procedures to maintain adequate patency. Furthermore, the intravenous contrast often utilized to assess and perform TIPS revisions is potentially nephrotoxic – a serious consideration given the typical association of CHF with ARPKD.

Hypersplenism. Hypersplenism usually does not result in clinically significant sequelae. Individuals with significant splenomegaly are fitted with spleen guards to wear when playing contact sports or performing activities that could result in splenic injury.

Splenectomy is contraindicated because it does not treat the underlying PH and often exacerbates it.

Abnormalities of the biliary tree. Cholangitis should be considered and investigated in individuals known to have biliary dilatation who develop unexplained fever or right upper-quadrant pain with or without jaundice [Shneider & Magid 2005].

Cholangitis is best treated with rapid institution of appropriate antibiotics.

Segmental resection of the liver is a controversial option for individuals with segmental bile duct abnormalities who have had repeated episodes of cholangitis [Ulrich et al 2008] even though cysts may form in other areas of the liver after the resection.

Recurrent cholangitis with or without more widespread bile duct abnormalities is best treated with liver transplantation. If cysts in the extrahepatic bile duct are complicated by recurrent infection and/or the presence of stones, excision of the common bile duct with a Roux-en-Y hepatojejunal anastomosis has been recommended.

Biliary stones. The treatment of biliary stones depends on their location, number, and size. Care is best provided in a tertiary care facility with expertise in managing biliary stones.

Cholangiocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. These should be managed by a multidisciplinary team.

Patient education. Patients are taught the manifestations of variceal bleeding (hematemesis, melena, and hematochezia) and cholangitis (fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice) and instructed to seek appropriate care when such manifestations occur.
