Clinical practice guidelines for the management of individuals with PGL/PCC have recently been published [Lenders et al 2014] (full text; registration or institutional access required).

The management of tumors in individuals with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes resembles management of sporadic tumors [Young 2011]; however, persons with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes are more likely to have multiple tumors and multifocal and/or malignant disease than are those with sporadic tumors.

For secretory tumors, treatment is directed toward containing the disease through antagonism of catecholamine excess with pharmacologic adrenergic blockade prior to surgical removal; treatment for malignant tumors is directed toward surgical removal and mitigation of the deleterious effects of metastatic spread [Eisenhofer et al 2004, Lenders et al 2005].

For nonsecretory skull base and neck paragangliomas, early detection allows for timely surgical resection and is believed to reduce operative morbidity and improve prognosis [Rinaldo et al 2004, Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For carotid body and low vagal paragangliomas, surgical resection is the treatment of choice in almost all cases. Most are benign and can be completely excised.

Note: In elderly individuals or those with clinically important comorbidities, surgery may be delayed and tumors monitored by serial imaging. Radiation therapy can also be considered in these patients [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For jugulotympanic paragangliomas, small tumors can usually be removed without difficulty; resection of larger tumors may be associated with CSF leak, meningitis, stroke, hearing loss, cranial nerve palsy, or even death. Therefore, close observation with symptomatically guided surgery may be prudent. Radiation therapy can also be considered, but potential long-term risks include malignant transformation of the primary tumor and other radiation-induced malignancies. In selected patients, stereotactic radiosurgery may also be performed [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For pheochromocytomas, surgery, preferably laparoscopic, is the treatment of choice [Lenders et al 2005, Young 2011].

Preoperative. The chronic and acute effects of catecholamine hypersecretion from adrenal chromaffin tumors must be reversed preoperatively. Combined α- and β- adrenergic blockade is required to control blood pressure and prevent intraoperative hypertensive crises. Using the following approach, only 7% of patients undergoing catecholamine-secreting tumor resection at the Mayo Clinic needed postoperative hemodynamic management [Young 2006, Young 2011]:

Alpha-adrenergic blockade starting at least seven to ten days preoperatively to allow for normalization of blood pressure and volume expansion. The dose of the alpha blocker is adjusted for a low normal systolic blood pressure for age.

A liberal sodium diet

Once adequate α-adrenergic blockade is achieved, initiation of β-adrenergic blockade (e.g., 3 days prior to surgery). The dose of the β-adrenergic blocker is adjusted for a target heart rate of 80 beats per minute.

Postoperative. Approximately one to two weeks after surgery, 24-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines should be measured.

If the levels are normal, resection of the biochemically active pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be considered complete.

If the levels are increased, an unresected second tumor and/or occult metastases should be suspected.

In individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants, paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas should be resected as soon as possible after tumor discovery. Prompt resection is particularly important for extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas because of their tendency to metastasize.
