Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013]. These recommendations encourage early detection of microalbuminuria and proteinuria through regular surveillance and early intervention aimed at suppressing proteinuria using angiotensin antagonists (click here for full text).

Renal. Hypertensive individuals should receive appropriate management.

Controlled clinical trials of therapy for Alport nephropathy have not been conducted. However, a retrospective analysis of a registry population suggested that early treatment with angiotensin blockade delays the onset of ESRD in human Alport syndrome [Gross et al 2012]. The angiotensin receptor blocker losartan has been shown to reduce proteinuria in children with Alport syndrome [Webb et al 2013]. Furthermore, angiotensin blockade has been shown to delay progression to ESRD in transgenic mice with ARAS [Gross et al 2003, Gross et al 2004]. Therefore, affected individuals are frequently treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers once proteinuria appears. This form of therapy is rarely associated with significant adverse effects. It is unknown whether the losartan therapy reduces the risk for aortic dilation in XLAS (as is being investigated for Marfan syndrome).

Renal transplantation is typically successful in individuals with Alport syndrome [Kashtan et al 1995, Byrne et al 2002]. Anti-GBM nephritis involving the renal allograft is a dramatic, but rare, complication occurring in an estimated 3% of males with Alport syndrome who have undergone transplantation [Kashtan 1999, Byrne et al 2002].

Prior to renal transplantation, males with XLAS should have a cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation [Kashtan et al 2010].

Special considerations apply to the selection of potential living related kidney donors for individuals with XLAS. The following discussion considers potential donors on the basis of gender and the presence or absence of hematuria:

Male relative without hematuria. The optimal living related donor is a male who has a normal urinalysis and is therefore unaffected.

Male relative with hematuria. A related male with hematuria probably has Alport syndrome, and cannot be a kidney donor.

Female relative without hematuria. Female relatives who have normal urinalyses are probably unaffected, although approximately 5%-10% of females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant are asymptomatic. It is rare for asymptomatic females whose children are also asymptomatic to be heterozygous. Asymptomatic females can probably donate a kidney safely, but should be informed of their risk of having affected male children to whom they will not be able to donate a kidney. Genetic status can be confirmed or excluded by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Female relative with hematuria (i.e., heterozygous female). Females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant should only be considered as potential kidney donors if no asymptomatic living donors are available.

The presence of proteinuria or sensorineural deafness is an absolute contraindication to kidney donation as these are risk factors for progression to ESRD.

Heterozygous females younger than age 40 years should not be used as donors, even in the absence of proteinuria or deafness.

Heterozygous females age 40 years or older who have normal renal function, blood pressure, and hearing and no proteinuria can be considered as donors because the risk of late progression to ESRD appears to be low in such individuals. However, the donor should be informed of the risk (albeit low) of late progression to ESRD.

Cochlear. Hearing aids should be prescribed when appropriate.

Ocular. The ocular manifestations of Alport syndrome rarely require specific ophthalmologic intervention.

Some individuals develop cataracts that interfere with vision; these should be extracted when necessary.

Diffuse leiomyomatosis. Symptomatic leiomyomas may require surgical intervention.
