Chelation Therapy with Disodium Calcium Edetate

Regular chelation therapy with intravenous disodium calcium edetate can stabilize blood manganese levels, improve neurologic symptoms, and halt liver disease [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012].

Short term. The response of an individual to disodium calcium edetate is determined by a single five-day course of twice-daily disodium calcium edetate at 20 mg/kg/dose (made up in 250 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 1 hour) and daily measurement of plasma manganese concentration and 24-hour urine manganese levels. Other monitoring includes: serum concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, and magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium.

Note: To avoid hypocalcemia, disodium calcium edetate infusions need to be administered slowly over at least one hour. If the calcium level (corrected for albumin concentration) is low, infusions should be administered over a longer time span (i.e., >3 hours).

Long term. If chelation therapy proves to be effective in the short term, monthly five-day courses of disodium calcium edetate (intravenous 20 mg/kg/dose 2x/day) are expected to lower blood manganese levels and normalize hemoglobin concentration and iron indices [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012]. Chelation therapy should be continued lifelong. While on treatment, monitoring once every two months includes: serum concentration of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Iron Therapy

Iron is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal manganese uptake; hence, supplementation with iron given orally (despite normal serum iron levels) can reduce blood manganese levels and resolve polycythemia [Tuschl et al 2008, Tuschl et al 2012]. The high serum transferrin levels seen in affected individuals are thought to reduce the risk of manganese toxicity.

Note: Iron indices need to be monitored frequently (every ~3 months) in those receiving iron supplements (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Liver Transplantation

Liver transplantation should be considered in individuals with end-stage liver disease; however, it has not been attempted in individuals with this disorder and, hence, no data are available.

Other

Dystonia can result in physical deformities and pain. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy should be provided. Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications and L-dopa has been attempted with limited success.
