Treatment guidelines for DM2 have been published. See Udd et al [2011] (full text).

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help determine the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses [Johnson et al 1995].

Routine physical activity appears to be beneficial for maintaining muscle strength and endurance in persons with DM2, and as an aid to control musculoskeletal pain.

Myotonia is typically mild and rarely requires treatment [Ricker 1999], though use of mexilitene, which is very effective in controlling some forms of myotonia, has helped control muscle pain in some individuals with DM2.

The effectiveness of medications and combination of medications in pain management varies. No one medication has been consistently effective; medications that have been used with some success include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids (e.g., 5 mg prednisone on alternate days), and tricyclic antidepressants. Low-dose narcotic analgesics, when used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, may help but may also lead to development of tolerance and escalating doses.

Consultation with a cardiologist is strongly recommended for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to the onset of other symptoms. ECG, Holter monitoring, and an echocardiogram should be performed to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Florek et al 1990, Hawley et al 1991]. Due to the increased risk for cardiomyopathy, echocardiography and possibly cardiac MRI should be considered.

The value of defibrillator placement is increasingly evident in individuals with DM2 who have overt arrhythmias, but the role of pacemaker/defibrillators in asymptomatic patients is yet to be determined [Schoser et al 2004b].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. As compared to the more typical senile nuclear cataracts, direct ophthalmoscopy and even slit lamp examination can underestimate the functional significance of cataracts in individuals with DM2 because the alteration of vision depends on location, not just the number of subcapsular opacities.

Testosterone replacement therapy can be beneficial in males with symptomatic hypogonadism.

Direct gastrointestinal manifestations of DM2 are yet to be characterized, but some patients complain of postprandial abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea. As in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), some individuals respond to prokinetic agents such as metochlopromide (Reglan™) and tegaserod (Zelnorm™).
