The World Federation of Hemophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center. (Individuals in the USA see National Hemophilia Foundation; individuals worldwide see World Federation of Hemophilia for locations).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor VIII for bleeding episodes within an hour of noticing symptoms:

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers should be identified, as frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia A should be trained to administer the infusions. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia A include the following [Chalmers et al 2011, Srivastava et al 2013]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, is treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered preferably subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor VIII requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

DDAVP速

(desmopressin acetate). For individuals with mild hemophilia A, including symptomatic females, immediate treatment of bleeding can be achieved with DDAVP速. A single intravenous dose often doubles or triples factor VIII clotting activity. Alternatively, a multi-use nasal formulation of DDAVP速 Nasal may be more convenient.

Note: Hemophilia genotype influences DDAVP速 response [Castaman et al 2009, Nance et al 2013].

Immune tolerance therapy. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor VIII greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Fogarty & Kessler 2013]. High titer inhibitors can often be eliminated by immune tolerance therapy [Hay & DiMichele 2012]. Individuals with large gene deletions are less likely to respond to immune tolerance than individuals with other types of variants [Coppola et al 2009].
