Ventilatory support. The treatment goals for classic CCHS are to secure the airway and to use chronic ventilatory support at home to compensate for the altered/absent ventilatory responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Of note, although oxygen administration without artificial ventilation improves the PaO2 (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood) and relieves cyanosis, it is not an adequate treatment of hypoventilation.

Because individuals with CCHS may experience complete respiratory arrest or severe hypoventilation and, thus, the sequelae of hypoxemia, they require monitoring of objective measures of oxygenation (i.e., pulse oximeter) and ventilation (i.e., PETco2 monitor) continuously during sleep and at regular intervals while awake. They also require observation and continuous care, especially during all sleep, by an RN trained and experienced in ventilator management.

For each of the options listed below, the goal is to provide the affected individual with the technology optimal for her/his life style needs.

Typically, the infant needing ventilatory support 24 hours per day is most safely and effectively supported via tracheostomy and use of a home mechanical ventilator. Tracheostomy is also recommended for children and adults who require ventilator support during sleep only.

As children who require continuous ventilatory support become ambulatory, diaphragm pacing by phrenic nerve stimulation can be considered to allow for increased mobility and improved quality of life. Diaphragm pacing is not typically recommended for the young child who requires only nighttime ventilatory support because the benefits do not outweigh the risks; however, for older adolescents and young adults, this could be an appropriate consideration. Tracheal decannulation is not assured in affected individuals who use diaphragm pacing during sleep.

Diaphragm pacers for the active child with CCHS should be implanted at each phrenic nerve in the chest, ideally by thoracoscopic technique [Weese-Mayer et al 1996, Shaul et al 2002, Chin et al 2012].

Older infants, toddlers, and children with diaphragm pacers should be assessed for use of a Passy-Muir one-way speaking valve while awake, allowing for vocalization and use of the upper airway on exhalation.

Children with diaphragm pacers may be assessed for capping of the tracheostomy tube while awake and paced, thereby allowing for inspiration and exhalation via the upper airway; tracheostomy is typically still required for mechanical ventilation during sleep to avoid upper airway obstruction and physiologic compromise.

Although not yet accomplished, the older child with an entirely normal airway may be able to eliminate the need for a tracheostomy by relying on diaphragm pacing while awake and on mask ventilation while asleep; however, such a child may require interim endotracheal intubation to allow for optimal oxygenation and ventilation during acute illness that requires more aggressive ventilatory management.

Cooperative older children with CCHS who consistently require ventilatory support only while sleeping may be candidates for noninvasive support with either mask ventilation or negative-pressure ventilation; however, this must be done with careful consideration of each child’s needs. If successful, tracheal decannulation can be considered (with the caveat that in the event of severe illness, interim endotracheal intubation may be required in a pediatric intensive care unit). The child who normally requires ventilatory support during sleep only may, during an intercurrent illness, also require artificial ventilation both awake and asleep.

Note: Straus et al [2010] reported that the ventilatory response to hypercarbia seemed to improve with the use of oral contraceptives in two young women heterozygous for 20/25 and 20/26 genotypes. Ongoing studies have not confirmed this report.

Cardiac. Prolonged transient asystoles may present as syncope and/or staring spells, and may be of such significant duration (≥3.0 seconds) as to warrant placement of a cardiac pacemaker for management [Silvestri et al 2000, Gronli et al 2008].

Hirschsprung disease. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview.

Tumors of neural crest origin. Neuroblastomas are removed surgically and followed by chemotherapy if they have advanced beyond Stage 1. Other tumors of neural crest origin are treated individually by location and type, though surgical removal is typically recommended.
