Treatment includes the following:

Regular professional dental hygiene, routine brushing, and fluoride treatment

Oral-motor therapy to alleviate chewing and swallowing problems

Consultation with a pediatric orthodontist regarding malocclusion and need for orthodontic intervention

Routine protocols to alleviate sleep apnea. If other sleep disturbances are present, establishing a bedtime routine can calm and soothe the child. Melatonin has been used to treat insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders with 85% of parents reporting improved or normal sleep [Andersen et al 2008]. Although no controlled studies have been performed in Phelan-McDermid syndrome, melatonin treatment has been used to improve sleep in some children.

Tympanostomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections. If hearing is impaired, management with hearing aids should be considered.

Resolution of cardiac, renal, respiratory, immunologic, thyroid, and other medical issues according to standard protocols

Surgical removal of ingrown toenails to prevent infection

Use of pressure stockings and elevation of the foot of the bed for lymphedema.

Early intervention programs, intensive physical and occupational therapies, adaptive exercise and sports programs, and other therapies to improve coordination and strength

Therapies to improve verbal and nonverbal communication because perceptive language is often more advanced than expressive language. Sign language, picture exchange systems, and computer touch screens may augment communication.

Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified

Walkers or other assistive walking devices

Nutritional assessment for individuals with persistent gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and/or cyclic vomiting. GER may be treated in infants by thickening formula, smaller feedings, and positioning, and in older children by avoiding spicy food and refraining from eating within two to three hours of bed time. In some cases, medication is required to control GER. In the most persistent cases, surgery (fundoplication) may be required.

As in the general population, medication as indicated to help reduce hyperactivity, anxiety, and self-stimulatory behavior

Intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration in individuals with recurrent vomiting; neurologic evaluation to assess cyclic vomiting, particularly to address issues of increased intracranial pressure. If increased intracranial pressure is caused by an arachnoid cyst, surgery may be warranted.

Vigilance by parents or caregivers in monitoring children, particularly those who can walk or run independently, as children may be impulsive and unaware of the consequences of their behavior
