Renal manifestations

The renal disease progresses from proteinuria to ESRD at variable rates and is not prevented by any known drug therapies, although a few affected individuals treated with cyclosporin A, tacrolimus, or corticosteroids have had a transient reduction in the rate of renal disease progression.

Renal transplantation effectively treats the nephropathy and neither nephropathy nor arteriosclerosis recurs in the graft [Lücke et al 2004, Elizondo et al 2006, Clewing et al 2007a]. Mild immunosuppressive therapy, such as immunosuppressive monotherapy, appears to improve outcome after renal transplantation [Lücke et al 2009].

Orthopedic manifestations

Some affected individuals who have survived beyond childhood have required hip replacement.

Treatment of scoliosis and/or kyphosis is standard.

Immunologic manifestations

Neutropenia usually responds well to supplementation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

One affected individual has been successfully treated by bone marrow transplantation (BMT) [Petty et al 2000, Thomas et al 2004], and four affected individuals have died after BMT [Baradaran-Heravi et al 2013].

Individuals with autoimmune problems have had variable responses to treatment.

A few individuals have been transfusion dependent because of anemia or thrombocytopenia.

In one affected individual with thrombocytopenia, the autoimmune features resolved spontaneously; in one they resolved after steroid and IVIG treatments, and in one they cleared after splenectomy. All other affected individuals, excepting one with Evans syndrome, were successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy such as steroids, cyclophosphamide, or IVIG. The individual with Evans syndrome was resistant to treatment with steroids, cyclosporin A, and rituximab [Zieg et al 2011].

Infectious disease manifestations. Individuals with recurrent infections, opportunistic infections, or declining lymphocytes or T-cell counts frequently require the care of an immunologist.

Affected individuals with recurrent herpetic infections benefit from treatment with acyclovir.

A few affected individuals have developed severe disseminated cutaneous papilloma virus infections that have improved with imiquimod and cidofovir.

Neurologic manifestations

Individuals with transient ischemic attacks or strokes usually show temporary improvement on treatment with agents that improve blood flow or decrease coagulability (pentoxifylline, acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, warfarin, heparin). To date, no curative or effective long-term therapies have been identified.

Migraine headaches are often difficult to treat since response to anti-migraine medication is variable. Medications that have helped some individuals include ergotamine, sumatriptan, verapamil, and propranolol. Note: Use of ergotamine and sumatriptan is contraindicated in individuals with SIOD with severe vasoocclusive disease or cerebral ischemic events.

Hypothyroidism can be treated with levothyroxine supplementation; however, supplementation does not have an ameliorative effect on the renal disease or T-cell deficiency.
