Acute presentations should be managed symptomatically in a hospital setting, including intravenous glucose (dextrose) administration, supportive treatment of hepatic insufficiency (including fresh frozen plasma or exchange transfusion), and treatment of metabolic acidosis, if present.

Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is the cornerstone of HFI treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). During acute episodes of intoxication, including at the time of initial diagnosis, immediate and absolute elimination of fructose (by substitution of fructose with other carbohydrate sources including glucose, maltose, and cornstarch) rapidly reverses symptoms and should result in normalization of related metabolic disturbances.

Ongoing education for children and adults concerning the need for dietary restriction is recommended, and should ideally be handled by nutritionists with specific experience in treating HFI and other inherited metabolic diseases.

Individuals with HFI are advised to wear a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace at all times.

Hepatomegaly with steatosis and lipid vacuolization may remain a persistent complication despite fructose restriction and resolution of initial fibrosis. This includes individuals ascertained by family history and treated from birth [Odièvre et al 1978]. The reason for this remains to be determined, but may be related to insufficient fructose restriction as well as lower tolerance of fructose early in life [Froesch et al 1963].

Chronic renal insufficiency, specifically proximal tubular dysfunction, may also persist despite fructose restriction. Typically resolution of renal disease occurs shortly after starting fructose restriction [Odièvre et al 1978]. In rare historical instances, dietary modification did not affect renal dysfunction [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968]. This may be a result of earlier, incomplete attempts at restriction, as reported patients tended to manage themselves with self-restriction alone. It may also be in part due to primary defects in aldolase function and ATPase interaction within the proximal tubule, leading to dysfunctional acid-base regulation, renal tubular insufficiency (manifesting as glucosuria, aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia), and nephrocalcinosis [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968, Lu et al 2001, Steinmann & Santer 2011].
