Medications

High dose supplementation

of

riboflavin. Because oral riboflavin supplementation is effective (and possibly life saving), it should begin as soon as a riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy is suspected and continued lifelong unless the diagnosis is excluded by molecular genetic testing.

High-dose supplementation of riboflavin between 10 mg and 50 mg/kg/day has been effective in patients with genetically proven riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy and also in some patients in whom the genetic basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy has not been established.

Although no formal placebo control trial has been conducted and the longest course of riboflavin supplementation has been 36 months, riboflavin supplementation: improves symptoms and signs on clinical examination; improves objective testing (vital capacity, brain stem evoked potentials, nerve conduction studies), and normalizes acylcarnitine levels [Foley et al 2014].

Before initiating riboflavin supplementation, perform the assessments in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis.

Oral riboflavin supplementation should be given in gradually increasing doses in order to establish the optimum dose:

Riboflavin 10 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 20 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 30 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 40 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 50 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Note: Some patients are on doses up to 70 mg/kg/day.

Side effects, problems, or deterioration at any point require discussion with the treating clinician.

See Surveillance for recommended follow up of individuals treated with riboflavin supplementation.

Note: Treatments attempted before the basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy was known have included the following:

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been tried in a number of patients with reports of improvement as well as reports of no or non-sustained response [Bandettini Di Poggio et al 2014].

Some patients have reported additional improvement with other multivitamins and coenzyme Q10.

Supportive Care

The following are appropriate:

Respiratory support

Physiotherapy to avoid contractures

Occupational therapy for support in activities of daily living

Orthotics for limb and trunk bracing

Hearing aids and appropriate educational intervention for those with sensorineural hearing loss

Speech and language therapy to avoid choking and respiratory problems

Wheel chair as needed

Low vision aids for those with decreased visual acuity

Routine management of scoliosis to avoid long term respiratory problems

Routine management of depression
