No established treatment for Kindler syndrome exists. The goals of care are to treat manifestations and prevent complications.

When possible, children with KS should be managed by a multidisciplinary team in a center experienced in caring for children with skin fragility. When possible, the team should include a dermatologist, pediatrician, ophthalmologist, dentist, gastroenterologist, urologist, nurse specialist, and dietitian.

Skin. The following are recommended:

Standard blister care in childhood. If a blister is not painful, it should be kept intact. Otherwise alleviate blister-related pain by draining the fluid using a sterile needle, leaving the overlying skin in place. Apply an ointment to the blister and cover it with nonstick gauze bandage. Antibiotics may be used to treat an infected blister.

Protection from trauma, for example, by use of soft and protective clothing and avoiding contact sports to prevent physical trauma

Use of moisturizers for dry, pruritic skin

Sun-safety education, including use of high sun protective factor (>30 SPF) sunscreens, use of sun-protective clothing (hats and long-sleeve shirts) and avoidance of sun exposure as much as possible

Pseudosyndactyly is usually relatively mild and does not require surgical treatment.

Mucosal involvement

Eyes. Lubrication of the cornea by artificial tears and eye drops and prevention of infections by use of local antibiotics; surgical correction of corneal scarring as needed by an ophthalmologist

Mouth and periodontium. Regular dental care to ensure optimal oral hygiene to reduce periodontal disease

Gastrointestinal tract

Esophageal dilatation may be indicated for those with dysphagia.

Esophageal strictures and stenosis may require fluoroscopically guided balloon dilations [Sadler et al 2006].

Temporary parenteral nutrition may be necessary when esophageal dysfunction is severe.

Anal stenosis and bleeding requires regular laxatives.

Severe colitis may require surgical bowel resection in some cases.

Urethra. Meatal stenosis may require dilatation. Strictures may require stenting and/ or surgical intervention.

Phimosis. Most males require circumcision [Penagos et al 2004].
