Treatment aims to reduce plasma concentration of plant sterols to as close as possible to normal concentrations (i.e., <1 mg/dL), to control plasma concentration of cholesterol, and to prevent xanthoma formation and/or reduce the size and number of xanthomas.

Historically, treatment strategies included dietary restriction of intake of both animal- and plant-based sterols, ileal bypass surgery, and/or hepatic transplantation [Salen et al 2004, Wang et al 2004, Miettinen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010]. Some of these treatments have only been partially effective.

Current treatment therapies focus on the following:

A diet low in shellfish sterols and plant sterols (i.e., avoidance of vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, seeds, avocados, chocolate, and shellfish) in conjunction with ezetimibe or other medications

The sterol absorption inhibitor: ezetimibe (10 mg/d) [Salen et al 2004, Salen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Musliner et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010], which alone may be sufficient

Bile acid sequestrants such as cholestryramine (8-15 g/d) which may be considered in those with incomplete response to ezetimibe

Treatments should begin at the time of diagnosis. When tolerated, the combined treatments can decrease the plasma concentrations of cholesterol and sitosterol by 10% to 50%. Often existing xanthomas regress.

Partial ileal bypass surgery (i.e., shortening of the ileum) has been used to increase intestinal bile acid loss. Partial or complete ileal bypass surgery in persons with sitosterolemia has resulted in at least 50% reduction of plasma and cellular sterol and stanol levels [Nguyen et al 1988, Nguyen et al 1990].

Arthritis, arthralgias, anemia, thromobocytopenia, and/or splenomegaly require treatment, the first step being management of the sitosterolemia, followed by routine management of the finding (by the appropriate consultants) as needed.

Sitosterolemia does not respond to standard statin treatment.
