Management of CPVT is summarized in a specific consensus document from the Heart Rhythm Association (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) [Priori et al 2013b] (full text) and summarized in the recent version of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on ventricular arrhythmias [Priori et al 2015] (full text).

Beta-blockers are the first therapeutic choice (class I indication) of proven efficacy for about 60% of individuals with CPVT [Leenhardt et al 1995, Priori et al 2002]. The proposed mechanism of action in an individual with CPVT is inhibition of adrenergic-dependent triggered activity. This effect can be due to both heart rate reduction and direct effect on calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Chronic treatment with full-dose beta-blocking agents prevents recurrence of syncope in the majority of affected individuals.

The reproducible induction of arrhythmia during exercise allows effective dose titration and monitoring. Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day divided into two doses per day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day divided into 3-4 doses per day). Nadolol is reported to be more effective than selective beta blockers [Leren et al 2016]. However, selective beta-blockers can be used in individuals with asthma or other respiratory conditions. Importantly, the dose of beta-blockers should always be individualized with exercise stress testing. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006] (see Surveillance).

Flecainide. Clinical [van der Werf et al 2011] and experimental [Liu et al 2011] data show that to improve arrhythmia control, flecainide (100-300 mg/day) can be given along with beta-blockers to persons who have recurrence of syncope or complex arrhythmias during exercise (class IIa). Although controlled clinical trials are lacking, the evidence for effectiveness of flecainide is sufficient to indicate the use of this drug whenever beta-blockers are not sufficient to control arrhythmias. Beta-blockers and flecainide are also indicated for affected individuals who have experienced a previous aborted sudden death to reduce the probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) shocks (class IIb). The antiarrhythmic effects of flecainide appear to be independent from the specific CPVT genetic subtype [Watanabe et al 2013].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation in addition to beta-blockers with or without flecainide is recommended in individuals with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience cardiac arrest, recurrent syncope or polymorphic/bidirectional VT despite optimal therapy. Furthermore, in those individuals in whom the highest tolerated dose of beta-blockers fails to adequately control arrhythmias [Priori et al 2002, Sumitomo et al 2003], an ICD can be considered for primary prevention of cardiac arrest/sudden death [Zipes et al 2006]. Whenever possible, pharmacologic therapy should be maintained/optimized even in individuals with an ICD in order to reduce the probability of ICD firing.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) may be considered in those with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience recurrent syncope, polymorphic/bidirectional VT, or several appropriate ICD shocks while on beta-blocker and flecainide and in those who are intolerant of or with contraindication to beta-blocker therapy (class IIb). However, LCSD is not without side effects, including palpebral ptosis, elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, and lack of sweating from the left arm and face. Recurrences of cardiac events have been also reported in those with LCSD. Therefore, pharmacologic therapy should always be optimized prior to considering LCSD.
