Patients with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Referral to the appropriate specialist(s) is recommended for the following findings:

Significant or lipomatous segmental overgrowth: referral to a surgeon and/or thoracic surgeon (when lipomatous overgrowth involves the trunk)

Leg-length discrepancy secondary to segmental somatic overgrowth

Cardiac abnormalities (i.e., structural cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias)

Renal abnormalities

Intellectual disability and/or difficulties with learning, behavior, or speech, or motor difficulties

Speech, swallowing, and feeding difficulties

Neurologic and neurosurgical manifestations

MCAP syndrome. Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of raised intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data are lacking to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management. In recent years, favorable outcomes have been observed with ventriculostomy of the third ventricle (rather than insertion of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt), suggesting that the neurosurgical management of hydrocephalus in MCAP syndrome is evolving.

HMEG. Individuals are at risk for severe early-onset epilepsy, focal neurologic signs such as hemiparesis, and severe intellectual disability. Epilepsy and intellectual disability may be improved by hemispherectomy [Di Rocco et al 2006, Kwan et al 2008].

Individuals with HMEG and MCAP syndrome with polymicrogyria (PMG) are at increased risk for epilepsy; thus, long-term neurologic follow up is warranted, and many require long-term antiepileptic treatment [Mirzaa et al 2012].

Somatic overgrowth, vascular, lymphatic and musculoskeletal manifestations. CLOVES syndrome and fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH) are associated with severe focal overgrowth, vascular malformations, and orthopedic complications with significant morbidities. Prompt diagnosis (by MR/CT and angiography) is warranted. Most individuals undergo (often several) debulking or orthopedic procedures with significant ensuing complications (see Surveillance).

The following are the main treatment considerations in CLOVES syndrome:

The characteristic truncal lipomatous mass infiltrates surrounding tissues and often requires surgical excision. Severe scoliosis, large truncal mass, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems of the feet and hands, and central phlebectasia/thromboembolism are examples of significant morbidities that need active or prophylactic medical intervention.

Paraspinal and intraspinal extension have significant risk for compression of the cord, thecal sac, and nerve roots, with resultant major neurologic deficits, warranting prompt diagnosis and multidisciplinary care [Alomari 2009a].

Given the risk for thromboembolism in CLOVES syndrome, appropriate prophylactic measures including anticoagulation and caval filtration, particularly in the perioperative period, are recommended. Central and thoracic phlebectasia in individuals with CLOVES syndrome should be considered an indication for placement of a superior vena cava (SVC) filter.

FH is associated with severe progressive overgrowth of fibrous and adipose tissues. While the severity and natural history varied among reported individuals, thorough surgical and orthopedic evaluations are warranted. Most individuals (8/10) underwent extensive debulking or orthopedic procedures.
