Reduction of urine supersaturation of calcium oxalate in order to reduce stone formation and formation of calcium oxalate crystals that can be injurious to the kidney:

Maintainance of high oral fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 BSA)

Oral administration of an inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystallization. Most patients are treated with one of these agents, which include potassium and sodium citrate [Leumann & Hoppe 2001], orthophosphate [Milliner et al 1994], or magnesium [Watts 1994]. Note: Simultaneous administration of citrate and phosphate should be done with caution due to the potential for increasing calcium phosphate supersaturation.

Avoidance of supersaturation of calcium oxalate in the blood. Although there is little experience with chronic kidney disease in PH3, a decline in GFR to less than approximately 40 mL/min/1.73m2 would be expected to result in increased plasma oxalate and the potential for systemic oxalosis (as in other forms of PH). If plasma oxalate exceeds 35-50 μmol/L dialysis or transplantation is needed to reduce the risk of multiorgan complications of calcium oxalate deposition.

Prevention of stone complications through regular monitoring (see Surveillance) and prompt attention to the following, any of which can damage kidney function:

Alleviate obstruction of the urinary tract by a stone promptly through stent placement and/or stone removal.

Maintain continuous fluid intake and urine flow before, during, and for several days after stone removal procedures.

Treat urinary tract infections promptly and thoroughly, as bacteria may cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Avoidance of acute kidney injury by avoiding intravascular volume contraction at all times. This may necessitate intravenous fluids during severe gastroenteritis or other circumstances in which oral fluid intake cannot be maintained.

Avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess. Since the source of the excess oxalate in PH3 is metabolic overproduction, little is gained by strict low oxalate diets, which in young children may compromise nutrition. Simple avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess is recommended.
