Hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria in individuals with PRS superactivity can be reduced by treatment with the following:

Reduced intake of red and organ meats, poultry, and shellfish [Choi et al 2004], oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines), beer, avoidance of high-fructose corn syrup-containing foods and drinks, and increased low-fat dairy intake

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, prescribed in doses with the ultimate aim of achieving serum urate concentrations lower than 6.0 mg/dL (360 μmol/L). The starting dose should be 100 mg once a day (in adults) with titration every three to four weeks according to the serum urate concentration. However, because of the uric acid overproduction and excessive uric acid excretion, allopurinol should be prescribed conservatively, as there is a high risk for xanthinuria and xanthine renal lithiasis – see Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Febuxostat, a newer urate-lowering xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat has not been tested in individuals with PRS superactivity, but there is no reason a priori to doubt that it will be effective in the treatment of this disorder. Febuxostat should also be prescribed conservatively, because of a high risk for xanthinuria causing renal lithiasis. Note: Excretion of >1.1 g uric acid per day in an adult is associated with a greater than 50% risk for kidney stones.

High daily fluid intake (i.e., ≥2 L/day in the adult)

Potassium citrate (usually administered 4x/day to alkalinize the urine) when urate urinary tract stones are present or uric acid gravel is in the urine [Becker 2008]. Xanthinuria does not respond to urinary alkalinization.

Note: The interventions described only prevent/treat gout and the other metabolic complications of hyperuricemia; they have no known beneficial effect on hearing loss or neurodevelopmental impairment.

Sensorineural hearing loss is managed in the usual manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management).

Ataxia is managed in the usual manner (see Hereditary Ataxias, Management).
