All symptomatic persons should be treated (see Priori et al [2013]). Complete cessation of symptoms is the goal. Management is focused on the prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death through use of the following:

Beta blockers are the mainstay of therapy for LQTS, including asymptomatic individuals with prolonged QT intervals and individuals who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Some individuals have symptoms despite the use of beta blockers [Moss et al 2000]. However, a majority of cardiac events that occur in individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype “on beta-blockers” are not caused by failure of the medication, but in fact by failure to take the medication (non-compliance) and/or the administration of QT-prolonging drugs [Vincent et al 2009]. It is suspected that the same holds true for individuals with LQTS type 2, but that has not been systematically studied. It is therefore important that:

Inadequate beta blocker dosing is prevented by regular adjustments in growing children with evaluation of the efficacy of dose by assessment of the exercise ECG or ambulatory ECG;

Beta blockers are taken daily, and strategies are in place in case of missed doses;

QT-prolonging drugs (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) are not administered to persons with LQTS without careful consideration of risk versus benefit by the individual(s) and physician(s).

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) are recommended in individuals with LQTS resuscitated from a cardiac arrest, although children with a LQTS type 1 phenotype with an arrest while not receiving beta blockers can be treated with beta blockers or with left cardiac sympathetic denervation [Alexander et al 2004, Vincent et al 2009, Jons et al 2010]. ICDs can be useful for those individuals with beta-blocker-resistant symptoms or a contraindication for beta blocker therapy (severe asthma) [Zareba et al 2003, Priori et al 2013].

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) is recommended for high-risk patients with LQTS in whom ICD therapy is refused or contraindicated and/or in whom beta blockers are either not effective, not tolerated, not accepted, or contraindicated [Schwartz et al 2004, Priori et al 2013]. LCSD can be useful in individuals who experience events while on therapy with beta blockers or ICD [Priori et al 2013].

Sodium channel blockers can be useful as additional pharmacological therapy for individuals with a LQTS type 3 phenotype with a QTc interval >500 ms in whom this additional compound is shown to shorten the QTc interval by >40 ms [Priori et al 2013].
