Management at all ages focuses on supportive therapy to minimize disease-related complications.

Multidisciplinary management at various ages may include:

Endocrinology to optimize bone homeostasis and avoid exacerbating treatments

Nephrology to monitor calcium homeostasis and examine for nephrocalcinosis

Neurology to prophylactically or prospectively treat seizures and manage myopathy

Neurosurgery or craniofacial team to manage pseudocraniosynostosis

Orthopedics to manage primary and secondary skeletal manifestations

Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R), physical therapy, and occupational therapy to optimize mobility and autonomy

Pain management

Psychological support

Pediatric and adult dentistry to manage tooth loss

The involvement of multiple specialists treating complex interrelated medical issues mandates case management and social work support.

Enzyme Replacement Therapy

The emergence of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with asfotase alfa (Strensiq™) has altered the natural history of severe perinatal and infantile HPP cases; the long-term effects of treatment are not fully known. A new phenotype of “treated perinatal and infantile HPP” is emerging, and the prior designation of “perinatal lethal HPP” may no longer universally apply in the developed world.

In October 2015, the FDA approved asfotase alfa for treatment of patients with perinatal, infantile, and juvenile onset HPP [Alexion –10-23-2015].

Perinatal/infantile HPP study outcomes. In two prospective, single-arm studies (with historical controls used for survival analysis), 68 individuals with severe, perinatal/infantile-onset HPP (age at treatment onset: 1 day – 78 months) completed at least 24-weeks of TNSALP ERT (≤9 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously) [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Survival. Of those requiring respiratory support (n = 26), 21 (81%) survived through the last date of assessment (median age 3.2 years), in comparison to 1:20 (5%) in historical controls.

In the mixed cohort of 68 patients with perinatal/infantile onset HPP receiving asfotase alfa ERT, 54 required mechanical ventilation and of these, 91% survived and 85% were ventilator free at last contact, in comparison to 27% overall survival and 25% ventilator free in the 48 historical controls [Whyte et al 2016] (final data). Clinical trials with ERT have shown improvement in developmental milestones and pulmonary function [Whyte et al 2012].

Bone findings. Radiographs from 64 of these individuals, and four from a third prospective open-label study of juvenile-onset HPP, were evaluated for HPP-related rickets using the 7-point Radiographic Global Impression of Change (RGI-C) scale. Radiographic change of at least +2 (defined as “responders”) were seen in 50/68 (74%) of those treated (see Figure 2), at last assessment (historical comparative data does not exist). Eighteen individuals with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP experienced fractures during the course of treatment; the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures remaining unclear [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Juvenile-onset HPP study outcomes. One prospective open-label, single arm study included eight patients with juvenile-onset HPP and five patients with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP; age at treatment onset was six to 12 years. The patients with juvenile-onset HPP completed at least 48 months of TNSALP ERT (6 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously). The eight juvenile-onset patients were compared with 32 historical controls. By the RGI-C rating of radiographs, all eight patients were deemed responders; two (6%) of the historical controls were rated responders with an improvement of +2 or more at month 54. Gait, assessed using a modified Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment Gait (MPOMA-G), six-minute walk test (6MWT), and step length improved in patients treated with asfotase alfa. 6MWT improved to the normal range in six of six patients assessed by month 48, from none at baseline. The data are at present insufficient to assess the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures in juvenile-onset HPP [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

When Enzyme Replacement Therapy is Not Available or Not Typically Used

Perinatal types. Limited experience exists for asfotase alfa ERT treatment of perinatal HPP in the immediate newborn period, and this therapy may not be readily available. In the immediate perinatal period, if multidisciplinary assessment identifies the perinatal severe type, comfort care and supportive management of infant and family remain an option.

Infantile type. The infantile phenotype has high mortality, with 50% of individuals succumbing to respiratory failure caused by undermineralization of the ribs. In the absence of ERT, supportive management remains.

Calcium homeostasis. Management can further be complicated by recalcitrant hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria, and optimal management of this issue remains unclear: hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria is typically resistant to hydration and furosemide treatment, and bisphosphonates would be contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). In the absence of ERT, calcitonin and steroids could be attempted short term, with limited efficacy [Deeb et al 2000].

Seizures. When present, seizures may respond to treatment with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), one of the natural substrates of alkaline phosphatase, is the active compound by which pyridoxine mediates essential enzyme activity; PLP deficiency in the central nervous system may reduce seizure threshold by reducing neurotransmitter (GABA) synthesis.

Craniosynostosis in those with the infantile phenotype is variable. When identified, involvement of a neurosurgeon to monitor for complications is prudent. Increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis is an indication for surgical release.

Dental care beginning at age one year is important to preserve primary dentition (to support nutrition) and to preserve or replace secondary dentition.

Childhood (juvenile) and adult hypophosphatasia

Osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs.

Bone pain and osteomalacia are managed supportively: NSAIDs appear beneficial [Girschick et al 2006]. Hypophosphatasia is a relative contraindication to treatment with bisphosphonates (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pseudofractures and stress fractures are difficult to manage; internal fixation has been suggested as the optimal orthopedic management. Foot orthotics may help in management of tarsal fractures and pseudofractures in adults.
