The following recommendations are based on guidelines proposed for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis in Europe [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text) and an expert review [Adams & Barton 2010]. However, it should be emphasized that since TFR2-HHC is rare and may progress differently from HFE-associated hemochromatosis, individual treatment is important.

Individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration should be treated by the same protocol as for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.

Therapeutic phlebotomy. Periodic phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective way to remove excess iron. Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is weekly phlebotomy; however, twice weekly phlebotomy may be useful initially to accelerate iron depletion. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the serum ferritin concentration is 100 ng/mL or lower. Serum ferritin concentration should be measured following each phlebotomy or every other phlebotomy [Adams & Barton 2010]:

Once the serum ferritin concentration is approximately 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

If the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or higher despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, phlebotomies need to be spaced further apart.

Note: Although experience is limited because of the small number of affected individuals identified worldwide, it should be noted that transferrin saturation remains high in TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis when serum ferritin concentration is low (<50 ng/mL), even after intensive phlebotomy [Girelli et al 2011; Camaschella & Roetto, unpublished observation].

Maintenance therapy. The goal is to maintain serum ferritin concentration around 50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation below 50%. Phlebotomy to prevent reaccumulation of iron is performed about every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. Iron chelators such as subcutaneous desferrioxamine are used as a first choice in case of concomitant anemia [Riva et al 2004] or cardiac dysfunction.

Note: At present, oral iron chelators are not available to treat hemochromatosis. However, a phase I/II trial has been completed with daily administration of deferasirox in persons with newly diagnosed HFE-HHC with iron overload and without evidence of liver cirrhosis. The trial demonstrated that treatment is feasible, safe, and effective; side effects were mostly related to the GI tract [Phatak et al 2010].

Treatment of clinical complications

Cirrhosis should be treated and followed up as in other conditions. Although cirrhosis is not reversible by phlebotomy, individuals with cirrhosis benefit from iron removal in that it reduces the risk of hepatocellular cancer.

Hypogonadism is irreversible and requires lifelong hormone replacement therapy in males and females. Use of gonadotropins has successfully restored fertility and induced pregnancy in women who have been treated for other forms of hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy requires nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and is barely influenced by phlebotomy. In some cases, joint replacement has been performed.

Cardiac failure is treated with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, cardiac glycosides, and iron chelation by intravenous or subcutaneous deferioxamine.

Diabetes mellitus may require lifelong insulin treatment. Iron removal may improve control of diabetes mellitus but cannot reestablish normal glucose metabolism.
