Guidelines for the management of IOPD have been put forth by an expert panel from the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2006b]:

Cardiomyopathy. Medical intervention needs to be individualized as use of standard drugs may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease process (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) [Kishnani et al 2006b].

Arteriopathy. Treatment does not differ from that in the general population.

Conduction disturbances. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are at high risk for tachyarrhythmia and sudden death [Tabarki et al 2002]; 24-hour Holter monitoring is useful in characterizing the type and severity of rhythm disturbance. Management includes avoidance of stress, infection, fever, dehydration, and anesthesia. Medical therapy, if indicated, often necessitates a careful balance of ventricular function and should be undertaken by a cardiologist familiar with Pompe disease.

Muscle weakness. Physical therapy is appropriate to maintain range of motion and assist in ambulation.

Proximal motor weakness can result in contractures of the pelvic girdle in infants and children, necessitating aggressive management including surgery [Case et al 2012].

Scoliosis is frequent, particularly in individuals with infantile- or childhood-onset disease [Roberts et al 2011].

Difficulty with communication is common, and speech therapy as well as the use of augmented communication devices may be helpful.

Nutrition/feeding. Infants may need specialized diets and maximal nutrition, with some requiring gastric feedings.

Persons with LOPD may also develop feeding concerns and are often managed on a soft diet, with a few requiring gastric or jejunal feedings.

Respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory support including CPAP and BiPAP may be required. Inspiratory/expiratory training has improved respiratory muscle strength in adults with LOPD [Jones et al 2011].

Macroglossia and severe respiratory insufficiency in the infantile form may necessitate tracheostomy.
