L-carnitine supplementation. The main treatment for CDSP is oral levocarnitine (L-carnitine) supplementation. Typically, a high dose (100-400 mg/kg/day, divided in 3 doses) is required. Individuals with CDSP respond well if oral L-carnitine supplementation is started before irreversible organ damage occurs. Metabolic decompensation and skeletal and cardiac muscle function improve with L-carnitine supplementations.

Oral L-carnitine supplementation in infants with CDSP identified through newborn screening results in slow normalization of the plasma carnitine concentration. The carnitine dose needs to be adjusted according to the plasma carnitine concentrations, which should be measured frequently.

L-carnitine supplementation has relatively few side effects:

High doses of oral L-carnitine can cause increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and intestinal discomfort.

Oral L-carnitine can be metabolized by intestinal bacteria to produce trimethylamine, which has a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for 7-10 days and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor [Longo et al 2006].

Note: (1) An unaffected infant born to a mother with CDSP can have low carnitine levels detected on newborn screening; in these infants oral L-carnitine supplementation is followed by a rise in plasma carnitine concentration within days or a few weeks [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. (2) Asymptomatic adults with CDSP have been reported; however, the limited literature and the lack of follow up make it unclear whether these individuals have potential health risks. Because some fatty acid oxidation defects such as medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency can remain asymptomatic until they results in sudden death or another acute presentation during stress, it is prudent to treat asymptomatic individuals with CDSP with L-carnitine supplementation to prevent the possibility of decompensation during intercurrent illness or stress [El-Hattab et al 2010].

Other

Hypoglycemic episodes are treated with intravenous dextrose infusion.

Cardiomyopathy requires management by specialists in cardiology.
