Acute Neurovisceral Attack

Immediate treatment of an acute neurovisceral attack does not require confirmation of the specific type of acute porphyria.

Clinical assessment should include a full neurologic evaluation.

In persons known to have AIP consider other causes of abdominal pain in addition to porphyria.

Investigations should include:

Full blood count (FBC);

Measurement of serum/plasma concentrations of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes;

Serum and urine osmolality;

Urine sodium concentration if hyponatremic;

Other blood tests as indicated by the patient’s condition and possible cause of the attack, e.g., CRP, blood cultures, CK, magnesium.

MRI should be considered if CNS symptoms are present.

General measures

Review all medications and discontinue any that can exacerbate acute porphyria [Elder & Hift 2001]. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Restore energy balance using an enteral route if possible. When required, intravenous fluid should contain a minimum of 5% dextrose; however, hypotonic dextrose-water solutions should be avoided because of the risk of hyponatremia.

Treat intercurrent infections and other diseases promptly.

Supportive treatment

Pain relief. Effective analgesia should be provided as soon as possible, usually in the form of parenteral opiates (morphine, diamorphine, and fentanyl are safe). Very large quantities may be required in a severe acute attack. Consider patient-controlled analgesia and support from a pain team.

Nausea and vomiting. Prochloperazine, promazine or ondansetron are considered safe.

Hypertension. Beta blockers are considered safe.

Convulsions can be terminated with intravenous diazepam, clonazepam, or magnesium sulphate.

Fluid balance and electrolytes. Dextrose saline is preferred. Severe hyponatremia should be treated with intravenous saline rather than fluid restriction [Hift & Meissner 2005].

Specific treatment

For mild acute neurovisceral attacks, a high carbohydrate intake, preferably oral and together with other supportive measures (see Acute Neurovisceral Attack), may be used for up to 48 hours. If improvement is unsatisfactory or if additional and progressive neurologic features present, intravenous administration of hemin preparations is recommended.

Intravenous human hemin is the most effective treatment for acute neurovisceral attacks. Intravenous administration of hemin preparations may be life-saving when employed early when neuronal damage is still reversible, and may help to avoid paresis or prevent its progression.

The recommended dose for hemin is 3-4 mg/kg IV, given once daily for four days. Treatment may be extended, depending on the clinical course.

Panhematin™ (Ovation Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL) is approved for treatment of acute attacks in the US. This product is supplied as a dried powder, which must be reconstituted with sterile water immediately before intravenous injection and administered over 10-15 minutes. Because the administration of Panhematin™ reconstituted with sterile water is associated with transient, mild coagulopathy, concurrent anticoagulant therapy should be avoided.

Heme arginate (Normosang Orphan Europe, Paris) is an arginine-stabilized form of human hemin available in most other countries, including Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South America. It is infused over at least 30 minutes. It has the same advantage as hemin in treating an acute neurovisceral attack, but has fewer reported side-effects [Hift & Meissner 2005, Puy et al 2010].

Note: (1) Phlebitis after intravenous injection can be minimized by reconstituting hematin in 20% human serum albumin solution and/or by using a large vein or a central catheter for infusion. Peripheral cannulas used to administer hematin should be replaced after each use. (2) An infusion set with an in-line filter is recommended to remove any undissolved particulate matter. (3) Rigorous flushing of venous catheters with boluses of saline totaling 100 mL is recommended.

Recurrent Acute Attacks

Recurrent acute attacks are best managed with support and advice from a porphyria specialist. See information and contact details of specialist porphyria centers at porphyria.eu.

Medical therapy aims to reduce the frequency and or severity of acute attacks by the following measures:

Ovulation suppression with gonadorelin analogues for patients with recurrent menstrual cycle-related acute neurovisceral attacks [Innala et al 2010]. Long acting analogues can be used to prevent ovulation and should be administered during the first few days of the menstrual cycle to minimize the early stimulation effect on hormone release which can trigger an attack. Side effects can be minimized by administering estrogen, preferably by patch. Gynecological review and bone density monitoring are recommended.

Prophylactic hemin infusion. The minimum effective infusion frequency should be employed, usually a weekly dose of hemin infused via an in-dwelling venous catheter. Problems include those associated with a venous access device (infection, blockage) and iron overload (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Other Treatments

Liver transplantation is curative and reported from several centers [Soonawalla et al 2004, Wahlin et al 2010, Dowman et al 2012]. Indications include repeated life-threatening acute attacks, failure of medical therapy, and poor quality of life [Seth et al 2007].

Combined liver and kidney transplantation, which has been successful, can be considered in those with AIP with repeated severe attacks and renal failure [Wahlin et al 2010]. Kidney transplantation has been performed for renal failure in persons with overt and latent AIP [Nunez et al 1987, Warholm & Wilczek 2003].

Cimetidine has been suggested as an alternative treatment [Rogers 1997]; however, evidence for clinical efficacy remains elusive. No recent formal study has been performed, but informal feedback from experienced clinicians at international porphyria meetings indicates that few patients have benefited from this treatment.

Other

Patients should be advised to register with an organization that provides warning jewelry in case of an accident (e.g., MedicAlert® or similar).

Patients should be advised about support available from national patient associations where available.

Good-quality information is now widely available from patient or professional organizations either in paper form or from the Internet; see Resources.

Advice on safe treatment of persons with porphyria in some specific clinical situations (e.g., epilepsy, HIV, malaria, tuberculosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) is available on the European Porphyria Network Web site and/or Porphyria South Africa Web site.
