Management is usually best accomplished by a team consisting of a nutritionist, a pediatric (or adult) nephrologist or endocrinologist, and a clinical geneticist.

General management. The essence of management is the provision of free access to drinking water and to toilet facilities. Infants, who are naturally unable to seek out water when thirsty, must be offered water between regular feedings. Children and adults who are heavy sleepers may need to be awakened at night by a family member or an alarm clock in order to drink water and to urinate. As long as an individual's thirst mechanism remains intact and the person is otherwise well, these measures prevent hypernatremic dehydration. Education of friends, teachers, caretakers, and neighbors and a willingness to find creative solutions are helpful.

Polyuria (and thus polydipsia) can be reduced by up to 50% without inducing hypernatremia by the use of one of the following drugs/combinations. Therapy is considered effective when urine output declines below a documented baseline in individuals with ad libitum water intake. Objective measurements of 24-hour urine volume are more valuable than subjective reports of the volume or frequency of voiding, although reduction in the latter provides a benefit to lifestyle.

Thiazide diuretics (i.e., hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide) in standard to high doses. Since these diuretics cause potassium wasting, serum potassium concentration should be monitored and supplemental potassium provided in the diet or pharmacologically as needed. Thiazides are often used in combination with either amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic) or indomethacin.

Note: When thiazide diuretic therapy is initiated, a transient increase in urine output may occur as a result of salt diuresis.

Dietary restriction of sodium to 300 mg/day to maximize the effectiveness of thiazide diuretics in reducing urine output. Although previously a diet low in protein (2 g/kg/day) to reduce the renal osmolar load and obligatory water excretion was recommended, severe limitation of dietary protein may introduce nutritional deficiencies. Thus, it is preferable to prescribe dietary restriction of sodium only.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, to potentially improve urine concentrating ability and reduce urine output. NSAIDs have been used individually and in combination with thiazide diuretics (with or without amiloride). Because NSAIDs have undesirable effects, such as gastric and renal tubular damage, caution is warranted in the chronic use of NSAIDs for treatment of NDI.

Emergency treatment for dehydration. When individuals with NDI present with dehydration or shock, it is essential to establish whether the deficit is primarily in free water (through water deprivation or excessive urine, stool, or sweat) or in extracellular fluid (bleeding, fluid extravasation). The natural tendency of healthcare providers to treat dehydration with normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is dangerous in individuals with NDI if the deficit is primarily in free water.

Acute blood loss or shock may be treated with isotonic fluid until the blood pressure and heart rate are stabilized, after which 2.5% dextrose in water is the preferred solution.

Dehydration associated with free water deficit is treated by gradually replacing the deficit water as well as ongoing urinary losses. Whenever possible, rehydration should occur with the oral intake of drinking water. If administration of IV fluids is required, 2.5% dextrose in water and/or quarter-normal saline should be used.

If significant hypernatremia is present, serum sodium concentration should be monitored and the hydration solution modified to avoid reducing serum sodium concentration faster than 1 mEq/L per hour. Rapid increases or decreases in plasma osmolality can cause seizures, coma, brain damage, and death.

Special situations. Individuals being prepared for surgery are often denied oral intake for many hours and are described as having 'NPO' (nothing per ora) status. In individuals with NDI, an IV must be provided from the beginning of NPO status and the person's oral intake of water for that period, which is typically much larger than that of an individual who does not have NDI, should be given intravenously as 2.5% dextrose in water [Moug et al 2005].

Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megacystis. Treatment involves medical management to reduce urine output and continuous or intermittent bladder catheterization when significant post-void urinary bladder residuals are present.

Psychomotor development. Children with a history of an episode of severe dehydration, delayed developmental milestones, or a delay in establishing the correct diagnosis and management warrant a formal developmental evaluation and intervention before school age.
