A complete, system-based management guide is available from the Progeria Research Foundation.

No evidence that a low-cholesterol, low-fat, or other special diet influences the course of progeria exists. Thus, a regular diet is indicated unless the lipid profile becomes abnormal, at which point appropriate treatment includes exercise, diet modification, and medication as warranted. Frequent small meals tend to maximize caloric intake.

Stiffened peripheral vasculature may be less tolerant to dehydration; therefore maintaining optimal hydration orally is recommended.

Shoe pads are recommended, as lack of body fat leads to foot discomfort.

Use of sunscreen on all exposed areas of skin, including the head, is recommended for outdoor activities.

Prior to decline in cardiovascular or neurologic status (resulting from strokes, angina, or heart attacks), children should be encouraged to be as physically active as possible, taking into account possible limitations related to restricted range of motion of joints and hip problems including osteoarthritis and hip dislocation.

Because intellect and maturity are normal, age-appropriate schooling is usually indicated.

Infections are generally handled as for unaffected children.

Medications. Dosages should be based on body weight or body surface area and not on age. Anesthetics should be used with particular caution.

Nitroglycerin is frequently of benefit if angina develops.

Routine anticongestive therapy is appropriate if congestive heart failure is present.

Statins are recommended for their putative effect on farnesylation inhibition.

Anticoagulation is warranted if vascular blockage, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, angina, or myocardial infarction occur.

Injuries. Wound healing is normal.

Fracture rate is equivalent to the general pediatric population. When children do fracture, treatment and healing are routine.

Hips. Conservative management of hip dislocation with physical therapy and body bracing and avoidance of surgical procedures on bones are recommended when possible.

Teeth. Extraction of primary teeth may be required to avoid crowding and development of two rows of teeth. Since secondary teeth may erupt slowly or not at all, pulling primary teeth to make room for secondary teeth should be performed after secondary teeth have fully or almost fully or almost fully descended. Once the primary tooth has been extracted, the secondary tooth often moves into the appropriate position with time.

General anesthesia and intubation should be performed with extreme caution, ideally with fiberoptic intubation, if possible. Individuals with HGPS may have a narrow and unusually shaped airway; additionally, they may exhibit an extreme sensitivity to alterations in blood pressure due to vascular stiffness.

Physical therapy. Routine physical and occupational therapy is recommended to help maintain range of motion in large and small (i.e., finger) joints; see Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy in Progeria (pdf). Active stretching and strengthening, along with hydrotherapy, are recommended.

Podiatric evaluation is indicated to determine if shoe inserts are needed

Eye care. Corneal dryness, clouding or ulceration should be fully evaluated by an ophthalmologist. Exposure keratitis primarily caused by nocturnal lagophthalmos can be treated during daytime with ocular lubication and during sleep with moisturizing ointment or by closing eyelids with skin tape.

Hearing loss. Hearing aids can be used, when clinically necessary.
