Growth. Most infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. Because of gastroesophageal reflux and irritability, Nissen fundoplication is often performed. Pyloric stenosis is treated surgically.

Anecdotally, affected children have very high caloric needs. Even after nutrition is improved through supplemental feeding, growth retardation persists.

Cardiac. Treatment of cardiac manifestations is generally the same as in the general population. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with an identified cardiac abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history [Lin et al 2011]. Ongoing studies of the natural history will continue to define management for older individuals. Arrhythmias have been well documented, but incompletely defined from a management point of view. Non-reentrant tachycardia (chaotic atrial rhythm/multifocal tachycardia) may require aggressive anti-arrhythmic drugs or ablation.

Pharmacologic and surgical treatment (myectomy) has been used to address severe cardiac hypertrophy.

Individuals with Costello syndrome and severe cardiac problems may choose to wear a Medic Alert® bracelet.

Skeletal. Ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers responds well to early bracing and occupational and/or physical therapy.

Limited extension of large joints should be addressed early through physical therapy. Surgical tendon lengthening, usually of the Achilles tendon, is often required. Hip joint abnormalities are common and may require surgical correction.

Kyphoscoliosis may require surgical correction.

Central nervous system. When seizures occur, underlying causes (including hydrocephalus, hypoglycemia, and low serum cortisone concentration) need to be considered [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004].

Cognitive. Developmental disability should be addressed by early-intervention programs and individualized learning strategies.

Speech delay and expressive language limitations should be addressed early with appropriate therapy and later with an appropriate educational plan.

Alternate means of communication should be considered if expressive language is significantly limited.

Respiratory. A high index of suspicion should be maintained for obstructive sleep apnea as the cause of sleep disturbance.

Dental. Dental abnormalities should be addressed by a pediatric dentist.

Papillomata. Papillomata usually appear in the perinasal region and less commonly in the perianal region, torso, and extremities. While they are mostly of cosmetic concern, papillomata may give rise to irritation or inflammation in hard-to-clean body regions and may be removed, as appropriate.

Recurrent facial papillomata have been successfully managed with regular dry ice removal.

Endocrinopathies. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Rarely, hypoglycemia occurs in older individuals and may present with seizures. Under these circumstances, growth hormone (GH) deficiency needs to be excluded as the underlying cause [Gripp et al 2000]. Hypoglycemic episodes unresponsive to GH therapy responded well to cortisone replacement in another individual [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004]; thus, cortisol deficiency may also be considered.

Malignant tumors. Treatment of malignant tumors follows standard protocols.
