For a detailed explanation of treatment for HLH, see Jordan et al [2011] (full text).

HLH-1994. To improve survival, in 1994 the Histiocyte Society initiated a prospective international collaborative therapeutic study. It combined chemotherapy and immunotherapy (etoposide, corticosteroids, cyclosporine A, and intrathecal methotrexate for individuals with CNS diseases), followed by HSCT in persistent, recurring, and/or familial disease. Although HLH-94 was primarily designed for the treatment of FHL, it was also open to all individuals with non-familial HLH.

HLH-2004. The HLH-2004 protocol was opened on January 1, 2004, and was designed for individuals with FHL and non-familial HLH. This protocol was based on the HLH-94 protocol with minor therapeutic modifications such as initiation of cyclosporine from onset of induction therapy.

The two protocols developed by the Histiocyte Society are available from the Histiocyte Society website.

Given the poor prognosis of individuals with HLH without prompt and effective treatment, it is recommended that treatment be initiated when clinical suspicion is high, even if all recommended studies are incomplete. In general, treatment involves the following:

Chemotherapy and immunotherapy to achieve a clinically stable resolution prior to hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Antibiotics or antiviral agents to treat or prevent infections that may have triggered the exaggerated inflammatory response

Allogeneic HCT, the only curative therapy, which should be undertaken in children with confirmed FHL as early in life as feasible:

Presymptomatically if status is confirmed by family history of clinical HLH, or

After achievement of clinical remission in simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family)

Use of HCT has improved survival significantly [Henter et al 2002]. Initially, three-year-survival in children who received HLH-94 therapy was approximately 64% [Horne et al 2005a]. More recently, reduced intensity regimens prior to HCT have diminished the early transplant mortality and increased three-year-survival rates to 92% [Marsh et al 2010c]. Long-term follow up reveals that after HCT most children treated early in the disease course return to normal or near-normal quality of life. Brain atrophy secondary to steroid therapy often identified on neuroimaging studies during the acute phase of HLH gradually resolves after HCT [Shuper et al 1998]. However, children who experienced serious CNS involvement may have irreversible neurologic problems and learning disabilities despite adequate disease control following HCT.
