Consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span have been published [Pierpont et al 2014].

CFC syndrome affects many organ systems and, therefore, the vast majority of individuals require ongoing care by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare providers. At present, phenotypic features caused by germline pathogenic variants in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, or KRAS are treated as in the general population.

Severe feeding issues during the first years of life require management by a pediatric gastroenterologist. Many children with CFC syndrome require nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding because of failure to thrive. Increasing caloric intake may be of benefit. Children with severe gastroesophageal reflux may require a Nissen fundoplication. Constipation affects the majority of individuals; increased fiber in the diet, under the direction of a pediatrician, may be beneficial.

Some individuals are growth hormone- and or thyroid hormone-deficient and may benefit from management by an endocrinologist. Individuals with a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy must be monitored closely while on growth hormone therapy.

Enrollment in early-intervention therapies to promote motor and intellectual development (e.g., occupational therapy, physical therapy, or speech therapy) is highly recommended.

Seizures are treated as in the general population. However, seizures may be refractory to single-agent therapy and may require polytherapy.

Recurrent otitis media may require placement of PE tubes.

Ocular abnormalities such as myopia or hyperopia are corrected with lenses as in the general population.

Cardiovascular management is dictated by the abnormality, with treatment similar to that in the general population: structural defects are managed surgically as needed; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is followed by serial echocardiograms, and cardiac arrhythmias are medically managed in an aggressive manner.

Xerosis and pruritus may be relieved by increasing the ambient humidity or using hydrating lotions. Hyperkeratoses are treated as in the general population.

Signs and symptoms of skin infection, especially in the presence of lymphedema, warrant thorough and immediate evaluation by a physician for the consideration of antibiotic treatment.

Musculoskeletal abnormalities, such as scoliosis or pectus deformity, are managed as in the general population.

Note: Specialized NF/Ras pathway genetics clinics are available in the US and United Kingdom.
