Children with an ACTG2-related disorder require multidisciplinary management with specialists in pediatric gastroenterology, nutrition, urology, surgery, clinical genetics, and occupational therapy, among others. Adults with an ACTG2-related disorder require similar multidisciplinary care.

Treatment for ACTG2-related disorders remains supportive.

Urologic manifestations. Management of bladder dysfunction by an urologist is recommended.

A clear link has been established between fetal urinary tract dilation such as megacystis and long-term impairment of renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012]. Patients are frequently dependent on bladder management with diversion, catheterization, and/or voiding schedules. In addition, clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.

In a review of 14 patients with visceral myopathy evaluated prior to the discovery of ACTG2, Ghavamian et al [1997] noted that clean intermittent catheterization decreased the frequency of urinary tract infection and observed that surgical approaches (construction of a catheterizable channel or a vesicostomy) were also therapeutic options.

In a review of 39 children with CIPO reported before the discovery of ACTG2,

Lapointe et al [2002] identified megacystis in 26 and hydronephrosis in 14. They noted that urologic intervention to ensure adequate bladder emptying was important to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections and to preserve long-term renal function. Urologic treatment (at some point in their care) included voiding with abdominal pressure (14 children), intermittent catheterization (10), and antibiotic prophylaxis (17).

Gastrointestinal manifestations. Management by a gastroenterologist and nutritionist familiar with intestinal motility disorders is recommended. Patients are frequently dependent on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) (see review by Gabbard & Lacy [2013]).

Complications of long-term TPN can be progressive and include irreversible cholestasis, hepatic dysfunction, central line infections, and thromboembolic events. For this reason, individuals with an intestinal disorder that requires long-term TPN (like those seen in ACTG2-related disorders) have undergone multi-visceral transplantation including liver and intestine. In the series of Gosemann & Puri [2011] in which 12 individuals underwent such multivisceral transplants, TPN could be discontinued in the majority; however, bladder catheterization was still required.

Isolated intestinal transplantation has also been reported in one individual with MMIHS [Huang et al 2013a].

Of note, use of pro-kinetic agents such as 5HT4 agonists has resulted in anecdotal evidence of improvement in bowel function [Lehtonen et al 2012, Wangler et al 2014], as well as failure to improve in bowel function in MMIHS [Hiradfar et al 2013] and some cases of molecularly confirmed ACTG2-related MMIHS [Wangler et al 2014].
