It is recommended that a multidisciplinary team that includes nephrologists, metabolic disease specialists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, gastroenterologists, nutritionists, and psychologists manage individuals with cystinosis.

Renal Fanconi syndrome

Replacement of tubular losses of electrolytes, bicarbonate, minerals, and other small molecular weight nutrients

For children, free access to water and bathroom privileges and supplementation with citrate to alkalinize the blood

Phosphate replacement to prevent and treat rickets; vitamin D supplementation to assist the gastrointestinal absorption of phosphate and calcium

Early treatment of skeletal deformities with the help of orthopedic specialists

Careful attention to fluid and nutrient replacement is required during episodes of dehydration. (Obligatory urinary losses amount to 2-6 L electrolyte-rich water per day.)

Renal glomerular disease

Reduction of cellular cystine concentration through treatment with the cystine-depleting agent cysteamine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Renal transplantation. Renal replacement is usually indicated when the creatinine clearance falls below 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and azotemia and hypertension rapidly progress. The time frame for appropriate renal replacement is the point at which the reciprocal serum creatinine value plotted against age reaches approximately 0.1. Symptoms often determine the exact time of transplantation.

Ophthalmologic problems are treated symptomatically and with cystine-depleting agents:

The photophobia, resulting from corneal crystal accumulation, can be ameliorated by sun avoidance, dark glasses, and lubrication with over-the-counter eye drops (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Corneal transplantation is very rarely required for intractable pain resulting from recurrent corneal ulcerations.

Retinal involvement is irreversible.

Growth for children with cystinosis requires good nutrition, adequate phosphate supplementation, and robust intracellular cystine depletion (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations):

Nutrition must be adequate for growth.

Growth hormone therapy has proven beneficial for children with cystinosis in providing catch-up growth and bringing them into the normal percentiles for height [Gahl et al 2001, Wühl et al 2001, Gahl et al 2002].

Early and diligent treatment with supplements and oral cysteamine can obviate the need for growth hormone [Kleta et al 2004a].

Other

Oral L-thyroxine replacement for hypothyroidism

Insulin for diabetes mellitus

Testosterone to induce secondary sexual characteristics in males with primary hypogonadism

Specific exercises for the muscle deterioration and swallowing difficulties of older individuals with cystinosis. Hand tendon transfer has been partially successful in improving strength.

Speech therapy and physical therapy

Standard treatment for benign intracranial hypertension. Other central nervous system complications are irreversible.

Feeding via gastrostomy for those with dysphagia, poor nutrition, and risk of aspiration (Figure 2b)
