Treatment for affected individuals of all ages can be difficult and is enhanced with the teaching and support of an experienced healthcare team consisting of physicians, nutritionists, genetic counselors, social workers, nurses, and psychologists. See ACMG Management Guidelines for PKU.

Treatment of Classic PKU

Restriction of dietary phenylalanine. The generally accepted goal of treatment for individuals with PAH deficiency is normalization of the concentrations of Phe (phenylalanine) and Tyr (tyrosine) in the blood and thus prevention of the cognitive deficits that are attributable to this disorder [Burgard et al 1999].

Genetic Metabolic Dieticians International (GMDI) has PKU Nutrition Management Guidelines that are continually updated.

Any provider managing the diet of an individual with PAH deficiency should use these resources and work closely with a dietician knowledgeable in the care and management of a person with this diagnosis.

Singh et al [2014] provide the following dietary recommendations:

Maintain blood Phe between 120 and 360 μmol/L throughout the life span.

Monitor blood Phe most frequently during times of increased anabolism: infancy, childhood, and pregnancy. The NIH recommends measurement of blood phenylalanine levels on a weekly basis for the first year of life, on a biweekly basis until age 13 years, and on a monthly basis thereafter [Camp et al 2014]. Care must be taken to avoid long periods of low blood Phe concentration, which is also harmful to brain development and function.

Monitor blood Phe consistently, preferably two to three hours after eating.

Evaluate individual nutritional needs, ability to adhere to recommendations, and access to treatment options when choosing appropriate interventions (medical food, modified low-protein food, large neutral amino acids [LNAAs], and sapropterin) to achieve blood PHE in the target range.

Include breast milk [Vockley et al 2014] and/or infant formula as sources of Phe in the diet of an infant with PAH deficiency.

Recommend that medical food be consumed throughout the day for optimal metabolic control.

Track Phe intake by any of several methods, including counting milligrams or exchanges of PHE or grams of protein.

Maintain blood Tyr in the normal range.

Maintain other nutrients and micronutrients at RDA levels, including calcium, vitamin D, iron, and B vitamins. Due to the protein-restricted dietary components, micronutrients found in animal products must be carefully monitored and supplemented, as needed.

Provide counseling and education specific to the needs of the individual with PAH deficiency (and/or his/her caregivers) to help maintain appropriate blood Phe throughout the life span.

Sapropterin (Kuvan®). BH4 responsiveness, as determined by a 30% decrease in Phe plasma levels on plasma amino acid analysis, is determined based on response to a pharmacologic dose of BH4 (10-20 mg/kg per day):

All affected individuals except those with two trans pathogenic null variants should ideally undergo a trial with sapropterin supplementation. The trial needs to be conducted when Phe levels have been stable and dietary intake can remain unchanged, so that any change in Phe level is the result of the medication; for some affected individuals it is a challenge to conduct a trial of therapy. The most common dose given is 20 mg/kg per day. Lower trial doses may lead to false negative responsiveness results [Vockley et al 2014].

Affected individuals who are responsive should continue this medication with compensatory dietary Phe liberalization, as needed, to maintain a safe Phe level between 120 and 360 μmol/L.

The majority of individuals with mild or moderate PKU may be responsive to sapropterin while up to 10% of individuals with classic PKU show a response [Bernegger & Blau 2002, Pérez-Dueñas et al 2004, Zurflüh et al 2006]. Reviewed in Ho & Christodoulou [2014].

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of sapropterin.

Large neutral amino acids (LNAA) transporters. LNAA may decrease the plasma Phe concentration in affected adolescents and adults; however, it should not be used in women of child-bearing age (see Pregnancy Management).

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of LNAA

Treatment for Non-Classic Hyperphenylalaninemia

While debate continues, many experts believe that dietary treatment is unnecessary for many of the individuals in this class.

Individuals with Phe levels >600 μmol/L (10 mg/dL) are treated by most centers, in recognition of the finding of head MRI changes and neuropsychological findings in at least some affected individuals.

Treatment in individuals with Phe levels consistently <600 μmol/L but >360 μmol/L remains controversial [Weglage et al 2001, Hanley 2011, van Spronsen 2011].

Thirty-one individuals with PAH deficiency who were never treated and whose plasma Phe concentrations did not exceed 600 µmol/L had normal cognitive neuropsychological development.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH (PKU) state: “…treatment of infants with sustained blood Phe levels >360 µmol/L is recommended following appropriate review of the controversy with patients.”

If the Phe levels remain between 120 and 360 µmol/L, treatment is not recommended; however, children should be followed for plasma Phe levels closely during the first two years of life, then on an annual or biennial basis [Vockley et al 2014].

Care should be taken so that women of childbearing age in this group receive proper counseling about the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal plasma Phe concentration (i.e., ‘maternal HPA/PKU’) on the developing fetus [Weglage et al 2001] (see Pregnancy Management).

Other

Neuropsychiatric testing may be considered to identify learning differences. Referral to appropriate developmental services is indicated to optimize developmental outcome.

Bone health assessment. Current literature regarding the utility of DEXA scans is controversial; however, bone health should be considered in the overall health of an affected individual [Coakley et al 2016].
