See Table 3.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Dental crowding /

Malocclusion

Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist

Poor weight gain / Failure to thrive

Feeding therapy; gastrostomy tube placement may be required for persistent feeding issues.

Dietary diary & calorie counts may be requested.

GERD and/or constipation

Standard treatment(s)

Seizures

Standard treatment(s) as recommended by neurologist

Scoliosis / Kyphosis

Standard treatment as recommended by orthopedist

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district may be considered. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function can be developed by the local public school district. Severely affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst. Effectiveness should be evaluated on an individual basis.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications (e.g., to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.
