No consensus exists among various metabolic centers regarding treatment of acute and chronic complications of methylmalonic acidemia. Recent guidelines developed by professionals across 12 European countries and the US based on rigorous literature evaluation and expert group meetings outline the current management recommendations and areas for further research [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Stabilization of critically ill individuals

Volume replacement with isotonic solutions

All IV solutions should contain glucose, preferably D10 or D12.5. If hyperglycemia develops, an insulin infusion may be needed.

The total base deficit should be followed serially with repeat electrolyte and venous or arterial blood gas measurements and corrected by hydration and bicarbonate replacement, as needed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Adequate kcals must be delivered. Central or peripheral total parenteral nutrition (TPN), which typically contains glucose and amino acids, and in some instances, lipids, may be required. Total protein administration is usually completely withdrawn for no more than 24-48 hours and reinstated gradually depending on the patient's acid-base balance and remaining test values, including ammonia, lactic acid, and plasma amino acids among others.

Lipid infusions must be used with caution for the risk of pancreatitis.

Carnitine may be administered intravenously at 50-100 mg/kg/d bid-qid.

Urine output and serum sodium and potassium concentration need to be monitored.

Dietary protein should be reintroduced enterally as soon as is feasible given the clinical scenario and may need to be further augmented with TPN. Nasograstric or orogastric feeding should be strongly considered so that enteral feedings can be reintroduced without delay.

N-carbamylglutamate (NCG, Carbaglu®) may be considered in the event of hyperammonemia. NCG allosterically activates CPS1 (carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1), the first step of the urea cycle. It has been effective in normalizing the blood ammonia concentration in patients with a deficiency of NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthase) and can also benefit some patients with propionic and possibly methylmalonic acidemia [Tuchman et al 2008, Ah Mew et al 2010].

Hemodialysis or hemofiltration may be required in the event of treatment failure (uncontrollable acidosis and/or hyperammonemia).

A letter given to the family to present to emergency department physicians that specifies the recommended acute management protocol should be standard of care.

Medic Alert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Other

Aside from episodes of critical illness, patients with intercurrent illness such as viral infection or those undergoing surgery for various reasons should have aggressive fluid, metabolic, and nutritional management.

Specialists in physiatry, physical therapy, and occupational therapy can help address the complex challenges faced by patients and families, maximize functionality, and improve quality of life [Ktena et al 2015b].

Special considerations regarding choices of anesthetic agents in this patient population may apply [Ktena et al 2015a, Ruzkova et al 2015].

Most individuals require "sick day" management regimens, which typically consist of reducing or eliminating protein intake and increasing fluids and glucose to ensure delivery of adequate calories and to arrest lipolysis. Immediate hospitalization is usually required if signs suggest intercurrent infection.

Although all of the treatments discussed above may be needed in fragile individuals, they still may not prevent death, the severe sequelae of metabolic decompensation (e.g., metabolic stroke of the basal ganglia), or renal disease. The correlation and identification of treatment patterns and outcomes is needed to develop more effective management protocols for individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia.

Many affected individuals require gastrostomy/gastrojejunostomy tube feeding because of anorexia and vomiting to ensure caloric and fluid intake and improve growth.

Bone marrow failure during episodes of metabolic decompensation on rare occasion requires granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF).

Anemia is an expected complication of chronic renal failure and is treated with erythropoietin and eventually renal transplantation [Inoue et al 1981, Guerra-Moreno et al 2003, MacFarland & Hartung 2015].

Some children have had documented growth hormone (GH) deficiency; however, because response to GH therapy may vary, diet and GH replacement dose need to be carefully adjusted [Bain et al 1995, Al-Owain et al 2004]. The indications for GH replacement therapy and the response to GH replacement in treated individuals require further investigation.
