Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2011, Lubarr & Bressman 2011, Bertucco & Sanger 2015, Dressler et al 2016, Shanker & Bressman 2016].

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (in the range of 100 mg/day) in children, who tend to tolerate high doses better than adults.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely. Pyridostigmine can be used to counter anticholinergic side effects, but does not improve cognitive side effects.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines

Other medications including levodopa, antiepileptics, and dopamine-depleting agents; these have been used to treat dystonia with variable effects.

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail

Surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for medically refractory isolated generalized dystonia in randomized controlled studies [Vidailhet et al 2005, Kupsch et al 2006, Vidailhet et al 2007], including in individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia [reviewed in Fox & Alterman 2015].

GPi DBS has become a well-established and important treatment option for individuals with medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia. Overall, individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia tend to have good outcomes after GPi DBS, with some showing dramatic improvement.

Some, though not all, studies have found that the presence of a TOR1A pathogenic variant is a positive predictive factor of good outcome of GPi DBS surgery [Isaias et al 2008, Andrews et al 2010, Borggraefe et al 2010, Air et al 2011].

Shorter disease duration has been correlated with improved outcomes, highlighting the importance of early referral for DBS in children with severe, medically refractory DYT1 dystonia. [Markun et al 2012, Lumsden et al 2013]. Conversely, referral for DBS should not be made prematurely (i.e., prior to sufficient medication trials).

Clinical effect has been found to be well sustained at follow up of up to 13 years [Alcindor et al 2010, Cif et al 2010, Panov et al 2013, Krause et al 2016].

Note: Intrathecal baclofen therapy has been used for treatment of generalized dystonia of various etiologies in the past [van Hilten et al 2000, Walker et al 2000, Albright et al 2001], however, GPi DBS surgery has become the preferred surgical treatment for severe, medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia because of the good treatment outcomes.

Physical therapy and an appropriate exercise program may be of benefit.
