For optimal outcome children with CFM require timely and coordinated assessments and interventions. Ideally, children should be managed by an experienced multidisciplinary craniofacial team that includes the following (in alphabetical order):

Audiologist

Dietitian

Clinical geneticist and genetic counselor

Nurse coordinator

Ophthalmologist

Oral and maxillofacial surgeon

Orthodontist

Orthopedist

Otolaryngologist

Pediatric dentist

Pediatrician

Plastic and reconstructive surgeon

Psychosocial professionals (psychologist, social worker)

Speech pathologist

The goals of treatment for CFM are to assure adequate respiratory support and nutritional status, maximize hearing and communication, optimize development, improve facial symmetry, and treat dental malocclusion. Treatment is age dependent, with time-sensitive interventions at appropriate stages of craniofacial growth and development. Treatment plans should be individually tailored to ensure the best results.

The phenotype in CFM is quite variable (see Table 1 for associated anomalies). Details of common surgical interventions have been reviewed elsewhere [Birgfeld & Heike 2012]. The following medical issues may need to be addressed in an individual with CFM:

Feeding. Infants with significant micrognathia, macrostomia, or a cleft palate may have difficulty with feeding and may require specialized bottles designed for infants with cleft palate and/or dysphagia (e.g., Habermann feeder, Mead-Johnson Squeeze bottle, Pigeon nipple, Dr. Brown nipples), supplemental nasogastric (NG) feedings, and gastrostomy tube placement. Consultation with an infant feeding specialist and/or dietitian should be considered.

Respiratory

Infants with severe mandibular hypoplasia may have significant upper-airway compromise and require tracheostomy placement and/or early mandibular advancement. Referral to a craniofacial center or otolaryngologist is recommended.

Those children with moderate mandibular hypoplasia may develop obstructive sleep apnea and require either medical (CPAP) or surgical (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy or mandibular surgery) intervention.

Face. Surgical repair is often recommended for facial tags and macrostomia within the first year. Surgery for palatal clefts typically occurs within the first year although this may be deferred for children with respiratory compromise.

Jaw and teeth

Good oral hygiene is especially important for children with CFM. Children should have consistent primary preventative dental care.

Orthodontic evaluations are important to assess for missing teeth, dental crowding, jaw growth, and dental malocclusion. Some children may need one or more dental appliances or braces to optimize facial growth, dental appearance, and function.

Children with mandibular hypoplasia may require a bone graft and/or mandibular distraction osteogenesis to lengthen the mandible and/or create a functional TMJ. In a child without airway compromise, these options may be considered when the child is between ages five and seven years.

The use of functional dental appliances to try and influence facial growth, vertical alveolar growth, and dental eruption in the younger patient may be considered, depending on the patient. When facial and jaw growth is nearly complete (age 13 to 16 years), most children with CFM require orthodontics, and many benefit from a final orthognathic surgery to create skeletal symmetry.

Hearing

All infants with CFM should have a diagnostic hearing evaluation (brain stem auditory evoked response [BAER]) within the first six months of life (regardless of whether the child passed the newborn hearing screen). Timing and type of additional testing depend on results from this initial evaluation and the child’s medical history. Early referral to an otolaryngologist is recommended. Early intervention for infants with hearing loss is important to optimize speech and language outcome.

Children with hearing impairment should receive guidance regarding recommendations for hearing aids, appropriate academic accommodations, and avoidance of ototoxic medications to prevent further hearing loss.

Conductive hearing loss, related to aural atresia in which the ossicles may be poorly formed or absent, may be treated with hearing aids. Children with unilateral conductive hearing loss and normal hearing in the contralateral ear are frequently not treated with amplification; however, their speech and language should be monitored closely.

Prior to planning external ear surgery, the authors recommend obtaining a CT scan to assess the middle- and inner-ear structures to help determine if atresia repair is likely to improve hearing. This surgery typically occurs after age five years. The CT may also reveal cholesteatomas, which occur in a small proportion of children with aural atresia.

Children with unilateral aural atresia should have serial screening (with hearing evaluations and tympanoscopy) to ensure maximal hearing of the unaffected ear.

Individuals with eustachian tube dysfunction should continue to have hearing and otologic status monitored, with a low threshold for placing tympanostomy tube(s).

Speech. Children with CFM may have cranial nerve palsies, clefts of the palate, malocclusion, and muscular deficiencies that can contribute to abnormal speech patterns (including velopharyngeal insufficiency). The authors recommend a speech evaluation prior to age two years, and ongoing monitoring by a speech and language pathologist.

Ears. Surgical options for treating ear malformations include auricular reconstruction or creation of a prosthetic ear. Options for management of microtia include the following:

No action

Prosthetic management, either adhesive or implant-retained

Staged surgical reconstruction, using autogenous rib or a synthetic framework

Because adult ear height is achieved by age six to eight years, surgical reconstruction or prosthetic management is often considered after age six years. Ear reconstruction should be coordinated with jaw surgeries for optimal long-term outcomes.

Eyes. Individuals with congenital or acquired epibulbar dermoids (pinkish-white growth on the sclerae) should be referred to the ophthalmologist. Large epibulbar dermoids and those that interfere with vision may require excision.

Cardiac. Children with physical examination findings suggestive of a cardiac anomaly should receive a timely referral to a pediatric cardiologist.

Renal. Individuals with renal anomalies should be referred to a nephrologist.

Skeletal

Children should undergo screening with four-view cervical spine radiographs (i.e., AP, lateral, flexion, and extension) at age three years when the bones are ossified. Those with anomalies should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis with annual physical examination. The authors recommend obtaining radiographs for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Family and social support. Children with CFM may be at increased risk for psychosocial difficulties [Maris et al 1999]. Social workers can provide support and guidance to children and their families, such as accessing community resources, making decisions about surgery, and adjusting to having facial differences.
