Testosterone-replacement therapy. Management of individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD with testosterone deficiency is similar to that for other causes of testosterone deficiency. Physicians should check for the most current preparations and dosage recommendations before initiating testosterone replacement therapy.

After age 14 years, low-dose testosterone therapy can be initiated. Note: If an individual has short stature and is eligible for growth hormone therapy, testosterone therapy should be either delayed or given at lower doses initially in order to maximize growth potential.

Testosterone enanthate is given IM every three to four weeks, starting at 100 mg and increasing by 50 mg every six months to 200-400 mg. Initial high doses of testosterone should be avoided to prevent priapism. The treatment should plateau, in adulthood, at the best possible dosage, typically between 50 and 400 mg every two to four weeks.

Injection of testosterone enanthate is the preferred method of replacement therapy because of low cost and easy, at-home regulation of dosage; however, side effects include pain associated with injection and large variations of serum testosterone concentration between injections, resulting in a higher risk of mood swings.

Alternative delivery systems that result in a more stable dosing include transdermal patches (scrotal and non-scrotal) and transdermal gels. Testosterone-containing gels, however, are associated with the risk of interpersonal transfer, which can be reduced by the use of newer hydroalcoholic gels [Kühnert et al 2005].

Gynecomastia. Regression of gynecomastia may occur with testosterone replacement therapy. If it does not, and if it causes psychological distress to the individual, reduction mammoplasty can be offered.

Osteopenia. Depending on the degree of osteopenia, treatment may include: calcium, exercise, vitamin D, biphosphonates, or calcitonin. Referral to an internist, pediatrician, or endocrinologist is recommended.

Psychological support.

Sensitivity is necessary when conveying information to individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD about the genetic cause and associated sterility of the disorder. This information must be presented in a manner that helps minimize psychological distress. Providers are encouraged to anticipate the need for further psychological assistance.
