Polyps. Once the burden of gastrointestinal polyps has been established by endoscopy and imaging studies, prophylactic polypectomy of polyps >1cm is performed. This strategy has two goals:

To decrease the sequelae of large polyps including bleeding, anemia, obstruction, and intussusception

To reduce the risk for cancer by the malignant transformation of PJS-type polyps

The luminal polyp-related complications arise in childhood whereas cancer in PJS is typically seen in adulthood. Some evidence indicates that routine endoscopy and intraoperative enteroscopy with polypectomy decreases the frequency of emerging laparotomy and bowel loss [Pennazio & Rossini 2000, Edwards et al 2003, Oncel et al 2004]. From St. Mark’s PJS registry of 51 affected individuals who underwent surveillance endoscopies, none had emergency surgical interventions and no GI luminal cancers were diagnosed [Latchford et al 2011]. In surveillance endoscopies in affected individuals by age 18 years, 17/28 had large gastroduodenal or colonic polyps (>1 cm). These studies demonstrate that endoscopic surveillance and polypectomy in PJS is safe.

Distal small-bowel polyps that are beyond the reach of conventional endoscopy have been difficult to manage. Until recently, barium contrast upper-gastrointestinal series with a small-bowel follow through has been recommended. However, recent advances allow better diagnosis and eradication of small-bowel polyps, oftentimes without laparotomy and with a decrease in the radiation burden related to frequent surveillance:

Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) allows for better visualization of the small-bowel polyps than barium x-rays and is recommended as a first-line surveillance procedure. In children, the capsule can be deployed in the duodenum after upper endoscopy [Parsi & Burke 2004, Burke et al 2005, Mata et al 2005, Schulmann et al 2005]. See Note.

Magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) is a reliable procedure for the detection of larger small-bowel polyps with similar sensitivity to VCE and avoids the radiation exposure of CT enterography [Caspari et al 2004, Gupta et al 2010]. CT and MR enteroclysis are alternative procedures but are less well tolerated. See Note.

Balloon-assisted enteroscopy can remove distal small-bowel polyps with or without laparotomy [Ohmiya et al 2005, Ross et al 2006, Gao et al 2010]. Safety in those with PJS has been demonstrated in a few studies. Balloon-assisted enteroscopy and polypectomy should decrease the need for intraoperative enteroscopy or enterotomy, and should be reserved for affected individuals with many large and distal small-bowel polyps.

Note: (1) VCE was preferred by individuals and detected more large polyps than MRE [Urquhart et al 2014]. (2) In three individuals in a study by Gupta et al [2010], MRE detected polyps >15 mm that were not detected by VCE.

Intussusception should be treated in a standard manner.

Malignancies should be treated in a standard manner. Conservative management of gonadal tumors in males and females is appropriate.
