No published treatment guidelines exist.

Seizure control should be managed by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy management who is familiar with the pharmacotherapy for SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy and how it differs from treatment of similar disorders (e.g., Dravet syndrome; see SCN1A-Related Seizure Disorders and Differential Diagnosis).

Vigorous attempts to control seizures with drug polytherapy are warranted because children with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy are at risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) as well as prolonged acute seizures that may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010].

Sodium channel blockers. Several studies suggest that patients with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy respond favorably to the class of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that block sodium channels; these include phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, lacosamide, lamotrigine, rufinamide, and oxcarbazepine [Kong et al 2015b, Larsen et al 2015, Boerma et al 2016]. The effectiveness of sodium channel blockers is consistent with the activating effects of most SCN8A pathogenic variants [Wagnon & Meisler 2015, Wagnon et al 2015a, Wagnon et al 2015b]. Most patients are maintained on multiple medications with incomplete seizure control. One study of four patients reported a positive response to high doses of phenytoin [Boerma et al 2016].

Other AEDs

Clobazam, part of the standard of care for epilepsy in Europe, is now FDA-approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009].

Phenobarbital, while effective for seizure control, is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition.

Levetiracetam (Keppra®) has been reported by several families to be ineffective or occasionally associated with an increase in seizure frequency [M Hammer, unpublished data].

Other. When seizures are not responsive to conventional AEDs, the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective based on anecdotal information:

Corticosteroids

Immunoglobulins

Vagus nerve stimulator

Ketogenic diet

Cannabinoids

Sleep hygiene. As described for Dravet syndrome, sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN8A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected.

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.
