Thrombosis

The management of individuals with factor V Leiden thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin or intravenous unfractionated heparin [Kearon et al 2008a]. Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with low molecular-weight heparin (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international normalized ratio (INR). A target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.5 (therapeutic range 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in individuals with homozygous factor V Leiden [Baglin et al 1998, Kearon et al 2008a]. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin therapy should be overlapped for at least five days, and until the INR has been within the therapeutic range on two consecutive measurements over two days. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin are both safe in breast-feeding women.

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be tailored to the individual, based on an assessment of the risks for VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with an incident VTE develop recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent ten years [Prandoni et al 1996]. Since individuals remain at risk for recurrence even after ten years, VTE is now considered a chronic disease. The optimal duration of anticoagulation for individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele is debated. Individuals with a spontaneous thrombosis and no identifiable provoking factors or persistent risk factors require a longer course of anticoagulation. In contrast, individuals with transient (reversible) risk factors such as surgery require a shorter course of therapy [Kearon et al 2008b].

The risk for VTE recurrence is higher in persons with proximal than with distal DVT (relative risk=0.5) and in those with one or more prior episodes of VTE. Other risk factors for recurrent VTE include male sex and a negative D-dimer level one month after discontinuation of warfarin [McRae et al 2006, Palareti et al 2006]. Multiple other studies confirmed residual proximal thrombosis after a course of anticoagulation as a strong risk factor for recurrence [Siragusa et al 2008, Prandoni et al 2009].

The presence of hereditary thrombophilia was not a major factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2008 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy based on evidence that these disorders are not major determinants of recurrence risk. Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2008b].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring.

Long-term anticoagulation should also be considered in individuals homozygous for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant or with multiple thrombophilic disorders [Kearon et al 2008b]. In these individuals at high risk for recurrence, the potential benefits from long-term warfarin may outweigh the bleeding risks.

Individuals receiving long-term therapy should be reevaluated at periodic intervals to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation outweigh the bleeding risks.

Unfractionated and low molecular-weight heparin, fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide), and warfarin are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolism. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin and argatroban) are approved for use in certain circumstances. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. It is unknown whether the presence of a factor V Leiden allele should influence the duration of anticoagulation in children. There are no randomized trials of antithrombotic therapy of VTE in children and treatment guidelines are adapted from those in adults. The American College of Chest Physicians 2008 guidelines recommend at least three months of anticoagulation after a provoked VTE. A minimum of six months is recommended for children with a first idiopathic VTE. Indefinite anticoagulation is favored for children with recurrent idiopathic VTE [Monagle et al 2008].
