Treatment involves rapid control of hyperammonemia during metabolic decompensations and long-term management to help prevent episodes of hyperammonemia and long-term complications.

During acute hyperammonemic episodes severe enough to cause neurologic symptoms, treatment includes the following [Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001] (full text):

Discontinuing oral protein intake

Supplementing oral intake with intravenous lipids, glucose and intravenous insulin if needed (with close monitoring of blood glucose) to promote anabolism.

Intravenous nitrogen scavenging therapy. A loading dose of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate in 25 to 35 mL/kg of 10% dextrose solution given intravenously over a 90-minute period is recommended. This is followed by a sustained intravenous infusion of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate over a 24-hour period. When available, plasma concentrations of ammonia scavenging drugs should be monitored to avoid toxicity. In the absence of drug levels, a serum anion gap of greater than 15 mEq/L and an anion gap that has risen more than 6 mEq/L could indicate drug accumulation and increased risk for toxicity.

Ammonia levels usually normalize with therapy; however failure to decrease ammonia levels with medical therapy mandates prompt institution of hemodialysis.

Hemodialysis is the preferred method for rapid reduction of ammonia in patients who do not respond to nitrogen scavenging therapy. Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis (CAVHD) or continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) with flow rates greater than 40 to 60 mL/min is optimal. Some centers use extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with hemodialysis. Although this combination of techniques provides very high flow rates (170-200 mL/min) and rapidly reduces ammonia levels, morbidity is greater because of the need for surgical vascular access. Nitrogen scavenging therapy needs to be continued during hemodialysis. It is the authors’ policy to continue nitrogen scavenging therapy for 12-24 hours after the patient has been stabilized and is able to accept enteral feeds and medications [Author, personal observation].
