See McLaughlin et al [2013], Taichman et al [2014] and Hill et al [2015] for evidenced-based treatment algorithms.

Referral centers specializing in diagnosis and therapy of PAH are available across the US (see Pulmonary Hypertension Association Web site). Consultation is encouraged for all persons suspected of having PAH because of the complexity and continuing evolution of diagnosis and treatment.

Unprecedented approval of medications for PAH by the FDA in the last two decades has led to availability of a dozen therapies which all demonstrate some efficacy, but substantial limitations remain: none of them cures the disease, nor is effective in all patients, nor stops or reverses the underlying pathogenesis (obstruction of the pulmonary arteries).

The most effective among them, continuous IV prostanoids, are the most complicated to administer as they require patient management of a pump for continuous infusion, with a myriad of possible problems, including sepsis related to chronic central venous catheters. Patient preference often dictates the route of medication administration (continuous IV or subcutaneous (subQ), aerosol, oral) or side effects determine which agents are personally acceptable.

Continuous patient monitoring for progression of disease and medication adjustment requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team which communicates seamlessly with multiple specialty pharmacies and insurors.

Medications in use for PAH include the following:

Prostacyclin analogsEpoprostenol (continuous IV)Treprostinil (inhalation, oral, continuous subQ, or IV)Iloprost (inhalation)

Endothelin blockers (oral)BosentanAmbrisenanMacitentan

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (oral)SildenafilTadalafil

Guanylate cyclase stimulator (oral)Riociguat

Calcium channel blockers. A minority of individuals with PAH have a favorable long-term clinical response to oral calcium channel blockers. Such responders may be identified by a positive acute pulmonary vasodilator response (inhaled nitric oxide) assessed during cardiac catheterization. Three retrospective studies suggest that individuals with HPAH are less likely to demonstrate an acute pulmonary vasodilator response or have more severe disease than those with PAH of unknown cause [Elliott et al 2006, Rosenzweig et al 2008, Sztrymf et al 2008].

Adjunctive agents. Fluid retention may be ameliorated by diuretic therapy, hypoxemia may be helped by supplemental oxygen, and anticoagulation therapy may prevent superimposed thrombosis, especially common for indwelling catheters needed to deliver continuous infusion of a prostanoid.

Lung transplantation is an effective treatment for selected patients with PAH, but has many limitations, among them insufficient availability of donor lungs and limited long-term survival after lung transplantation for most recipients because of chronic graft rejection. Mean survival after lung transplantation is about five years.

Lung transplantation is appropriate only for patients whose lives are threatened by lung disease. Although the many effective PAH medications can improve symptoms, they do not reverse the underlying pulmonary vascular disease and it is debated how much they prolong overall survival [Humbert 2010, Macchia et al 2010]. The time span of months usually needed to assess the benefit of the many different medications or combinations of medications can delay the decision about timing of lung transplantation.
