Appropriate management, tailored to each individual, can improve quality of life and prolong survival. The general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995], Bushby [1999], and Norwood et al [2007], and revised by the Committee of the American Academy of Neurology [Narayanaswami et al 2014]:

A passive physical therapy program [Oygard et al 2011] and stretching exercises should be instituted early after diagnosis to promote mobility, prolong walking, and slow the disease progression, in particular by maintaining joint flexibility. Individuals usually benefit from strengthening and gentle [Sveen et al 2013], low-impact aerobic exercise (swimming, stationary bicycling) with a supervised sub-maximal effort, which improves cardiovascular performance, increases muscle efficiency, and lessens muscle fatigue. Although there are no specific reports on supportive care, physical and occupational therapies are important [Eagle 2002].

Avoidance of prolonged immobility is recommended.

Technical aids can also compensate for the loss of certain motor abilities; canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs enable individuals to regain independence. The use of knee-ankle-foot orthoses at bedtime is recommended to prevent contractures. Scoliosis occurs mainly after wheelchair dependence and attention should be paid to seating [Norwood et al 2007].

Surgical intervention may be required for correction of orthopedic complications including foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures. Occasionally, scapular fixation may be required for particularly problematic scapular winging.

In the late stage of the disease, chronic respiratory insufficiency may occur and the use of respiratory aids may be indicated to prolong survival [Pollitt et al 2001, Norwood et al 2007, D’Angelo et al 2011, Richard et al 2016, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Individuals should be monitored for signs of nocturnal hypoventilation (sleep disturbances, early morning headache, daytime drowsiness).

Overnight pulse oxymetry is recommended if forced vital capacity is lower than 60% and the demonstration of nocturnal hypoventilation should lead to noninvasive nocturnal ventilation [Norwood et al 2007].

Intervention in the form of nocturnal ventilator assistance for respiratory failure (by noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, NIV, by nasal masks) may be life saving in severely affected individuals [Dirik et al 2001, Hashiguchi et al 2014, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Wheelchair-bound individuals may also develop weak cough efforts, placing them at risk of atelectasia, pneumonia, progressive mismatch, and respiratory failure.

Annual influenza vaccination and prompt treatment for chest and respiratory infections should be eventually addressed using a mechanical in-ex-sufflator [Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Social and emotional support help to improve the quality of life, to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity, and to reduce the sense of social isolation [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Clinicians should anticipate and facilitate decision-making for affected individuals and their families as the disease progresses, including decisions regarding loss of mobility and need of assistance with activities of daily living, medical complications, and end-of-life care [Narayanaswami et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

There are a number of measures that decrease disease manifestations in a symptomatic individual: control of weight gain, prevention of joint contractures by means of physical therapy and stretching exercises, and in the advanced stage, control of respiratory insufficiency. Physical therapy and stretching exercises can help to slow disease progression; therefore, a physical therapy program should be instituted early after diagnosis.
