A multidisciplinary approach is recommended including regular evaluations with specialists in clinical genetics, dermatology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, audiology, dentistry and prosthodontics, plastic surgery, gastroenterology, and psychiatry.

Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum. These strands of tissue between the upper and lower eyelids are often small and autolyse shortly after birth; larger ones may require surgical separation by an ophthalmologist.

Ectodermal defects

Wigs can be used, if desired, for the sparse hair and alopecia.

There are no known therapies for the nail or skin pigment changes.

Dentures should be considered in early childhood and the possibility of dental implants should be considered in the teens or early adult years.

Sweating is not severely impaired and does not require special care.

Skin erosions. The skin erosions are difficult to treat and prone to excessive ineffective granulation response; they are at increased risk for secondary infection and are not responsive to most standard wound care regimens or antibiotic therapy [Julapalli et al 2009]. Skin erosions should be treated with gentle wound care and periodic, dilute bleach soaks (Dakins solution) to prevent secondary infection.

Occlusive dressings should not be used as they tend to stimulate granulation tissue.

Secondary infections should be treated with topical or oral antibiotics or antifungal agents when appropriate. Empiric treatment (i.e., use of antibiotic without culture-proven infection) is not recommended.

Cleft lip/palate. Clefting should be addressed as soon as developmentally possible. Typical feeding issues associated with clefting are seen and include: poor suck, difficulty coordinating feeding and breathing, and excessive air intake. A nurse, nutritionist, pediatrician, speech therapist, or other specialist familiar with the management of feeding issues in children with cleft lip/palate should be consulted. Early referral to a craniofacial surgeon for planning for surgical cleft repair is indicated.

Other

Weight should be followed closely with assessment for signs of failure to thrive. If optimization of oral caloric intake fails to improve growth, gastrostomy tube placement may be considered.

Myringotomy is indicated as needed for conductive hearing loss resulting from chronic otitis media.

Significant breast asymmetry in women may be corrected through plastic surgery.

Psychological impact of the phenotypic features of the disorder on patient and family should also be considered and referrals made to psychiatry or psychology as appropriate.
