Prognosis is poor in patients with early-onset cblC who are undiagnosed and untreated [Rosenblatt et al 1997]. Institution of therapy during acute illness results in rapid improvement of clinical, biochemical, and hematologic manifestations in patients with early- and late-onset cblC [Bartholomew et al 1988, Rosenblatt et al 1997, Bodamer et al 2001, Tomaske et al 2001, Kind et al 2002, Van Hove et al 2002, Fowler et al 2008].

Parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) is the mainstay of therapy and should be instituted as soon as a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism is suspected. Infants are started with daily 1.0 mg intramuscular or subcutaneous injections. Patients with cblC are often highly responsive to this therapy.

Patients with elevated tHcy should also receive betaine (250 mg/kg/day) and folate or folinic acid.

Acute metabolic decompensation. Although less common in the disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism than in methylmalonic acidemia, severe acidotic/ketotic crises due to profound methylmalonic acidemia do occur. Such critically ill individuals should be managed in consultation with a metabolic specialist. MedicAlert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Treatment includes volume replacement with isotonic solutions containing high (10%-12.5%) glucose to reverse catabolism, correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate, and prompt reintroduction of feedings — preferably enterally, but parenterally if enteral route cannot be established.

Thromboembolic complications a cause of mortality in cblC are likely associated with increasing plasma concentrations of tHcy [Carrillo-Carrasco & Venditti 2012]. The proper management of thromboembolic complications, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic microangiopathy, should include initiation of OHCbl and betaine or an increase in their doses [Van Hove et al 2002, Sharma et al 2007].

Long-term management. The goals of long-term management include improving the metabolic derangement by lowering plasma tHcy and MMA concentrations and maintaining plasma methionine concentrations within the normal range. These are accomplished by:

Parenteral OHCbl. The most experience derives from the treatment of patients with cblC. Infants are usually started at a daily dose of 1.0 mg (~0.3 mg/kg/d) of OHCbl given IM or SQ. Parenteral OHCbl (not the cyanocobalamin form or oral form) is the only effective preparation. Placement of a SQ catheter that minimizes cutaneous punctures [Freehauf et al 2011] and pre-filled injections may increase compliance.

Weight-appropriate adjustment of the OHCbl dose is recommended and can be attained by the ability to concentrate OHCbl up to 30 mg/mL. Further titration of the dose may be empirically adjusted as needed for worsening clinical manifestations [Van Hove et al 2002] or for metabolic control of plasma tHcy, MMA, or methionine concentrations [Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2009].

Betaine. Oral betaine (starting at ~250 mg/kg/day) is recommended in patients with defective MeCbl production (cblC, cblD, cblE, cblF, cblG, and cblJ). Betaine augments the non-methionine synthase-dependent conversion of homocysteine to methionine (however, this is not uniformly accepted). Optimal dosing and monitoring have not been adequately established.

Folate and folinic acid. Folic acid and folinic acid can potentially augment remethylation and may help improve plasma tHcy and methionine concentrations. Folinic acid may be preferred as it crosses the blood brain barrier more efficiently than folic acid. The adult dose of folate is 1.0 mg by mouth per day, titratable down to 0.5 mg for maintenance. Doses for children and infants are available in the Harriet Lane Handbook [Tschudy & Arcara 2012] and other common reference texts.

Dietary management. Patients may be able to tolerate a normal diet: the use of a low-protein diet is under debate and needs further clinical studies to clarify the benefits of its use.

Most importantly, methionine restriction should be avoided, as hypomethioninemia can be detrimental [Ribes et al 1990, Rossi et al 2001, De Bie et al 2009].

Gastrostomy tube placement may be required in the present of feeding difficulties and failure to thrive.

Other therapeutic considerations that have not been fully validated:

Methionine supplementation. Hypomethioninemia is usually responsive to appropriate treatment with OHCbl and betaine. The need for exogenous methionine supplementation may be minimized by these strategies, as the efficacy of this therapy is uncertain [Smith et al 2006].

Pyridoxine. Vitamin B6 is a cofactor for cystathionine beta synthase and, therefore has been proposed as a means of maximizing the removal of homocysteine. Persons with disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism generally do not respond to pyridoxine unless they have a dietary deficiency.

Levocarnitine. Indicated for low plasma carnitine levels

Treatment of infantile spasms, seizures, congenital heart defects, and hydrocephalus is done in a routine manner.
