Management of individuals with MPS IVA is best undertaken by the following multiple specialists, coordinated by a physician specializing in the care of individuals with complex medical problems:

Physiatrist (specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to optimize mobility and autonomy

Physical therapist to optimize mobility

Occupational therapist to optimize autonomy

Psychological support to optimize coping skills and quality of life

Educational professions to optimize learning in a medically fragile individual

Consideration of referral to family therapy to help normalize the experience for the affected individual, parents, sibs, and extended family members

Home care for affected individuals with multiple medical equipment needs

Hospice for end-of-life care

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Recombinant human GALNS ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) was approved by the FDA in February 2014.

The recommendation dose is 2 mg/kg/week intravenous. Although the treatment with ERT is not curative, ERT could improve endurance and overall quality of life.

Premedication (30-60 minutes prior to each enzyme infusion) with a non-sedating antihistamine (if possible) with or without antipyretics is recommended to prevent infusion-associated reactions.

A Phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in the 6MWT distance in the 2 mg/kg weekly dose group compared to the placebo group. The 3-minute stair climb test (3MSCT) and respiratory function were improved with the treatment but the differences were not statistically significant.

The long-term effects of this treatment on the skeletal features of MPSIVA are not yet known (see Therapies Under Investigation). The efficacy of ERT in improving pathology in the musculoskeletal system may be limited because of poor biodistribution of the enzyme in avascular tissue.

Musculoskeletal

For published orthopedic management guidelines, see White et al [2014]. The level of physical activity should be monitored by specialists in orthopedic surgery, neurology, physiatry, and physical therapy to optimize mobility while preventing joint injury, joint misalignments, and cervical cord damage.

Upper extremities. Non-operative interventions, such as external wrist splints, may be considered. Surgical intervention, including partial or complete wrist fusion, may be necessary to stabilize wrist range of motion.

Knee and ankle valgus. Lower extremity malalignment associated with progressively poor mechanical alignment and decreasing endurance requires intervention; however, no absolute indications for intervention exist.

Growth modulation, also called guided growth (temporary surgical tethering of the growth plate to allow gradual correction of the deformity) or realignment osteotomies have been successful [Dhawale et al 2012, White et al 2014].

Early detection and evaluation may allow surgical tethering of the growth plate to treat mild-to-moderate lower extremity angular deformities in children with open physes (growth plates). Typically this procedure is less invasive and allows for easier recovery than realignment osteotomies.

Once the growth plates close, distal femoral and proximal tibial osteotomies are needed to acutely or gradually (with the use of external fixators) correct lower extremity malalignment.

Ankle malalignment is often corrected by a distal tibial osteotomy with distal tibial screw hemiepiphyseodesis [reviewed in Tomatsu et al 2011].

Hip dysplasia. Surgery can manage pain and alignment and permit optimal mobility.

Hip reconstruction includes either femoral or acetabular osteotomy for mild cases or combined acetabular and femoral osteotomy for severe cases. Augmentation of acetabular bone stock and customized implants by using cortical grafts from the inner table of the ilium are usually required due to a shallow acetabulum [White et al 2014].

Total hip arthroplasty may be required in young adults experiencing significant hip pain which cannot be corrected by reconstructive techniques.

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression.

To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, intervention in children is recommended when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms.

Affected individuals undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation.

Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI (see Surveillance). The affected individual should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Lumbar spine malalignment. Thoracolumbar kyphosis (resulting from vertebral hypoplasia) may be progressive and symptomatic.

When kyphosis is less than 45 degrees, the risk of progressive deformity is less than with a greater curve, but warrants clinical and radiographic monitoring.

When kyphosis exceeds 45 degrees, progression is likely. Although extensive bracing with an orthosis or a cast does not prevent progression of the thoracolumbar kyphosis, it may delay the need for surgical intervention during a period of growth and development.

Anterior and posterior circumferential spinal fusion are indicated if one or more of the following are present:

Progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis greater than 70 degrees

Uncontrolled back pain

Neurologic changes related to spinal stenosis

Cardiac

Elevated heart rates could indicate a compensation mechanism, secondary to small left ventricular diameter and small stroke volume; thus tachycardia treatment with beta blockers should be avoided. Valve replacement may be considered for progressive valvular problems [Hendriksz et al 2015]. Risks need to be carefully weighed for valve replacement, either mechanical (life-long use of anticoagulants) or bioprosthesis (increased risk of valve dysplasia, degradation, and calcification).

Respiratory

Upper-airway obstruction and obstructive sleep apnea are managed by removal of enlarged tonsils and adenoids (average age 7 years [Montaño et al 2007]). Note: Even with this intervention, the rate of obstructive sleep apnea in children with a mucopolysaccharidosis is much higher than the general population; therefore, prompt clinical evaluation and referral for polysomnography are appropriate [Nashed et al 2009].

In persons with diffuse narrowing of the airway in whom adenotonsillectomy only temporally relieves upper-airway obstruction, other interventions to consider are: CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure), BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure), and tracheostomy.

Lower-airway obstruction manifest as wheezing and recurrent infection is managed by inhaled and/or oral bronchodilators and, in some instances, corticosteroids.

Restrictive lung disease is managed by supportive treatment.

Growth

Height of children with MPS IVA is best plotted on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008].

Nutrition should be optimized with a balanced diet and adequate vitamin D and calcium to assure bone health.

Learning Environment

Despite some physical limitation, individuals with MPS IVA have normal intellect and can thrive in an environment with academic and social stimulation. Children routinely attend regular class/school with assistance to prevent physical injury.

Eye

Corneal opacification often causes reduced vision in early childhood, necessitating penetrating keratoplasty, for which the outcome can vary. Recurrence of opacities within the first year post keratoplasty has been reported, making this a temporary measure for improving quality of life [reviewed by Bothun et al 2011]. In addition, other ophthalmologic problems including glaucoma and retinopathy may limit the success of corneal transplantation. Cataract surgery may benefit those with cataracts.

Dental

Daily oral hygiene care, fissure sealing, and adequate fluoride supplementation help prevent cavities. Orthodontic management to correct malocclusion may be necessary.

Hearing

Because ventilation tube placement can minimize the long-term scarring associated with chronic middle-ear effusions and recurrent acute otitis media, and improve hearing in the long term, most children have ventilation tubes placed during the preschool years. At the first occasion, a long-lasting tympanostomy tube is recommended due to high risk of recurrent middle-ear effusion and the risk associated with sedation in individuals with MPS IVA [Hendriksz et al 2015].

The progressive hearing impairment observed in most individuals with MPS IVA benefits from hearing aids.
