No guidelines exist for the management of VHL lesions.

CNS hemangioblastoma

Most central nervous system hemangioblastomas can be surgically removed completely and safely [Lonser et al 2003].

Some advocate early surgical removal of both symptomatic and asymptomatic CNS lesions, while others follow asymptomatic lesions with yearly imaging studies.

Surgical intervention of cysts/syrinx in the spinal cord is recommended.

Preoperative arterial embolization may be indicated, especially for extensive spinal tumors.

The position of stereotactic therapy is still questionable [Oldfield 2015]. Gamma knife surgery may be useful with small solid tumors or those in inoperable sites [Asthagiri et al 2010, Simone et al 2011]. While this technique may reduce the size of the solid tumor, it does not appear to prevent cyst formation. In a study with nearly six years of follow up of 40 hemangioblastomas in 20 patients treated with stereotactic therapy, no progression was described in 33% [Asthagiri et al 2010]. Similar results are found when analyzing the natural history of the hemangioblastomas (25%) [Lonser et al 2014]. The unpredictable growth pattern makes it difficult to determine when to start stereotactic therapy, to avoid unnecessary intervention. A recent study demonstrates a local tumor control with stereotactic therapy of 93% after three years, 89% after five years, and 79% after ten years [Kano et al 2015]. Factors associated with tumor control are solid, smaller, VHL-associated lesions and higher margin dose. Thirteen of the 186 (7%) experienced complications, 11 patients needed steroid therapy and one person died of refractory peritumoral edema. Two patients required additional surgery.

Retinal hemangioblastoma

Most ophthalmologists favor prospective treatment of retinal (but not optic nerve) angiomas to avoid blindness, although spontaneous regression has occurred.

Therapeutic modalities used to treat retinal hemangioblastomas include diathermy, xenon, laser, and cryocoagulation, with variable degrees of success depending on the location, size, and number of lesions. Recurrent tumors have been noted, even after many years, but some may be new tumors in the same general area rather than recurrent disease.

External beam radiotherapy has been shown to be useful when standard therapy has not prevented progression [Raja et al 2004].

Renal cell carcinoma

Early surgery is the best option for renal cell carcinoma, although close monitoring is recommended for lesions smaller than 3 cm. Depending on the size and location of the tumor, nephron-sparing or partial nephrectomy may be possible without compromising survival [Grubb et al 2005].

Nephrectomy should leave the adrenal gland in situ, as is done in individuals with renal cell carcinoma who do not have a confirmed diagnosis of VHL. If contralateral pheochromocytoma occurs, the remaining adrenal gland will prevent or delay steroid replacement therapy.

Cryoablation is being increasingly used for small lesions or in individuals who are likely to require multiple surgical procedures [Shingleton & Sewell 2002].

Radio frequency ablation therapy is often applied to smaller tumors, particularly <3 cm [Best et al 2012]. However, smaller lesions treated with radio frequency ablation need frequent intervention [Joly et al 2011]. The major complication rate (need for a radiologic, surgical, or endoscopic intervention) for laparoscopic and percutaneous radio frequency ablation therapy was 7.3% and 4.3%, respectively [Young et al 2012].

Renal transplantation has been successful in individuals in whom bilateral nephrectomy has been necessary. It is imperative to evaluate any living related potential donor for VHL syndrome and to exclude those found to have VHL syndrome.

Pheochromocytomas

Pheochromocytomas should be surgically removed. Laparoscopic approaches have been shown to be effective.

Preoperative treatment with alpha-adrenergic blockade, and optional additional beta-adrenergic blockade for seven to ten days is appropriate even in individuals with no known hypertension.

Partial adrenalectomy could be considered. One long-term follow-up study (9.25 years) of 36 affected individuals showed no metastatic disease; ipsilateral recurrence after partial adrenalectomy was seen in three individuals (11%) [Benhammou et al 2010].

Partial adrenalectomy is also therapy of choice in children. In 10 VHL patients 18 successful operations were performed. After follow up (median 7.2 years), 2 patients developed a new tumor in the ipsilateral adrenal gland [Volkin et al 2012].

Pancreatic cysts and neuroendocrine tumors

Pancreatic cysts are common, but rarely influence endocrine function and generally do not require surgical removal.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors need to be differentiated from cysts and serous cystadenomas. Pancreatic tumors are usually slow growing and are not hormonally active, although they can cause metastatic disease. Surgery should be considered when there is a high risk of metastases suggested by one of the following prognostic criteria [Blansfield et al 2007]:

A tumor of ≥3 cm

A pathogenic variant in exon 3

A tumor with a doubling rate <500 days

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). Consideration of surgical removal of these slow-growing tumors must include discussion of the possible complication of total deafness. Early intervention with small tumors has been shown to preserve both hearing and vestibular function [Kim et al 2005, Friedman et al 2013]. Friedman et al described two patients (2/18) with postoperative decreased facial nerve function and three (3/18) patients with recurrent ELSTs (with a mean follow up of 67 months). Kim et al [2013] studied 31 patients with VHL with 33 resected ELSTs. Twenty-nine patients were symptomatic. After surgery, hearing was stabilized or improved in 97% of individuals, and tumor resection was complete in 91%. Complications occurred in three tumors: cerebrospinal fluid leakage in two (6%) and transient lower cranial nerve palsy in one (3%).

Epididymal or broad ligament papillary cyst adenomas. These generally do not require surgery, unless they are symptomatic or are threatening fertility.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize deficits such as hearing loss, vision loss, neurologic symptoms, and the need for renal replacement therapy.
