Management and treatment recommendations for juvenile hemochromatosis stated here are based on the established HFE-associated hemochromatosis recommendations when specific juvenile hemochromatosis information may not exist.

Treatment of iron overload. Phlebotomy is the therapy of choice in juvenile hemochromatosis and follows the same principles as the treatment of classic HFE-associated hemochromatosis. It is simple, safe, and effective. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow a regimen of phlebotomy of one unit of blood once or twice weekly [Tavill 2001]. Approximately 200 mg of iron are removed per unit of blood depending on the individual's hematocrit. Because individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis are usually severely iron overloaded, a therapeutic regimen of one to two weekly phlebotomies may take up to two to three years to reduce iron stores to desired levels.

The hematocrit should be monitored prior to phlebotomy; phlebotomy should be postponed if the hematocrit drops more than 20% of its initial value [Tavill 2001]. Systematic administration of erythropoietin has been successful in maintaining the hematocrit in individuals who failed to mount an adequate bone marrow response to the phlebotomy regimen [De Gobbi et al 2000].

Serum ferritin concentration reflects body iron stores and is used to monitor the progress of therapy; it is expected to fall progressively, along with iron mobilization. Measuring serum ferritin concentration every 10-12 phlebotomies is reasonable; however, once serum ferritin concentration is below 100 ng/mL, it should be measured more often, ideally prior to each phlebotomy. Achievement of serum ferritin concentration below 50 ng/mL and restoration of normal transferrin-iron saturation indicates the end point of the intensive phlebotomy treatment.

Maintenance therapy. The frequency of phlebotomies is adjusted to maintain normal serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation. When iron removal is not urgent, phlebotomies could be spaced further apart according to the responsiveness of the bone marrow to restore adequate hematocrit. Usually four to six phlebotomies annually are sufficient. The individual should permanently continue on this schedule of phlebotomy maintenance therapy.

Iron chelators such as parenteral deferoxamine (Desferal®) are used to treat individuals with secondary iron overload. They are not recommended in the treatment of juvenile hemochromatosis unless the disease is complicated by concomitant anemia or severe cardiac failure. In the latter situation, administration of deferoxamine alone or in combination with deferiprone can reduce mortality by improving left ventricular ejection fraction [Kelly et al 1998, Fabio et al 2007].

Treatment of secondary complications. Treatment does not essentially differ from the conventional treatment applied in other situations:

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is generally considered irreversible, despite adequate iron removal. However, reversal of hypogonadism has been observed in some young individuals who have been successfully treated with phlebotomy or iron chelation [Angelopoulos et al 2005]. For the majority of individuals with hypogonadism, testosterone or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is required to improve symptoms and prevent the development of secondary osteopenia or osteoporosis [Angelopoulos et al 2006].

Transdermal preparations (i.e., patches) deliver testosterone or estradiol at a controlled rate into the systemic circulation, avoiding first-pass hepatic metabolism; therefore, this approach may be useful for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis, eliminating the risk of potential liver complications.

Administration of gonadotropins has restored fertility and has led to a twin pregnancy in a woman with juvenile hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy is not modified by treatment. Individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis have to cope with persistent arthralgia presenting at a young age. Painful joints may require treatment with salicylates or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) [Vaiopoulos et al 2003].

Severe cardiac failure is treated with ACE inhibitors, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, and possibly deferoxamine. If left untreated, cardiac disease progresses rapidly and becomes refractory to treatment, leading to death in most cases. Orthotopic heart transplantation has been used on occasion [Caines et al 2005].

Liver steatosis and fibrosis are treated with appropriately early phlebotomy [Camaschella et al 2002]; however, it is uncertain whether these features are reversible. Reversibility of liver fibrosis has been reported in individuals treated for HFE-associated hemochromatosis [Falize et al 2006].

Cirrhosis is thought to be irreversible despite iron removal. Individuals with cirrhosis should undergo endoscopic evaluation to document the presence of varices and should be treated with propranolol or nadolol, as indicated. In advanced disease, orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) could be considered. Of note, individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis undergoing OLT display an overall lower survival than individuals undergoing OLTs for other causes of liver disease. Because most post-transplantation deaths occur in the perioperative period from cardiac disease or infection, it is advisable to remove as much of excess iron stores as possible before OLT even though the effect of excess tissue iron on survival post-OLT is not known [Tavill 2001].

Diabetes mellitus may require insulin administration; successful iron removal may improve its course [Angelopoulos et al 2007].
