Correction of refractive errors with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Of note, visual acuity is never correctable to normal.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory (because the strabismus in most individuals with albinism is not associated with the development of amblyopia); however, if the strabismus is marked or fixed, surgery can be considered to improve peripheral binocular fusion or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point into a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from ‘photophobia, painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare and to reduce some photodysphoria and to provide some sun protection to the face.

Skin care in OCA2 is determined by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Individuals with white skin that does not tan need to be protected from any prolonged sun exposure for prevention of burning, skin damage, and skin cancer. This can be for exposures as short as five to ten minutes in highly sensitive individuals and 30 minutes or more in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, and long sleeves, pants, and socks) and appropriate sunscreens after the guidance and education from a dermatologist.

Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

Skin cancer is treated as for the general population.
