Neurovisceral Symptoms

Most acute neurovisceral attacks require hospital admission; patients with mild attacks (not requiring narcotic analgesics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or muscle weakness) are sometimes treated as outpatients. A rapid, thorough, and multidisciplinary evaluation is optimized by in-patient management.

As with other acute porphyrias, evaluation should include identification of exacerbating drugs and other precipitating factors. Harmful medications include barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Harmful medications should be discontinued.

Seizures, motor neuropathy, and hyponatremia suggest severe disease and should be managed in the ICU with adequate supportive treatment.

Narcotic analgesics are usually required for pain and ondansetron or a related drug for nausea and vomiting. A phenothiazine is also effective for nausea and for psychiatric symptoms (e.g., agitation, hallucinations) [Anderson et al 2005, Harper & Wahlin 2007].

Mild attacks (not requiring narcotics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or motor neuropathy) can be treated with glucose loading, but most attacks should be treated with intravenous hemin [Anderson et al 2005].

Note: ‘Hemin’ refers to the oxidized form of iron protoporphyrin IX, but is also the generic term for heme preparations used as intravenous therapies for acute porphyrias, such as lyophilized hematin (heme hydroxide) and heme arginate. When these hemin preparations are infused intravenously, the heme is bound to circulating albumin as heme albumin. The latter is taken up by hepatocytes and decreases the synthesis of hepatic ALAS1, the rate-controlling enzyme for heme synthesis in the liver.

Patients with acute attack should be carefully monitored for muscle weakness and respiratory impairment that may require ventilatory support.

Hyponatremia should be corrected slowly and seizures treated with medications that do not exacerbate porphyria.

Liver transplantation, which has been effective in persons with AIP with severe repeated acute attacks that respond poorly to medical therapy, is a consideration in VP [Dowman et al 2012].

Cutaneous Symptoms

Porphyrin levels may decrease and photosensitivity improve if exacerbating factors can be identified and removed. Otherwise there is no effective treatment that lowers porphyrin levels. Treatment with hemin may lower porphyrins in the short term only.

Patients should wear protective clothing and avoid exposure to sunlight.

Analgesics may be needed for painful lesions and antibiotics for superimposed infection. Topical steroids are of little or no benefit.

Specific measures effective in the treatment of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) (i.e., phlebotomy and low-dose hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine) are not effective in the management of VP.
