Initial treatment. Once initial diagnostic blood samples are obtained, the hypoglycemia must be corrected immediately using intravenous glucose at a dose sufficient to prevent further hypoglycemia and irreversible brain damage. The dose of glucose may be high (>15 mg/kg/min) and frequently requires central venous access. The definition of adequate glucose control has been the subject of discussion. Most investigators recommend maintaining all glucose levels above 3.3 mmol/L (60 mg/dL), a level that leaves a sufficient margin to prevent frequent episodes of neuroglycopenia (i.e., transient or permanent brain dysfunction caused by inadequate glucose supplies) [Burns et al 2008, Inder 2008].

Long-term medical management. The next phase of treatment, designed to decrease and stop parenteral glucose requirement, is empiric and involves a combination of medical therapies, which may include the following:

Diazoxide, which binds to the ABCC8 subunit of the KATP channel, increases the channel's probability of being open, resulting in membrane hyperpolarization and inhibition of insulin release. Some evidence suggests that diazoxide binding to mutated channels may correct abnormal protein folding and thus facilitate the transit of more channels to the membrane. The effective therapeutic dose varies but may be as high as 20 mg/kg/day in divided doses. A thiazide diuretic is always given along with diazoxide to prevent fluid retention, which may be severe [Hussain et al 2004].

Somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide or lanreotide) suppress insulin secretion by binding to specific beta-cell receptors and initiating a number of intracellular signaling pathways. The clinical efficacy of these analogs may be limited by the relatively short duration of inhibition of insulin secretion after subcutaneous bolus injection (~3 hours) and by the fact that these drugs also inhibit glucagon and growth hormone secretion, thus impairing hepatic glucose production. Careful attention to dosage (typically 10/40 μg/kg/day for octreotide) as well as the use of continuous subcutaneous injection using a portable pump greatly enhances clinical efficacy [Glaser et al 1989, Hussain et al 2004]. Simultaneous treatment with glucagon or growth hormone may enhance efficacy.

Nifedipine, which acts as an inhibitor of the voltage-dependent calcium channels present in the beta cell, inhibits insulin secretion by decreasing calcium influx [Hussain et al 2004]. In vitro, this drug effectively suppresses insulin secretion depending on the pathogenic variant; however, in vivo side effects are usually dose limiting, and the drug is only rarely clinically effective.

Glucagon, which increases hepatic gluconeogenesis, helps prevents hypoglycemia. The drug can be used acutely to treat severe hypoglycemia, or chronically as replacement therapy to counteract suppression by somatostatin analogs [Mohnike et al 2008b].

Recombinant IGF-I has been shown to suppress insulin secretion in individuals with FHI [Katz et al 1999]; however, therapeutic success has not been confirmed.

Glucocorticoids induce resistance to endogenous insulin and correct the inadequate cortisol response sometimes seen in affected individuals. Their use in the treatment algorithm of FHI is, however, very limited.

Growth hormone may be given in combination with somatostatin analogs in order to counteract GH suppression by the analogs.

Novel treatment approaches, such as the use of a GLP1 receptor antagonist, have been attempted, but their therapeutic efficacy and safety have yet to be determined [Calabria et al 2012].

Dietary intervention:

Frequent high-carbohydrate feedings, including formula supplemented with glucose polymer

Night-time continuous gastric drip containing glucose or glucose polymer

Feeding gastrostomy to simplify the process of continuous night-time feeding and to provide access for emergency home treatment of hypoglycemia

Some individuals, particularly those with FHI-GLUD1, FHI-HADH, FHI-GCK, or dominant pathogenic variants in either ABCC8 or KCNJ11, respond very well to medical therapy. Individuals with severe FHI-KATP may also respond to medical therapy; however, these individuals often require aggressive medical management, including a combination of several of the above-mentioned drugs along with dietary intervention to maintain plasma glucose concentration in a clinically safe range without the use of parenteral glucose administration. This management protocol may be extremely demanding and, even if successful in the hospital setting, may not be appropriate for many families on an outpatient basis. The overall success of medical management in FHI-KATP as reported by different groups is extremely variable [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009]. The discrepancy may result from different pathogenic variants being common in various populations, or by differences in physician and patient expectations and willingness to invest time and effort in achieving success using medical management.

If medical treatment can be safely maintained, glycemic control usually becomes easier with time, and most individuals treated medically enter clinical remission after several months or years of treatment [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009]. It is generally accepted that those individuals who respond well to medical treatment can be treated chronically without undue risk for long-term complications. Long-term follow up of medically treated individuals shows that some eventually develop glucose intolerance, which can be effectively managed with mild dietary restrictions [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009].

Surgical management. Once an individual is stabilized, a decision must be made as to the need for surgical intervention and the extent of such intervention. In some severe cases, even the most aggressive medical management fails to maintain plasma glucose concentration consistently within the safe limits (>60 mg/dL). In such individuals, surgery must be considered. Prior to surgical intervention, differentiation between focal and diffuse disease using one of the following techniques is important, as the surgical approach and the clinical outcome are quite different:

Note: None of the techniques described is 100% accurate and more research is needed to develop tools to diagnose and localize focal FHI more accurately without the need for invasive testing.

Genetic studies, in certain circumstances, can be useful in differentiating focal from diffuse disease:

Finding two recessive pathogenic variants or a single dominant pathogenic variant is diagnostic of diffuse disease.

Finding a single recessive pathogenic variant on the maternal allele suggests diffuse disease; it is assumed that the other pathogenic variant on the paternal allele was missed because of technical limitations of the molecular genetic testing.

Finding a single recessive pathogenic variant on the paternal allele is consistent with and highly suggestive of focal disease, although it cannot be considered diagnostic, as molecular genetic testing methods could have failed to detect a pathogenic variant on the maternal allele. In such individuals, further testing diagnose and localize focal disease is indicated. Because of the large size of ABCC8 and KNCJ11, complete sequencing and analysis of all variants discovered is expensive and time-consuming and may not be completed in time to aid in clinical decision making for a severely ill individual. With the incorporation of modern sequencing techniques, rapid complete sequencing of all relevant genes is becoming feasible. In contrast, for a person from an ethnic group with a known founder variant (e.g., Ashkenazi Jews), targeted analysis for pathogenic variants can provide rapid and inexpensive clinically useful information.

Transhepatic percutaneous pancreatic venous sampling (TPPVS) was the first effective method for diagnosing and localizing focal lesions, but has now been largely replaced by F-DOPA-PET scanning, which is easier and considerably safer to perform.

Intraoperative histologic evaluation of a pancreatic biopsy in very experienced hands can be used to differentiate between diffuse FHI and a normal, suppressed pancreas in an individual with a focal lesion. Since interoperative identification of the focal lesion can be very difficult or impossible, resection of the lesion is usually only possible if its location is determined preoperatively.

Acute insulin response to calcium, tolbutamide, and glucose can be used to diagnose the focal FHI [Grimberg et al 1999, Ferry et al 2000, Grimberg et al 2001, Huopio et al 2002], while selective arterial calcium infusion may be useful in localizing the lesion [Abernethy et al 1998, Stanley et al 2004]. The former, however, will not help to localize the lesion, and the latter is invasive and not without potentially serious side effects.

Fluoro-DOPA positron emission tomography (F-DOPA-PET) has been used successfully for the preoperative localization of focal lesions [Otonkoski et al 2006, Mohnike et al 2008a] (see Diagnosis). While the scan itself is relatively easy to perform, the radiopharmaceutical is not readily available in many centers and the scan can be difficult to interpret, requiring extensive experience to obtain reliable results.

Individuals with diffuse disease require extensive (80%-95%) pancreatic resection and are at risk for persistent hypoglycemia postoperatively and/or insulin-requiring diabetes mellitus later in childhood. Individuals with focal disease can be cured by localized resection of the hyperplastic region. Although the apparent risk for postoperative diabetes appears to be very low after limited pancreatectomy, very long-term follow up is not yet available on these individuals [Beltrand et al 2012]. Since focal lesions can only rarely be identified grossly at the time of surgery, perioperative diagnosis and localization of focal lesions is needed.
