There are no recent published consensus guidelines for the management of CMS treatment.

Medical Treatment

The choice of medical treatment varies with the CMS subtype [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. Therefore, it seems reasonable to consider a first-line genetic testing to evaluate the genetic subtype. However, there may be individual clinical situations demanding an immediate therapeutic trial. Monotherapy is the usual course of treatment for congenital myasthenia; however, a combination of drugs may be necessary to optimize the therapeutic effect and to minimize side effects.

Acetylcholineesterase (AChE) inhibitors (pyridostigmine). Although the majority of individuals with CMS benefit from AChE inhibitors (pyridostigmine), some myasthenic symptoms may remain refractory to treatment even in individuals who are otherwise responsive. Certain CMS subtypes (see Table 2) including endplate (EP) AChE deficiency, slow-channel CMS (SCCMS), and DOK7-related CMS are refractory to or deteriorate with AChE inhibitors [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013].

3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP). Alternatively or in addition to AChE inhibitors, the potassium channel blocker 3,4-DAP may be used [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. This drug increases the release of ACh and prolongs the presynaptic action potential. Of note, two children with fast-channel CMS (FCCMS; caused by autosomal recessive loss-of-function variants of the genes encoding the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunits that shorten the time that the AChR channel is open) died when started on 3,4-DAP [Beeson et al 2005]. Although a relation to 3,4-DAP has not been proven, clinicians must be cautious when using 3,4-DAP in young children and in individuals with FCCMS.

Ephedrine treatment shows positive effects in different subtypes of CMS [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013, Vrinten et al 2014] and may be an alternative treatment option for CMS subtypes that are refractory to AChE inhibitors, such as COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Bestue-Cardiel et al 2005, Schara et al 2009, Lashley et al 2010, Witting & Vissing 2014]. It is well tolerated by most patients and improvement in strength can be profound.

Albuterol, an alternative to ephedrine, may have a role in the treatment of COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Liewluck et al 2011, Burke et al 2013, Lorenzoni et al 2013, Witting & Vissing 2014].

Quinidine, fluoxetine. Some individuals with genetically defined SCCMS (caused by autosomal dominant gain-of-function variants of the genes encoding the AChR subunits that prolong the time that the AChR channel is open) have been successfully treated with quinidine, a long-lived open-channel blocker of AChR [Harper & Engel 1998]. Quinidine in turn may be detrimental in individuals with AChR deficiency.

The therapeutic benefit of fluoxetine in SCCMS has been shown [Harper et al 2003, Colomer et al 2006]; however, it may induce suicidal ideation; thus, caution is strongly suggested in its use in childhood [Engel 2007].

Overall fluoxetine appears to be the accepted first-line treatment in SCCMS, whereas quinidine is the treatment of choice in children and teenagers because of the risk of psychiatric side effects associated with fluoxetine [Chaouch et al 2012a, Chaouch et al 2012b].

Non-Medical Treatment

In addition to medical therapy, a multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMS subtype, and rate of progression.

Depending on the individual clinical situation the clinical management may include the following:

Physical and occupational therapy

Speech therapy

Orthotics or a wheelchair

A percutaneous gastric tube

Ventilatory support
