Due to the difference in severity, treatment strategies for ARO and ADOII differ. IAO lies between these two forms and has a variable prognosis. Therefore, treatment options must be evaluated on an individual basis.

ARO

Hypocalcemic convulsions, occurring in a substantial number of neonates as the first disease manifestation, should be treated by calcium supplementation. The management of calcium homeostasis may be difficult and recommendations are conflicting: whereas physiologic doses of calcium and vitamin D have been used to treat children with osteopetrosis who have rickets, restriction of calcium and vitamin D has been used to prevent progression of disease and hypercalcemic crisis following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Treatment needs to take into account the particular situation of the affected individual.

Bone marrow failure may require erythrocyte or platelet transfusions (irradiated products). In the case of leukocytopenia and/or hypogammaglobulinemia, which may develop in a subset of individuals, antibiotics and immunoglobulins may be given in a prophylactic or therapeutic manner.

Newly diagnosed individuals should be transferred as soon as possible to a pediatric center experienced in allogeneic stem cell transplantation in this disease.

Sensory and neurologic manifestations require the collaboration of pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, ophthalmologists, and psychologists. Surgical decompression of the optic nerve, a difficult procedure, has been performed with some success to prevent vision loss [Hwang et al 2000].

Fractures require treatment and surveillance by an experienced bone surgeon or orthopedist in collaboration with the treating pediatrician.

Dental. Without HSCT, most children do not reach the age at which secondary dentition erupts. Children undergoing early HSCT may have normal secondary dentition despite defective primary dentition [Jälevik et al 2002].

In some cases, defective tooth eruption, ankylosis, abscesses, and the formation of cysts and fistulas may require surgical intervention. Special attention is required to prevent mandibular osteomyelitis and extreme brittleness of the alveolar bone [Luzzi et al 2006].

ADOII

Orthopedic treatment is often required for fractures and arthritis. Post-surgical complications such as delayed union or non-union of fractures and infections are common (50%) because of the brittleness of the bones. Fractures near joints may require total joint arthroplasty [Strickland & Berry 2005].
