Pharmacologic Therapy

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Although various medical therapies to alleviate symptoms and to stop or reverse the progression of liver damage have been tried, this disorder has, for the most part, been refractory to pharmacologic treatment. Standard treatments for pruritus associated with cholestasis (including choleretic agents such as phenobarbital and ursodeoxycholic acid [UDCA], cholestyramine, rifampin, antihistamines, carbamazepine, UV-B light therapy, and plasmapheresis) have been relatively ineffective in the long term. In addition, no data suggest that these therapies alter progression to end-stage liver disease.

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Some medications, including rifampicin, UDCA, and bile acid binding resin [Folvik et al 2012, Mizuochi et al 2012, Uegaki et al 2008] may have some efficacy.

Nutritional Therapy and Supplementation

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency

Special attention must be paid to nutritional therapy which includes infant formulas with significant proportions of medium chain triglycerides, which can be absorbed relatively independent of bile flow.

Nasogastric tube feeding has been useful in some infants.

Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation using special preparations of vitamin E (e.g., tocopheryl polyethylene glycol-1000 succinate) is useful in severe cholestasis. Individual supplementation may be required to insure adequate levels of fat-soluble vitamins.

Other Approaches

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Additional temporary approaches such as nasobiliary drainage [Stapelbroek et al 2006, Toros et al 2012] and extracorporeal liver support therapy [Huster et al 2001, Saich et al 2005, Walensi et al 2012] may hasten the end of an episode of cholestasis. Note: Because some of these studies involved individuals with a clinical – but not a molecular – diagnosis of BRIC, it is uncertain whether their disease was the result of pathogenic variants in ATP8B1 or in a different gene.

Interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids. Since liver damage in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is thought to result from a build-up of bile acids in the liver, surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids has been used as therapy. Such surgery can successfully reduce pruritus, with slowed or even reversed progression to hepatic fibrosis in some individuals [Felberbauer et al 2000, van Ooteghem et al 2002].

Surgical approaches reported to be successful in severe disease include [Hollands et al 1998, Ismail et al 1999, Rebhandl et al 1999, Melter et al 2000, Bustorff-Silva et al 2007, Clifton et al 2011]:

Partial external biliary diversion (PEBD) in which the gallbladder apex is anastomosed to one end of a segment of bowel while the other end is used to create a cutaneous stoma from which bile is then drained and discarded*, interrupts the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids and reduces pruritus. In some individuals it even slows or reverses progression to hepatic fibrosis. *PEBD includes cutaneous cholecystostomy, cholecysto-jejuno-cutaneostomy, cholecysto-appendico-cutaneostomy.

The internal biliary bypass approach of cholecystojejunocolic anastomosis.

Alternative surgical procedures include ileal exclusion, external diversion with a button device, and biliary diversion to the colon.

Note: Which surgical procedure is most helpful in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is unknown, although PEBD is the most commonly performed surgery. As most studies of responses to these procedures in individuals diagnosed with PFIC [Kaliciński et al 2003, Kurbegov et al 2003] have been performed in genetically uncharacterized patients, differences in response that may depend on which gene is mutated or on the severity of the functional effects of different pathogenic variants have not been assessed.

Liver transplantation (LTX). Individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency whose liver disease progresses to decompensated cirrhosis, may require LTX for long-term survival. Individuals whose disease does not respond to surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation may also be candidates for LTX.

In some individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency, LTX constitutes definitive therapy; however, in others secretory diarrhea in the absence of steatorrhea continues or worsens after LTX [Knisely 2004, Lykavieris et al 2003]. The diarrhea can be severe and may require intravenous fluid administration. Bile acid chelators [Egawa et al 2002] may ameliorate diarrhea after LTX, as they may divert bile produced by the allograft away from the native gut [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012]. Clonidine has palliated diarrhea after LTX in some patients [Kocoshis et al 2005].

Somatic growth failure can occur and may not be responsive to LTX.

Pancreatitis and steatohepatitis can occur after otherwise successful LTX [Egawa et al 2002, Lykavieris et al 2003, Miyagawa-Hayashino et al 2009, Davit-Spraul et al 2010, Hori et al 2011]. Steatohepatitis can be progressive and lead to cirrhosis. Both steatosis and diarrhea may respond when PEBD is used to divert the flow of bile from the allograft away from the native gut (which expresses functionally defective ATP8B1) [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012].

Extrahepatic manifestations. Persons with sensorineural hearing loss may require hearing aids [Stapelbroek et al 2009, Pawlikowska et al 2010].
