Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005].

For treatment of findings common to all

TRPV4-associated disorders

Sensorineural hearing loss. Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the extent of hearing loss and the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of management issues.)

Pain and depression. Symptomatic treatment

For the TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders the following are indicated:

Neuropathy

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity as needed [Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches, canes/walkers for gait stability, and wheelchairs

Exercise within the individual's capability (Many individuals remain physically active.)

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006]

Vocal cord involvement

Laryngeal surgery for vocal fold paresis (arytenoidectomy and tracheostomy)

Speech therapy

Respiratory dysfunction. Respiratory therapy/support (e.g., BiPAP)

For the TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias the following treatments may be indicated:

Physical therapy/exercise to maintain as much function as possible. Daily heel cord-stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.

Orthopedic evaluation with consideration of surgical intervention (i.e., spinal fusion) when kyphoscoliosis compromises pulmonary function and/or causes pain

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression. To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, it is preferred that intervention in children occur when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation. Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI. The patient should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression (which can influence physical function). Note that chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.
