Cognitive/behavioral. Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommended therapies include speech/language, physical, and occupational therapy. Consider hippotherapy (use of equine movement during speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy).

Verbal strengths can be used to assist in learning spatial tasks.

Phonics methods are recommended to teach reading [John & Mervis 2010].

Mastery of daily living skills contributes to adult well-being and should be encouraged.

Psychological evaluation, polysomnography, and psychiatric evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Behavior in young children may be addressed using techniques based on applied behavior analysis [Mervis & John 2010].

Behavioral counseling and psychotropic medication are often used to manage behavior problems, especially attention deficit disorder and anxiety, which require pharmacologic treatment in approximately 50% [Cherniske et al 2004].

Self-calming techniques can help manage anxiety.

Cardiovascular. Surgical correction of SVAS is performed in 20%-30% [Kececioglu et al 1993, Bruno et al 2003, Collins et al 2010b]. Surgical treatment of mitral valve insufficiency or renal artery stenosis may be required.

Hypertension is usually treated medically. In one series, calcium channel blockers were used successfully [Bouchireb et al 2010]. Antihypertensive therapy also results in improvement in vascular stiffness [Kozel et al 2014]. Lifelong monitoring of the cardiovascular system by a cardiologist familiar with treating WS is recommended.

Hypercalcemia. Management of hypercalcemia involves the following:

Hydration status should be assessed; increase water intake as indicated.

The diet should be adjusted with the help of a nutritionist so that the calcium intake is not higher than 100% of the recommended daily intake (RDI) [Ross et al 2011]. If the serum concentration of calcium remains elevated, dietary calcium should be reduced; but the serum concentration of calcium must be monitored. Parents should be counseled not to restrict dietary intake of calcium without medical supervision.

Vitamin supplements containing vitamin D should be avoided. If vitamin D deficiency is suspected, it is important to check vitamin D levels prior to initiating therapy, and calcium levels must be monitored during treatment. Absorption of calcium from the gut is increased in Williams syndrome (cause unknown) and vitamin D promotes calcium absorption.

Refractory hypercalcemia may be treated with oral steroids.

Intravenous pamidronate has been used successfully to treat infants with severe symptomatic hypercalcemia [Cagle et al 2004, Oliveri et al 2004].

Referral to an endocrinologist and/or nephrologist is recommended for treatment of persistent hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and/or nephrocalcinosis.

Eye, ear, nose, and throat. Hyperopia is treated with corrective lenses; strabismus is treated with patching of one eye or surgery; dacrostenosis is treated as in the general population.

Recurrent otitis media may be treated with tympanotomy tubes.

Hypersensitivity to sounds may be treated with ear protection when increased noise levels can be predicted.

Dental care may require assistance with daily brushing and flossing. Dental cleaning frequency should be increased to every four months in adolescents and adults. Orthodontic referral should be considered for treatment of malocclusion.

Gastrointestinal.The treatment of feeding problems in infancy and abdominal pain in children and adults depends on the cause (e.g., G-E reflux, hypercalcemia, hiatal hernia, and/or diverticulitis). Infants often benefit from feeding therapy.

Constipation must be aggressively managed at all ages due to the increased risk for early onset diverticulosis/diverticulitis. Treatment usually includes dietary increase in water and fiber followed by osmotic laxative treatment. Severe abdominal pain may indicate diverticulitis and/or intestinal perforation, which may occur at a young age in WS.

Urinary tract abnormalities. Individuals with febrile urinary tract infections will likely require investigation of the lower urinary tract such as voiding cystourethrogram to direct treatment.

Endocrine. Early puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist [Partsch et al 2002, Pober 2010]. Hypothyroidism is treated with oral thyroxine therapy; subclinical hypothyroidism typically is monitored but does not require treatment.
