Nutrition. Because of chromosome instability, vitamin E and folic acid supplementation in doses appropriate for body weight is recommended.

Infections. In individuals with severe humoral immunodeficiency and frequent infections, Ig replacement therapy should be considered.

Ig replacement is typically administered either intravenously (IVIg) or subcutaneously (SCIg).

The spectrum of recurrent infections in NBS is not opportunistic; therefore, the antibiotic selected should be appropriate for the microorganism being treated.

Malignancy. Standard treatment chemotherapy protocols for lymphoid malignancies in NBS need to be adopted according to individual tolerance [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Pastorczak et al 2016]. Treatment of affected individuals with solid tumors is also challenging. Radiotherapy of CNS tumors (medulloblastoma) caused severe complications and death in three individuals with NBS [Chrzanowska et al 1997, Bakhshi et al 2003, Distel et al 2003].

Although complete clinical remission (for >5 years) can be successfully achieved, in a proportion of affected individuals outcome is complicated by relapse or the development of a second malignancy [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Bienemann et al 2011].

For individuals who achieve first remission, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) may be considered:

The first successful bone marrow transplantation was performed in an individual with NBS who was initially misdiagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA) [Gennery et al 2004, Gennery et al 2005].

Wolska-Kuśnierz et al [2015] summarized the results of HSCT in 14 individuals with NBS, nine of whom were alive [Gennery et al 2005, New et al 2005, Albert et al 2010].

Woźniak et al [2015] reported the successful use of non-myeloablative umbilical cord transplantation in a child age 19 months with NBS and severe combined immune deficiency.

Further long-term follow up is needed to determine the outcome of HSCT in individuals with NBS.

Puberty and fertility. Females with NBS who are of pubertal age should be referred for evaluation by a gynecologist and/or endocrinologist to evaluate for hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.

Hormonal replacement therapy should be considered with careful monitoring of secondary sexual characteristics and uterus development.

Females are infertile; similarly, no male paternity has been reported.
