For a comprehensive summary of the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, see Levitt [2008] (full text). The principles of treatment are summarized in Table 7.

Table 7. 

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Goal

Means

Practical Details

To avoid triggering or aggravating factors for paralytic attacks

Avoid:

Strenuous effortProlonged immobilityCarbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggersProvide dietary review/counseling

Treatment of paralytic attack:

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episodeNormalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassiumOral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvementIV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Preventive treatment for paralytic attacks

Daily K+ supplementation

Slow-release forms of potassium may be used

Diamox (acetazolamide)

K+-sparing diuretics

Preventive treatment for late-onset myopathy

Diamox (acetazolamide)?

Medical precautions

Avoid corticosteroids if possibleUse alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Other elements of management

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficitAdaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Strenuous effort

Prolonged immobility

Carbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggers

Provide dietary review/counseling

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episode

Normalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)

Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassium

Oral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvement

IV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Avoid corticosteroids if possible

Use alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficit

Adaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Paralytic crisis. Treatment of the paralytic crisis is far from perfect, as the only tool is the administration of potassium by mouth or IV, which addresses the hypokalemia directly, but the weakness only indirectly. Resolution of muscle weakness and normalization of the serum concentration of potassium are not strictly parallel. The serum concentration of potassium may normalize before weakness begins to resolve.

During a paralytic attack, there is usually no true potassium depletion in the body (unless digestive or renal losses from another cause are associated), but there is a reversible transfer of potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular space. The global potassium pool (and especially the intracellular pool of the body) is conserved, and the goal of the treatment is to raise the blood potassium level just enough to trigger the shift to repolarization of skeletal muscle membrane, and the liberation of intracellularly sequestered potassium.

Mild to moderate paralytic episodes

Treatment may occur in a familial or non-medical setting if the diagnosis is well-established and the affected individual is able to manage paralytic episodes.

Rapid recovery is typically possible with oral intake of chloride potassium salts, either as capsules or liquid-containing vials. Aqueous potassium contained in vials may act more rapidly.

An initial intake of 1mEq/kg potassium chloride is often used (60 mEq; i.e., 4.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60-kg person).

A response (at least partial) should be seen after 30 minutes. If no improvement occurs after 30 minutes, an additional 0.3 mEq/kg can be administered (20 mEq; i.e., 1.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60 kg person).

Note: (1) Slow-release forms of potassium should be avoided during a paralytic attack. (2) Potassium ingesting should be followed by oral intake of water (e.g., 100 mL (4 oz) of water for each 20 mEq of potassium). (3) Liquids containing high sugar or sodium content should be avoided.

Severe paralytic episodes. If an affected individual has followed the instructions above for a mild to moderate attack and either no improvement or further aggravation is observed after an additional 30 minutes, medical supervision with measurement of serum potassium level should be considered.

The total dose of potassium taken over a 24-hr period for the treatment of an acute attack should not exceed 200 mEq.

During severe paralytic episodes or attacks associated with respiratory, swallowing, or speaking difficulties, or with signs of arrythmia, the affected individual must be transferred to hospital.

In the case of very low serum potassium and severe symptoms (airway compromise with ictal dysphagia, accessory respiratory muscle paralysis, arrhythmia associated with hypokalemia), intravenous potassium treatment should be initiated. Note the following critical points:

The concentration of intravenous potassium chloride solution should not exceed 40 mEq/L because of the risk for thrombophlebitis (the use of a central catheter is rarely necessary).

The solution should be given as a continuous infusion that does not exceed 0.3 mEq/kg/h of potassium (i.e., 18 mEq/h for a 60-kg person) because of the high risk for arrhythmia or cardiac arrest associated with faster infusions.

The physician should be aware that hyperkalemia may occur, as there is no true potassium depletion; a reverse shift of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular space occurs during the resolution of paralytic episode.

A Y-branched peripheral venous line containing potassium chloride should be branched to a perfusion of mannitol or normal saline (avoid glucose-containing solutions, which may enhance hypokalemia).

To prevent cardiac arrhythmias, it is important to monitor the electrocardiogram (ECG) before, during, and after treatment and to perform repeat assessments of blood potassium concentration:

A prominent increase in the amplitude of the U wave, triggered by hypokalemia, is associated with a higher susceptibility to the ventricular arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Some individuals exhibit serious arrhythmias with only mild hypokalemia.

Large and sharp T waves are a marker of hyperkalemia and may occur during and after recovery; they are associated with a risk for cardiac arrest.

Monitoring of ECG and blood potassium concentration must be continued some hours after normalization of the serum potassium concentration, in order to detect a relapse of hypokalemia or the development of hyperkalemia secondary to excessive potassium load.

Administration of supplemental potassium must be discontinued when the serum potassium concentration is normalized, even if weakness persists.

Attempting to abort paralytic attacks when they begin. Affected individuals are advised to keep a sufficient dose of potassium in various places (at the bedside, in pockets or handbags, in the car) so that when warning symptoms appear, the person can take potassium and possibly avoid a full-blown attack, which would usually occur within minutes [Levitt 2008]. It is also acknowledged that maintaining mild physical activity may abort attacks in some cases.

Myopathy. No curative treatment is known for fixed myopathy in HOKPP. The effects of muscle weakness are managed as in other disorders with similar manifestations.

Physiotherapy may help to maintain strength and motor abilities, especially after 40 years of age, when permanent muscle weakness is more often seen.

The physiotherapist must be aware of the following peculiarity of periodic paralysis: that sustained effort results in exacerbation of weakness. Therefore, self-managed exercise should be preferred to superimposed physiotherapy [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].
