Early diagnosis of at-risk family members may allow intervention before symptoms are present.

If born in the United States, sibs affected with SCD are diagnosed by universal newborn screening soon after birth (at which time referral to a pediatric hematologist is appropriate). Many states also identify sickle cell trait on newborn screening.

If newborn screening data is not available for at-risk sibs, several diagnostic approaches can be considered.

If the HBB pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the gold standard is a combination of HPLC or isoelectric focusing combined with a CBC and reticulocyte count. As microcytosis helps guide interpretation of results, a measure of iron status such as a ZPP (zinc protoporphyrin) test or serum iron and TIBC (total iron binding capacity) is of benefit.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy complications in SCD can be minimized with close follow up and collaboration between hematology and obstetric teams [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. Pregnancy in women with SCD involves increased risk for thrombosis, infectious complications, and acute painful episodes [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. There is conflicting information as to whether the risks for preeclampsia, eclampsia, pre-term labor, and maternal death are increased [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. The risk of pregnancy complications increases when access to prenatal care is limited, reinforcing the importance of close hematologic and obstetric follow up [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. The benefits of a chronic transfusion program versus the use of “as-needed” transfusions has not been established [Okusanya and Oladapo 2016]. As hydroxyurea is recommended for (and increasingly used in) adults, the current recommendation is that it be discontinued during pregnancy. While reports of human infants exposed prenatally to hydroxyurea have not noted an increased risk of malformations, in experimental animal models hydroxyurea has been noted to lead to an increase in congenital anomalies. The role of chronic transfusions in lieu of hydroxyurea needs to be addressed.

More than 99% of births to women with SCD occurring after 28 weeks’ gestation are live births with normal Apgar scores [Smith et al 1996]. Several studies have reported increased rates of low birth weight and intrauterine growth retardation in babies born to women with SCD [Hassell 2005]. Attention to postnatal opiate withdrawal in the babies of mothers treated with high-dose opiates during pregnancy is warranted.

Infants with SCD are asymptomatic in the antenatal, perinatal, and immediate postnatal periods; they manifest disease symptoms when fetal hemoglobin production switches to adult hemoglobin.
