It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the PAX2 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, dilated ophthalmologic examination and renal ultrasound examination, tests of renal function, urinalysis, and blood pressure evaluation should be performed.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

It is important that a female who has a pathogenic variant have a thorough renal evaluation prior to becoming pregnant. Individuals with clinical renal disease should consult with appropriate professionals including nephrologists and maternal fetal medicine specialists to establish a plan for medical management during pregnancy.

Pregnancies at 50% risk for renal coloboma syndrome should be monitored for fetal renal function. Comprehensive ultrasound in the second trimester is recommended to evaluate fetal renal anatomy. Ongoing monitoring for oligohydramnios in the second and third trimesters is recommended in at-risk pregnancies.

Eighteen individuals with pathogenic variants have been reported to have prenatal ultrasound abnormalities including oligohydramnios/anhydramnios, cystic renal dysplasia, multicystic dysplastic kidneys, and renal hypoplasia [Bower et al 2012]. Seven fetuses with a confirmed PAX2 pathogenic variant and severe prenatal renal failure (Potter sequence) have been reported [Martinovic-Bouriel et al 2010, Bower et al 2012]. In addition, four cases of severe prenatal renal failure have been reported in families with renal coloboma syndrome in which the presence of the familial pathogenic variant could not be verified in the affected fetus [Ford et al 2001, Bower et al 2012]. In several instances, parents with mild renal disease had pregnancies where the fetus presented with severe renal disease in utero.
