Recommended genetic testing for at-risk family members. Early recognition of APC-associated polyposis conditions may allow for timely intervention and improved final outcome; thus, surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk children for early manifestations is appropriate; see Syngal et al [2015] (full text), NCCN [2016].

Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members (see Genetic Counseling) improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant. A cost analysis comparing molecular genetic testing and sigmoidoscopy screening for individuals at risk for APC-associated polyposis conditions shows that genetic testing is more cost effective than sigmoidoscopy in determining who in the family is affected [Cromwell et al 1998]. Additionally, individuals diagnosed with APC-associated polyposis conditions as a result of having an affected relative have a significantly greater life expectancy than those individuals diagnosed on the basis of symptoms [Heiskanen et al 2000].

As colon screening for those at risk for FAP begins as early as age ten to 12 years, molecular genetic testing is generally offered to children at risk for FAP by age ten years. Genetic testing at birth may also be warranted, as some parents and pediatricians may consider hepatoblastoma screening from infancy to age five years in affected offspring. Colon screening for those with attenuated FAP begins in late teenage years; thus, molecular genetic testing may be delayed until that time.

Note: No evidence points to an optimal age at which to begin screening; thus, the ages at which testing is performed and screening initiated may vary by center, family history, hepatoblastoma screening, and/or the needs of the parents and/or child.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy/fertility/hormone use. Limited information is available on the effect of pregnancy on females with FAP. In one study of 58 Danish women with FAP including 16 who had undergone colonic surgery, the same frequency of fertility, pregnancy, and delivery was observed as in a control population [Johansen et al 1990]. A larger study of 162 women with FAP compared fertility rates before and after two types of colorectal surgery with a control population. Women with FAP who had not yet undergone surgery had the same fertility as a control population of normal women. Additionally, those women with FAP who had a colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA) had the same fertility as the control population. Fertility was significantly reduced in women with FAP who had a proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) compared to the control population [Olsen et al 2003].

In another study, the prevalence of self-reported fertility problems was similar among individuals with FAP who had undergone IRA, IPAA, or proctocolectomy with ileostomy [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010]. However, those who had their first surgical procedure at a younger age had more postoperative fertility problems [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010].

Little evidence supports an association between desmoid tumor development or growth and pregnancy [Sinha et al 2011].

Women who have undergone colectomy are considered to be at the same risk for obstetric complications as any other woman who has had major abdominal surgery and are more likely to be delivered by C-section than those without such surgery.

As anti-estrogen medications have been successfully used in the treatment of desmoid tumors, the development of desmoid tumors is thought to be affected by hormones important in pregnancy. However, one study has shown that women who had a previous pregnancy and developed a desmoid tumor had significantly fewer complications from the desmoid tumor than those who had never had a pregnancy [Church & McGannon 2000].

In a study of women with FAP at the time of their colectomy, no association was found between pregnancy history and colonic polyp severity; however, the proportion of parous women with severe duodenal disease was significantly higher than the proportion of nulliparous women [Suraweera et al 2007].

Some studies have suggested that female hormones protect against colorectal cancer development in the general population. In one woman, reduction in polyps after use of oral contraceptives was observed [Giardiello et al 2005].
