It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

In families in which findings suggest JPS or families with a known BMPR1A pathogenic variant, evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing in the first to second decade of life if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the familial pathogenic variant is not known, CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations).

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant:

Molecular genetic testing before age 15 years for children at risk for an SMAD4 pathogenic variant should be offered because the surveillance for HHT-related findings begins earlier in childhood than the surveillance for polyps.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome but the familial pathogenic variant is not known:

CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations).

Individuals older than age 40 years, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT. The absence of mild but recurrent epistaxis and subtle telangiectases in characteristic locations on careful examination is reassuring (see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia).

In individuals age 40 years and younger, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT as well as initial evaluation for brain and pulmonary AVMs, as features of HHT may not be identified by medical history and clinical examination in younger individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

See Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia, Pregnancy Management
