If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, use molecular genetic testing to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives to allow for early diagnosis and treatment, perhaps even before symptoms occur. Note: Plasma concentrations of ornithine and urinary excretion of orotic acid and homocitrulline may be unreliable in asymptomatic persons.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in a woman with HHH syndrome has not been published. Rebecca Mardach, MD (Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles) provided information to the authors about a healthy boy born after an uneventful pregnancy to a clinically asymptomatic woman in her early 20s who had been diagnosed with HHH syndrome at age 13 years in the course of evaluation of her affected five-year-old sib [Camacho et al 2006]. During her pregnancy the mother was maintained on a protein and citrulline regimen that allowed normal fetal development and maternal health; plasma and urine amino acids, orotic acid, plasma ammonia, and urine organic acids were monitored.

There are no well-controlled epidemiologic studies of the fetal effects of sodium benzoate, phenylacetate, or phenylbutyrate during human pregnancy. However, sodium benzoate has been reported to lead to malformations and neurotoxicity/nephrotoxicity in zebrafish larvae [Tsay et al 2007] and to possible teratogenicity in rats [Minor & Becker 1971, Onodera et al 1978]. As a known differentiating agent, sodium phenylbutyrate also functions as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with potential teratogenicity given its ability to alter gene expression in fetal mice [Di Renzo et al 2007].

The FDA has assigned sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate to pregnancy category C (“potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks”). Theoretically, the use of benzoate/phenylacetate and in particular sodium phenylbutyrate should be avoided during pregnancy, especially during the first trimester. The use of these medications should be carefully evaluated for each individual (benefit/risk ratio) in consultation with a metabolic genetics specialist. Despite the report of successful administration of sodium phenybutyrate to an OTC-deficient woman throughout her 11- to 33-week gestation period, caution is advised and the alternate use of sodium benzoate, if deemed necessary, is recommended [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000]. Mendez-Figueroa et al [2010] reported a small number of females with OTC deficiency who successfully completed their pregnancies without need of ammonia removal medications. This study also reported the use of sodium benzoate to manage a pregnant woman with OTC deficiency who developed mild hyperammonemia during induction of labor.

No specialized care for a fetus known to have HHH syndrome is warranted.
