Once a diagnosis of JHH has been made in a family, all at-risk family members (i.e., sibs) should be tested for the pathogenic variants identified in the affected individual. Family members with two HJV or HAMP pathogenic variants should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload.

If a molecular diagnosis was not made or the genetic status of the sibs of an affected individual is unknown, the sibs should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload.

If juvenile hemochromatosis is detected before evidence of organ damage, either by molecular genetic testing in relatives at-risk or by biochemical testing (i.e., serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation), treatment via phlebotomy can reverse or prevent many of the secondary complications resulting from organ damage.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

All pregnant women with JHH should be under the care of a maternal-fetal medicine specialist, an endocrinologist, and a cardiologist. Preferably women with JHH should be seen by these specialists prior to becoming pregnant.

Pregnancy in women with untreated JHH is high risk because the increased hemodynamic burden of pregnancy can precipitate cardiac failure in women with an underlying cardiomyopathy. Of note, it is critically important for specialists in endocrinology and infertility to be aware of JHH as a cause of infertility and to evaluate patients for iron overload prior to correcting the underlying hormonal imbalance. In a case report, a young woman who became pregnant following correction of her hypogonadotropic hypogonadism developed fatal cardiogenic shock; she was only identified as having JHH with severe iron overload at the time of presentation of her heart disease [Filali et al 2004].
