The CDC has classified FH as a Tier 1 condition indicating a significant benefit from performing family-based cascade screening using cholesterol testing with or without DNA analysis on relatives of affected persons with FH in order to identify previously unknown cases of FH and provide those people with life-saving treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of relatives at risk for FH can reduce morbidity and mortality [Goldberg et al 2011, Ned & Sijbrands 2011, Reiner et al 2011].

The genetic status of at-risk family members can be clarified by EITHER of the following:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member

Measurement of LDL-C level. Table 4 provides age-specific total cholesterol and LDL-C levels [Williams et al 1993]. Note: Age-specific LDL cut-offs are also available based on more contemporary data from the United Kingdom [Starr et al 2008].

Table 4. 

Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH

Degree of Relatedness to an Affected Individual

First Degree 1

Second Degree 2

Third Degree 3

Cholesterol Levels

Total Cholesterol (LDL Cholesterol) in mg/dL

Age

<20

220 (155)

230 (165)

240 (170)

20-29

240 (170)

250 (180)

260 (185)

30-39

270 (190)

280 (200)

290 (210)

40+

290 (205)

300 (215)

310 (225)

1. 

A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.

2. 

An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.

3. 

A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.

Total and LDL Cholesterol Levels in Heterozygotes for FH Based on Degree of Relatedness to an Individual with FH

A parent, sib, or child. First-degree relatives share about half of their genes.

An uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, or half-sib. Second-degree relatives share about one quarter of their genes.

A first cousin, great-grandparent, or great-grandchild. Third-degree relatives share about one eighth of their genes.

Of note, all national and international guidelines for FH call for “cascade testing” of relatives at risk (i.e., systematic testing of first- and second-degree relatives of the index case [proband]). Evidence supports the use of genetic testing in cascade testing algorithms to improve the detection of FH [DeMott et al 2008, Wierzbicki et al 2008, Wald et al 2016].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Statins are contraindicated during pregnancy; women with FH who are considering a pregnancy should be counseled of this risk and statins should be discontinued prior to conception.

Pregnant women should incorporate all the other recommended lifestyle changes including low saturated and trans unsaturated fat intake, no smoking, and high dietary soluble fiber intake (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pharmacologic treatment

during pregnancy

Statins are contraindicated in pregnancy due to concerns for teratogenicity. The use of statins during human pregnancy has not definitively been associated with adverse fetal outcome; however, the role of cholesterol in embryologic development has led to theoretic concerns about the effect of these medications on a developing fetus and a recommendation that alternative medications be considered during pregnancy and lactation. Nursing mothers should not take statins.

Bile acid binding resins (colesevelam, cholestyramine) are generally considered safe (Class B for pregnancy). Based primarily on animal studies, cholestyramine use during pregnancy has not been associated with an increased risk of fetal anomalies. However, use of cholestyramine could theoretically cause depletion of maternal fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin K.

LDL apheresis is also occasionally used.

Regarding other agents:

PCSK9 inhibitors. Use during pregnancy has not been well studied.

Ezetimibe. Use during human pregnancy has not been well studied.

Niacin. The use of pharmacologic doses of niacin, an essential vitamin, has not been studied in human pregnancy. The recommended upper limit of niacin intake during pregnancy is 30-35 mgs/day; higher doses have been associated with toxicity.
