The genetic status of asymptomatic at-risk family members can be established using molecular genetic testing. However, as there is no clinical evidence that early diagnosis reduces morbidity or mortality, the indications for family testing are unresolved and the decision to test at-risk family members should be made on an individual basis [Segal et al 2009].

Clarification of 20210G>A allele status may be useful in:

Asymptomatic adult family members of probands with one or two known 20210G>A alleles, especially those with a strong family history of VTE at a young age;

Asymptomatic female family members of probands with known prothrombin-related thrombophilia who are pregnant or considering estrogen contraception or pregnancy.

There is no clinical evidence to support testing asymptomatic children with a family history of thrombosis and/or inherited thrombophilia. Guidelines suggest delaying testing until children are able to understand the implications of the results and (optimally) can give informed consent for testing [Chalmers et al 2011].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No consensus exists on the optimal management of prothrombin thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are derived from studies in non-pregnant individuals [Kujovich 2004a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]; see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements. LMWH is the preferred antithrombotic agent for prophylaxis during pregnancy. All women with inherited thrombophilia should undergo individualized risk assessment. Decisions about anticoagulation should be based on the number and type of thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is recommended for all women:

With a history of unprovoked VTE, including those heterozygous for 20210G>A. LMWH should be given during pregnancy followed by six weeks of postpartum anticoagulation [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Heterozygous for the 20210G>A allele with a prior pregnancy or estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, De Stefano et al 2006, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Should be considered for:

Asymptomatic women doubly heterozygous for 20210G>A and factor V Leiden, especially those with coexisting circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b];

Asymptomatic homozygous women with a family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis or other risk factors. These women should be counseled about potential thrombotic complications during pregnancy and the postpartum period [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

In two large prospective studies, low-risk asymptomatic women with thrombophilia (including 20210G>A heterozygosity) did not receive LMWH during pregnancy in the absence of additional risk factors. All women received a course of postpartum anticoagulation. The low incidence of antepartum VTE in both studies (0% and 0.34%) suggested that anticoagulation may be safely withheld during pregnancy in low-risk 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not have other risk factors [Bauersachs et al 2007, Dargaud et al 2009].

A six-week course of postpartum prophylactic anticoagulation is recommended for:

Heterozygous women with a positive family history of VTE or other additional risk factors;

All asymptomatic homozygous women;

All women with a prior history of VTE [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Prevention of pregnancy loss. It is still unkown if prophylactic antithrombotic therapy improves pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss. The available evidence consists of predominantly uncontrolled trials, observational studies, and a few randomized trials with important methodologic limitations. There are no prospective randomized trials that include an untreated control group that confirms the benefit of LMWH for preventing pregnancy loss in women with inherited thrombophilia. Of note, the ALIFE2 study, a multicenter randomized trial of LMWH versus standard surveillance in women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of recurrent miscarriage, began recruitment in December 2012 (www.trialregister.nl, NTR 3361).

Current consensus guidelines and expert opinion recommend against the use of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss outside of clinical trials because of the absence of high quality evidence confirming benefit [Baglin et al 2010, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011b, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b, Middeldorp 2013].

Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation improves pregnancy outcome:

The results of several observational studies suggested that prophylactic antithrombotic therapy may improve pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss [Brenner et al 2000, Carp et al 2003].

A recent study of women with a history of unexplained pregnancy loss compared the frequency of obstetric complications in women with factor V Leiden or 20210G>A alleles and women without thrombophilia. Women with a thrombophilic disorder with a prior fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation who received enoxaparin during their next pregnancy had a significantly lower rate of fetal loss and severe preeclampsia and a higher rate of live births compared to women without a thrombophilic disorder with the same obstetric history who did not receive prophylaxis [Bouvier et al 2014].

A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women heterozygous for 20210G>A, factor V Leiden, or protein S deficiency, and a history of a single unexplained fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin. However, there were methodologic problems with this study and the results have not been confirmed in other trials.

Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation does not improve pregnancy outcome:

Several studies found no benefit with LMWH on pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia [Laskin et al 2009, Warren et al 2009, Visser et al 2011].

Two recent randomized trials compared the efficacy of LMWH and aspirin to no antithrombotic therapy or placebo in women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. Combined LMWH and low-dose aspirin did not increase the live birth rate in either study [Clark et al 2010, Kaandorp et al 2010]. Because only a small proportion of the study populations had inherited thrombophilia (3.5% and 15.7%), subgroup analyses were insufficiently powered to assess the effect of antithrombotic therapy.

In the recent Thrombophilia in Pregnancy Prophylaxis Study (TIPPS) multinational randomized trial, antepartum prophylactic LMWH did not reduce the incidence of pregnancy loss or placenta-mediated complications in pregnant women with thrombophilia (22% with a 20210G>A allele) who are at high risk for these complications [Rodger et al 2014].

Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited and also conflicting [Gris et al 2011, de Vries et al 2012, Martinelli et al 2012]. There is insufficient evidence that LMWH (with or without aspirin) reduces the risk for preeclampsia, placental abruption, or other obstetric complications in women with or without inherited thrombophilia. Current guidelines recommend against antithrombotic prophylaxis for women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of pregnancy complications [Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].
