It is appropriate to evaluate both symptomatic and apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of screening and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Brain and/or spinal cord MRI imaging including GRE or SWI if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant women with FCCM who have had recent brain or spinal cord hemorrhage, epilepsy, or migraine will require closer observation during pregnancy. Baseline MRI one year prior to delivery is recommended to determine lesion locations [De Jong et al 2012, Witiw et al 2012, Yamada et al 2013].

Simonazzi et al [2014] reported six women with CCM who had symptoms such as seizure or focal neurologic deficit during pregnancy or within six weeks post-delivery. Reviewing the literature they found ten further cases in which pregnancy outcome was published. Of the 16 women, hemorrhage occured in ten. Preterm delivery occurred in four of six cases, one because of neurologic symptoms at 30 weeks. Cæsarean (C-)section was performed in nine cases, eight of which were for concern over CCM.

Affected women and obstetricians are frequently concerned that the risk of increased blood pressure and intrathoracic pressure during stage 3 labor (pushing phase) could lead to CCM hemorrhage. However, in a study of 168 pregnancies (64 women), 28 with sporadic CCM and 36 with FCCM, only five symptomatic cerebral hemorrhages were reported, most commonly manifesting as seizures. Nineteen deliveries in this study were by C-section, mostly due to fear of possible intracranial hemorrhage. The risk of CCM hemorrhage was higher in the familial cases (3.6% compared with 1.8% in sporadic cases) [Kalani & Zabramski 2013].

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, visit MotherToBaby.
