Relatives of an individual with Marfan syndrome should be evaluated for signs of the disorder. Molecular genetic evaluation of relatives at risk is possible if the FBN1 pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband.

Echocardiography of relatives is indicated upon appreciation of any suspicious signs of Marfan syndrome, and even in apparently unaffected individuals if findings are subtle in the index case. It is generally appropriate to delay echocardiography for infants and toddlers until they can cooperate with the examination without needing sedation. Exceptions include those with evidence of valve dysfunction and/or congestive heart failure.

Note: All first-degree relatives of an individual with apparent isolated aortic enlargement should be evaluated by echocardiography.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy should only be considered after appropriate counseling from a clinical geneticist or cardiologist familiar with this condition, a genetic counselor, and a high-risk obstetrician because of the risk of more rapid dilation of the aorta or aortic dissection either during pregnancy or delivery, or in the immediate postpartum period. This is especially relevant to women who begin pregnancy with a maximal aortic dimension that exceeds 4.0 cm. Note: Some women with Marfan syndrome and aortic root dilatation opt for elective aortic repair with a valve-sparing procedure prior to reaching a conventional threshold for surgical intervention (i.e. at a root dimension <5.0cm) before becoming pregnant.

Pregnant women with Marfan syndrome should be followed by a high risk obstetrician both during pregnancy and through the immediate postpartum period.

In women with Marfan syndrome who anticipate pregnancy or become pregnant, beta blockers should be continued, but some other classes of medications such as ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers should be stopped because of the risk for fetal loss and birth defects.

Effort should be made to minimize cardiovascular stress through pregnancy and delivery.

Cardiovascular imaging with echocardiography should be performed every two to three months during pregnancy to monitor aortic root size and growth. Monitoring should continue in the immediate postpartum period due to an increased risk for aortic dissection.

The choice between a controlled vaginal delivery and cesarean section remains controversial.
