Guidelines for surveillance are incorporated into the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical report [Trotter et al 2005].

Growth. Monitor height and weight at each physician contact using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978, Hoover-Fong et al 2007]

Development. Screening of developmental milestones throughout infancy and early childhood should be performed and compared with those specific for achondroplasia [Fowler et al 1997, Ireland et al 2010].

Head growth and risk for hydrocephalus

Complete baseline CT scan (or MRI) of the brain in infancy

Monitoring of head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978] throughout childhood

Craniocervical junction

Every infant should have a CT scan (or MRI) of the craniocervical junction in infancy, with comparison of foramen magnum size to diagnostic-specific standards [Hecht et al 1989].

Overnight polysomnography should also be completed in infancy and interpreted with consideration of features important in assessing the craniocervical junction [Pauli et al 1995].

Neurologic examination including for signs of cervical myelopathy should be incorporated into each physical examination in infancy and childhood.

Sleep apnea

Inquiry should be made regarding signs and symptoms of sleep apnea.

If worrisome nighttime or daytime features arise, then polysomnography should be completed.

Ears and hearing

In addition to newborn screening, each infant should have tympanometric and behavioral audiometric evaluation by age approximately one year.

Evidence for middle ear problems or hearing loss should be sought throughout childhood.

Kyphosis

The spine of the infant and child should be clinically assessed every six months until age three years.

If severe kyphosis appears to be developing, radiologic assessment is needed (lateral in sitting or standing, depending on age, and lateral cross-table prone or cross-table supine over a bolster).

Legs. Clinical assessment for development of bowing and/or internal tibial torsion should be part of each physical assessment.

Spinal stenosis. Because adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk for spinal stenosis, a clinical history and neurologic examination is warranted every three to five years once the person with achondroplasia reaches adulthood.

Adaptation to difference. Inquiry regarding social adjustment should be part of each primary physician contact.
