Clinicians and families need to be aware that currently no monitoring regimens have been definitively proven as beneficial for children or adults with germline TP53 pathogenic variants. Nonetheless, this is an important area of ongoing investigation.

The following is recommended:

Children and adults should undergo comprehensive annual physical examination including careful skin and neurologic examinations. Clinicians should be aware of the high risks for rare, early-onset cancers and also for second malignancies in cancer survivors [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should pay close attention to any lingering symptoms and illnesses, particularly headaches, bone pain, or abdominal discomfort. When present, the individual should see a physician promptly for evaluation [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

Women should undergo breast cancer monitoring, with annual breast MRI and twice-yearly clinical breast examination beginning at age 20-25 years. The use of mammograms has been controversial because of radiation exposure and limited sensitivity. When included, annual mammograms should alternate with breast MRI, with one modality every six months [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

The following is suggested:

Adults should consider routine screening for colorectal cancer with colonoscopy every two to three years beginning no later than age 25 years [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should consider organ-targeted surveillance based on the pattern of cancer observed in their family [NCCN 2012].

In adults with LFS, a pilot trial of screening [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scans detected tumors in three of 15 individuals. However, significant concerns were raised regarding the potential adverse consequences of the radiation exposure associated with PET/CT scans [Masciari et al 2008]. For this reason, attention has shifted to the utilization of whole-body MRI for adults with TP53 pathogenic variants.

Several groups have begun to utilize an intensive screening strategy including rapid whole-body MRI, brain MRI, abdominal ultrasound examination, and biochemical markers of adrenal cortical function. Preliminary data suggest that such a surveillance protocol may improve survival of individuals with LFS through presymptomatic detection of tumors [Villani et al 2011]. However, further prospective studies are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of this protocol in adults and children with LFS.

Individuals with LFS have been surveyed regarding their attitudes toward cancer surveillance, given its lack of known clinical benefit. Most individuals believed in the value of surveillance to detect tumors at an early stage and also reported psychological benefits (specifically, a sense of control and security) associated with participation in a regular surveillance program [Lammens et al 2010b].
