Skeletal dysplasia

Children with CHH require annual measurement of linear growth and body proportions; comparison with published disease-specific growth curves [Mäkitie et al 1992a] is helpful.

Pubertal development should be monitored during yearly follow-up visits and hypogonadism excluded if puberty is significantly delayed.

Clinical assessment for deformities of the lower extremities and joints is appropriate. Radiographic evaluation and orthopaedic consultation is necessary if symptomatic misalignment, restricted knee or hip mobility, or symptomatic joint laxity is present.

Individuals with AD require annual clinical and radiographic monitoring of the spine.

Anemia

Observe for clinical signs of anemia starting from the time of the initial diagnosis until early adolescence.

Follow RBC, hematocrit, and hemoglobin levels in those in remission after treatment for anemia at least every six months or when clinical signs of anemia reappear.

Note: (1) No data are available on the likely timing of recurrence of anemia after successful treatment; (2) severe anemia in adolescents and adults with CHH can be the presenting symptom of malignancy and may require extensive investigations with bone marrow evaluation and imaging studies.

Immunodeficiency and infection

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to infection in children, ongoing follow up by physicians with experience in this condition is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of infection.

Particularly in the first two years of life, children with normal initial immunologic assessment should be monitored for recurrent infections, especially life-threatening varicella infections [Notarangelo et al 2008, Rider et al 2009].

Laboratory markers for immunodeficiency may fluctuate in children with CHH, thus emphasizing the need for regular yearly follow up [Kainulainen et al 2014].

Bronchiectasis should be suspected especially in subjects with frequent respiratory tract infections and combined immune deficiency; high-resolution computed tomography should be used for diagnosis [Toiviainen-Salo et al 2008].

Malignancy

Although no specific recommendations exist, it is advised that children be checked on a regular basis (once yearly) by their pediatrician or primary healthcare provider for lymphomas and other associated malignancies by careful clinical examination and routine blood tests.

Skin should be inspected for abnormal changes, lymph nodes for enlargement, and abdomen for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or other abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at a regular one- to two-year interval, as well as yearly laboratory tests including blood counts with differential, LDH, and uric acid.

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to malignancy in adults, ongoing regular follow up beyond adolescence is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of malignancy, as described above. The frequency of follow-up visits need to be determined on an individual basis.
