Individuals with known VHL syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations but identified as having a VHL pathogenic variant, and first-degree relatives who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team familiar with the spectrum of VHL syndrome.

Annual evaluation starting at age one year for neurologic symptoms, vision problems or hearing disturbance

Annual examination starting at age one year for signs of nystagmus, strabismus, or white pupils

Annual blood pressure monitoring starting at age one year

Monitoring for complications is as follows:

CNS lesions. MRI of the brain and total spine every two years starting at age 16 years. Attention should be given to the inner ear/petrous temporal bone (for ELST) and the posterior fossa.

Visceral lesions. Annual abdominal ultrasound; MRI scan of the abdomen (kidney, pancreas and adrenal glands) every two years starting at age 16 years

Retinal angiomas. Annual ophthalmology evaluation with indirect ophthalmoscope starting at age one year

Pheochromocytoma. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines starting at age five years

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). The best way to detect ELST is unknown.

ELST presents as a mass on the posterior wall of the petrous part of the temporal bone and can be missed on standard MRI. MRI with contrast and high signal intensity with T1 (to detect hydrops), using thin slices of the internal auditory canal is recommended in symptomatic individuals. Butman et al [2013] found that FLAIR MRI is useful to find ELST-associated hydrops.

Butman et al [2013] described three pathophysiologic ways in which ELST can cause symptoms: optic capsule invasion, hemorrhage, and endolymphatic hydrops. Symptoms can be caused by all three mechanisms and hemorrhage or hydrops can be present even without any lesion being visible on MRI (<3 mm).

Audiology assessment every two to three years (annually if hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo is present) starting at age five years. Audiology can be used to detect (early) hearing loss. Binderup et al [2013b] described a male patient with demonstrable hearing loss by audiometric data whose ELST was only detectable with MRI more than one year later, after the patient already suffered from complete right-sided hearing loss. Results from a large study on audiometric data in individuals with VHL are pending.

While current medical surveillance guidelines do not address structured psychological support for individuals with VHL, their partners, and their family members, research suggests a distinct need for psychosocial support [Lammens et al 2010, Lammens et al 2011b].

Note: The surveillance guidelines established for VHL are not evidence based and rely on experiential reporting, largely from North America. Guidelines may vary somewhat depending on the local standard of care.

In the United States, the VHL Alliance has worked extensively with healthcare professionals to assemble guidelines which are generally accepted throughout the world [VHL Handbook]. Other guidelines originate from Denmark and the Netherlands. For example, Dutch guidelines recommend screening for ELST only on indication. In addition, examination by a primary care physician and assessment of metanephrine levels start at age ten years, while ophthalmologic examination begins at age five years.

Two recent studies evaluated tumor progression. In one study, new tumor development was compared to age and genotype [Binderup et al 2013b]. According to their results, surveillance for retinal angiomas is essential during teenage years and central nervous system hemangioblastomas is mainly important in adults. In the other study, the optimal lesion-specific age to start surveillance and the optimal screening interval per organ system was analyzed [Kruizinga et al 2013]. The optimal time to start metanephrine measurements is age five years; retinal screening in patients with VHL can start at age 12 years. For central nervous system hemangioblastomas and visceral lesions, starting age was in line with current surveillance guidelines. Furthermore, to attain a 5% detection rate, surveillance intervals for retinal tumors can be twice as long, and for the adrenal gland, four times as long.

Improved surveillance guidelines have increased the life expectancy of individuals with VHL by more than 16 years since 1990 [Wilding et al 2012]. Two studies evaluated the implementation of national surveillance guidelines in Denmark and the Netherlands. One study showed that more than 90% of the 84 affected individuals included reported that they were familiar with their national VHL surveillance guidelines. However, daily practice showed that 64% of those individuals had received information that was only partially consistent with the Dutch guidelines [Lammens et al 2011a]. In a Danish study, compliance and frequency of follow up was surprisingly low with regard to the national VHL guidelines for individuals with VHL and subjects at risk [Bertelsen & Kosteljanetz 2011]. These studies collectively suggest that correct implementation of surveillance guidelines through a doctor- and patient-oriented information campaign could have an immediate positive impact for individuals with VHL.
