The following protocol is recommended for follow up of all individuals for whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite and for all individuals at risk for HHT based on family history in whom HHT has not been ruled out by molecular diagnosis [Faughnan et al 2011]:

Annual evaluation by a health care provider familiar with HHT, including interval history for epistaxis or other bleeding, shortness of breath or decreased exercise tolerance, and headache or other neurologic symptoms

Periodic hematocrit/hemoglobin and ferritin determination with appropriate treatment for iron deficiency anemia

Reevaluation for pulmonary AVM at approximately five-year intervals [Nawaz et al 2008]:

Contrast echocardiogram is used (if available) if the previous contrast echocardiogram did not reveal evidence of a pulmonary or intracardiac right to left shunt.

Chest CT with contrast rather than pulmonary angiography is used if the previous contrast echocardiogram revealed evidence of a right to left shunt.

Reevaluation for cerebral AVM. While cerebral AVMs are nearly always congenital, development or evolution of cerebral AVMs in the first two decades of life has been reported [Hetts et al 2014]. Accordingly, many HHT experts recommend rescreening the brain once more after puberty if the initial brain MRI was done in childhood.

Periodic screening for gastrointestinal polyps and malignant change in persons with juvenile polyps

Childhood

Because serious complications of pulmonary and cerebral AVM can occur at any age [Mei-Zahav et al 2006, Curie et al 2007], screening for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs is recommended in children from families with HHT, especially those with ENG pathogenic variants [Al-Saleh et al 2009].

Head MRI with and without gadolinium is recommended as early as the first few months of life [Faughnan et al 2011].

Pulse oximetry in the supine and sitting positions every one to two years during childhood is recommended as a minimum to screen for pulmonary AVMs. It may be of concern if the sitting value is even a few percentage points below that of the supine value. (Since most pulmonary AVMs are in the lower lobes, many individuals with pulmonary AVMs have higher oxygen saturation when lying than when sitting because of the effect of gravity.) Oxygen saturations below 97% should be followed up with contrast echocardiography. Many, but not all, serious complications of pulmonary AVM during childhood have occurred in hypoxemic children.

By at least age ten years, additional evaluation should be performed by contrast echocardiography, with a follow-up CT if positive.
