Physicians who are the US regional coordinators for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry (ICGG) and other groups have published recommendations for comprehensive serial monitoring of the severity and rate of disease progression [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004, Vom Dahl et al 2006]:

Medical history (at least every 6-12 months) including weight loss, fatigue, depression, change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities, bleeding from the nose or gums, menorrhagia, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, early satiety as a result of abdominal pressure, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (at least every 6-12 months) including: heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, evidence of bleeding (bruises, petechiae). In children, attention should be given to growth (height, weight, and head circumference using standardized growth charts) and pubertal changes (using the Tanner staging system). Neurologic evaluation is particularly important in the early detection of type 2 and type 3 disease in children. A severity scoring tool has been developed to evaluate neurologic features of neuronopathic GD [Davies et al 2007].

Assessment of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count (with frequency based on symptoms and treatment status). Hemoglobin, platelet count, and coagulation indices should also be assessed prior to surgical or dental procedures.

Other blood tests at the physician's discretion may include measurement of the following:

Serum concentrations of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferanse or alanine amino transferase), iron, ferritin, and vitamins B12 and D.

Plasma activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage-derived chitin-fragmenting hydrolase, and plasma concentration of PARC/CCL18. Levels are typically elevated, and are felt to correlate with body-wide burden of disease. An enzyme dose-dependent decrease in plasma chitotriosidase activity has been observed in affected individuals on ERT; however, up to 40% of affected individuals of European origin are homozygous or heterozygous for a common null variant, confounding interpretation of test results [Grace et al 2007].

Assessment of spleen and liver volumes by MRI or volumetric computed tomography (CT). Parenchymal abnormalities can be identified as well. In situations in which access to an MRI or CT is problematic, abdominal ultrasonography (US) may be performed. Abdominal US may provide information on organ volume and parenchymal abnormalities and also call attention to the presence of gallstones [Patlas et al 2002]. MRI or US are the preferred modalities in the pediatric population.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension. EKG and echocardiography with Doppler studies to identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure

Skeletal assessment

Plain radiographs of the femur (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view), and any symptomatic sites. Radiographs can reflect the status of both the compact/mineralized compartment and medullary compartment. In children, particularly those with signs of growth and pubertal delay, x-ray of the left hand and wrist to determine bone age is appropriate.

Coronal T1- and T2-weighted MR images of the hips to the distal femur. T1-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for following bone marrow infiltration. T2-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for detecting active bone infarcts, osteonecrosis, and osteomyelitis [Maas et al 2002b]. The developmental transition from cellular (red) to fatty (yellow) bone marrow, which normally occurs from childhood to early adulthood, may confound interpretation of the extent of long bone infiltration by Gaucher cells (lipid-engorged macrophages) in affected children younger than age 15 years [McHugh et al 2004]. Semiquantitative methods (BMB score and S-MRI score) have been developed to facilitate serial assessments [Robertson et al 2007, Roca et al 2007].

Other methods include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to identify osteoporosis and risk for pathologic fractures, technetium Tc-99 sulfur colloid nuclear scanning to assess location and extent of infiltration [Mariani et al 2003], and quantitative chemical-shift MRI or spectroscopy to quantify decrease in bone marrow fat content as a marker of bone marrow infiltration [Maas et al 2002a].

Assessment of disease severity. Two recent reports have delineated a means for scoring disease severity, incorporating standard assessments of disease severity [Di Rocco et al 2008, Weinreb et al 2010]. With increasing therapeutic options, the ability to benchmark response may inform the modality of choice and selected regimen [Weinreb et al 2008].
