Follow GSDI guidelines published recently through a group of experts in the field [Kishnani et al 2014].

Annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys for nephrocalcinosis should be initiated after the first decade of life.

Surveillance of the liver may include the following:

In younger children (age <16 years), liver ultrasound performed at diagnosis and thereafter every 12 to 24 months. In affected individuals who are 16 years and older, liver computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning using intravenous contrast should be done every six to 12 months to monitor for hepatic adenoma formation [Franco et al 2005].

Hepatic profile: serum AST, ALT, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR, and aPTT, and creatinine every six to 12 months to monitor for liver damage

When hepatic adenoma is detected. Abdominal CT/MRI with contrast should be performed in older individuals or individuals within the pediatric age group once adenomas are detected on ultrasound. Imaging should be repeated every 6-12 months or more often depending on laboratory and clinical findings. Liver imaging studies (MRI/CT scan) should evaluate liver size, adenomas, evidence of portal hypertension, or features suggestive of liver carcinoma (nodules, heterogeneous echogenic shadows) [Franco et al 2005].

Note: Serum AFP and CEA levels are not reliable markers of hepatocellular carcinoma [Shieh et al 2012].

For those individuals treated with G-CSF serial blood counts should be performed approximately every three months to assess response to treatment and, although the risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is low, to evaluate for the presence of myeloblasts in the blood. Any imaging performed for liver surveillance (e.g., ultrasound, CT, or MRI) should include measurements of the spleen to identify and monitor splenomegaly.

Cardiovascular surveillance

Systemic blood pressure measurements should be obtained at all clinic visits beginning in infancy.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension by echocardiography every three years beginning at age ten years (or earlier if symptoms are present) is appropriate.

25(OH)-vitamin D levels should be monitored routinely and treated as needed.
