No guidelines regarding surveillance of persons with AIP-related FIPA have been established. The following recommendations are based on the authors’ personal experience with more than 200 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic AIP-related FIPA.

Persons with AIP-related FIPA who have had a pituitary adenoma. The following are recommended to monitor for recurrence of the previous adenoma and development of new adenomas.

Yearly clinical assessment and basal pituitary function (IGF-1, spot GH, prolactin, LH/FSH, estradiol/testosterone, TSH, fT4, morning cortisol) and if necessary dynamic testing (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test) to evaluate for hormone excess or deficiency

Repeat pituitary MRI. Note: Frequency depends on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor, and treatment modality.

Persons with acromegaly. Follow established guidelines regarding clinical monitoring for related complications including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and colon cancer.

Persons with hypogonadism. Follow established guidelines. Because long-standing untreated hypogonadism may result in the early onset of osteoporosis, bone density needs to be assessed at baseline and if necessary monitored with DEXA scanning.

Persons with an AIP pathogenic variant and no history of pituitary adenomas. Recommendations follow. Note, however, that long-term experience with asymptomatic AIP heterozygotes is limited; more data are needed to develop appropriate future guidelines.

In a family in which an AIP pathogenic variant has been identified, relatives who have the family-specific AIP pathogenic variant or who have not been tested:

Adults

Baseline. Clinical assessment, pituitary function tests (IGF-1, prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, and fT4), and pituitary MRI

Thereafter

Perform annual clinical assessment and pituitary function tests.

Consider repeating a pituitary MRI every five years if clinical findings and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Consider discontinuing monitoring about age 50 years, after which the likelihood of developing new pituitary adenomas is low.

Children

Yearly beginning at age four years

Measure height and weight with calculation of height velocity. Document pubertal development, Tanner stages

Perform pituitary function tests (as for adults).

Perform baseline pituitary MRI at about age ten years.

Consider repeating the pituitary MRI every five years if clinical and pituitary function tests remain normal.
