Gastric Cancer

Although it has been proposed that individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant undergo routine surveillance for gastric cancer, the optimal management of individuals at risk for a gastric cancer is controversial because of the unproven value of surveillance regime. In most cases, the gastric cancer is not detected until it reaches an incurable, advanced stage. Samples obtained at the time of prophylactic gastrectomy of six asymptomatic individuals with a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant revealed occult disease on microscopic analysis even though each individual had had normal screening tests prior to surgery [Norton et al 2007].

Due to the highly penetrant nature of HDGC caused by a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant, it is recommended that at-risk individuals who are not ready to undergo PTG or who have declined it be screened every six to 12 months by upper endoscopy with multiple random biopsies [Norton et al 2007, Barber et al 2008, Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text). Screening should begin five to ten years prior to the earliest cancer diagnosis in the family.

Several screening modalities have been tested:

Endoscopy. The effectiveness of endoscopy (currently the only method in use) in detecting the early lesions of gastric cancer has not been proven. Endoscopy permits direct inspection and biopsy of suspicious areas; however, diffuse gastric cancer is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage because the lesions tend to spread in the submucosa rather than as exophytic masses. The submucosal lesions are difficult to identify; an additional challenge is sampling bias in a macroscopically normal-appearing gastric mucosa [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004, Norton et al 2007]. It is recommended that individuals at risk who do not wish to have prophylactic gastrectomy undergo a detailed 30-minute endoscopic examination of the gastric mucosa with multiple random biopsies and biopsies of subtle lesions at six- to 12-month intervals [Caldas et al 1999].

Chromoendoscopy, using indigo-carmine staining, has been shown to improve the detection rate of early gastric cancer [Stepp et al 1998, Fennerty 1999]. Charlton et al [2004] studied six stomachs removed prophylactically after macroscopically normal gastric endoscopies. A pH-sensitive Congo red dye followed by pentagastric stimulation revealed signet ring foci that were five times more prevalent in the transitional zone of the distal stomach, a finding in contrast with other studies [Carneiro et al 2004]. The transitional zone occupies less than 10% of the stomach and lacks gastric-secreting G cells. The authors suggest that chromoendoscopy using Congo red dye and pentagastric stimulation may highlight this area during endoscopy and thus increase the chances of detecting cancer foci. Further research is needed to evaluate this possibility.

The same group of investigators reported a year later on a follow up of 99 surveillance endoscopies over five years [Shaw et al 2005]:

69 of 99 (70%) endoscopies were normal.

23 lesions with signet ring cell cancer were identified in ten individuals.

The Congo red/methylene blue dye detected foci between 4 and 10 mm, not less than 4 mm.

These findings need to be evaluated in a larger group of heterozygotes for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. However, concerns over the toxicity of Congo red have precluded the use of this stain in chromoendoscopy.

Endoscopic ultrasound examination is important in the detection and staging of gastrointestinal cancers [Pfau & Chak 2002], but is not believed to be useful in detecting precursor lesions [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004].

Other. Several other tools utilized include PET scan [van Kouwen et al 2004], endoscopic ultrasound, stool for guaiac, abdominal CT, and multiple random stomach biopsies [Barber et al 2008]. However, none of these reliably detects DGC, as demonstrated by the finding – one week after a number of these screening investigations were performed – of multiple small cancer foci in six of six gastrectomy specimens from individuals who were heterozygous for a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Norton et al 2007].

Lobular Breast Cancer (LBC)

Currently the data on women with germline CDH1 pathogenic variants and development of lobular breast cancer are insufficient to determine the best cancer screening strategies. Recommendations for LBC risk management in CDH1 heterozygotes or at-risk women are based on recommendations for women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant (see BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer). At-risk women should undergo regular breast screening as determined by their physicians, including monthly breast self-examinations and a clinical breast examination every six months.

Because lobular breast cancer is often difficult to diagnose on clinical examination and mammography, it may also be prudent to refer a woman who has a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant to a high-risk breast cancer screening program and to consider use of MRI, which appears to be more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in such women [Schelfout et al 2004; Lehman 2006; Schelfout, personal communication].

The screening should begin by age 35 years or five to ten years prior to the youngest age of breast cancer diagnosis in the family [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Colon Cancer

Although evidence is insufficient to conclude that colon cancer is a manifestation of HDGC, it is prudent to recommend colonoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 40 years or ten years prior to the youngest age at diagnosis of colon cancer in families in which both DGC and colon cancer have occurred [Fitzgerald et al 2010].
