Early detection of hypertension. Children with a family history of ADPKD should have their blood pressure (BP) monitored by a practitioner with experience in measurement of BP in children [Chapman et al 2015]. Screening from age five years onward, with an interval of three years in cases in which no hypertension is found, seems prudent. The diagnosis of hypertension is made when systolic or diastolic BP is ≥95th percentile for age, height, and sex, in accordance with prevailing pediatric guidelines

Renal cell carcinoma. There is currently insufficient evidence for recommending screening in asymptomatic individuals with ADPKD.

Intracranial aneurysms. Widespread screening is usually not recommended since most intracranial aneurysms found by screening asymptomatic individuals are small, have a low risk of rupture, and require no treatment [Gibbs et al 2004, Irazabal et al 2011, Chapman et al 2015], although dissenting opinions have been published [Rozenfeld et al 2014].

Indications for screening in affected individuals with a good life expectancy include a family history of intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage, previous rupture of an aneurysm, preparation for elective surgery with potential hemodynamic instability, high-risk occupations such as airplane pilots, and significant anxiety on the part of the individual despite adequate risk information.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice for presymptomatic screening because it is noninvasive and does not require intravenous contrast material. Because only one of 76 individuals with an initial negative study had a new intracranial aneurysm after a mean follow-up of 9.8 years, rescreening after an interval of ten years has been suggested as a reasonable approach [Schrier et al 2004].

Aortic dissection. Until more information becomes available, it is reasonable to screen first-degree adult relatives of individuals with thoracic aortic dissection using either echocardiography or MRI. If aortic root dilatation is found, yearly follow-up and strict blood pressure control with beta blockers should be recommended.

Cardiac valvular abnormalities. Screening echocardiography is not recommended unless a murmur is detected or there are other cardiovascular signs or symptoms [Chapman et al 2015].

Colon diverticulosis. Routine screening for diverticulosis is not recommended, but physicians should be aware of a possible increased occurrence of diverticulosis or diverticulitis in individuals with ADPKD who have reached ESRD [Chapman et al 2015].
