Individuals on ERT

The following should be assessed before and after initiation of ERT to determine treatment efficacy:

Physical and neurologic evaluation at least every six months

Annual assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance (see All Individuals)

Annual pulmonary function tests, including maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) and forced vital capacity (FVC)

Note: (1) Changes in urine keratan sulfate (KS) levels do not correlate with efficacy of treatment; therefore, the benefit of following urine KS (or urine GAG) levels during elosulfase alfa treatment is limited. (2) The benefit of monitoring anti-elosulfase alfa antibodies is unknown.

All Individuals

Assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance

Every 6-12 months: track growth, pubertal stage, and progress; optimize ambulation

Pain severity assessment every six months; age-appropriate quality of life questionnaires every year

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, or as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk (T25FW) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Respiratory rate, pulse oximeter, and heart rate should be measured before and after the annual testing.

Musculoskeletal.

White et al [2014] recommended the following guidelines for monitoring musculoskeletal involvement in those with MPS IVA (full text):

Upper and lower extremities. Evaluate severity and progression of upper and lower extremity involvement at least annually.

Evaluation of range of motion, grip and pinch strength, and functional assessments (e.g., functional dexterity test) of the upper extremities

Assessment of lower extremity alignment, including standing AP radiographs (as clinically indicated) and AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis to assess hip dysplasia/subluxation until skeletal maturity or when clinically indicated

Spine. Neurologic examination every six months to assess for spinal cord compression [Solanki et al 2013]:

For children who are reliable historians, at each clinic visit obtain a history of exercise tolerance and symptoms of myelopathy (e.g., extremity weakness; clumsiness; unsteady, changing gait; bowel or bladder dysfunction or lower back/leg pain).

In those with multisegmental myelopathy, SSEPs and MEPs (if available) may provide detailed information.

Perform plain radiography of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion-extension) every six months.

Perform plain radiography of the spine (AP and lateral views for the thoracolumbar spine) every one to three years.

Perform MRI whole spine (neutral position)* annually and flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine every one to three years.* Neutral, flexion, and extension lateral radiographs of the cervical spine should be obtained prior to cervical MRI to assess for atlanto-occipital instability.

Cardiac. Evaluate heart rate annually; perform electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015].

Respiratory

For obstructive sleep apnea, yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Annual in home screening sleep studies (which monitor oxygen saturation). Polysomnography every three years.

To assess pulmonary function, annual MVV and FVC until children stop growing, then every two to three years. The benefit of noninvasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Length/height and weight should be measured at every visit.

Eye

Monitor for vision and ocular abnormalities at every visit; refer to an ophthalmologist as needed.

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy, perform retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013].

Dental. Evaluate every six to 12 months.

Hearing. Perform yearly audiogram.
