Clinical HFE-HH

Once the serum ferritin concentration is <50 ng/mL, monitor serum ferritin concentration every three to four months.

It is reasonable to perform follow-up T2* MRI for assessment of cardiac iron among persons with a history of cardiac involvement or known cardiac iron deposition.

Since cirrhosis is a crucial stage in the natural history of hemochromatosis, the diagnosis of cirrhosis is important because management changes. Individuals with cirrhosis should be followed regularly and screened for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) [Tavill 2001]. The AASLD Practice Guidelines recommend imaging every six months with good ultrasonography [Sherman 2010]. This may be accompanied with measurement of alpha fetoprotein. Noninvasive methods that use results derived from values of serum markers such as HepaScore® and FibroMeter™ can also be used to assess the stage of liver fibrosis [Martínez et al 2011].

Although the gold standard for the diagnosis of cirrhosis is biopsy, FibroScan® has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for cirrhosis [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. FibroScan (also known as transient elastography) quantifies fibrosis with ultrasound in a non-invasive manner [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. The results from a meta-analysis suggested a cut-off value for diagnosis of cirrhosis of 13.01 kPa [Friedrich-Rust et al 2008]. Individuals with normal transient elastography (TE) values on FibroScan would not need a biopsy while individuals with intermediate or high TE values should have biopsies to confirm cirrhosis. These results should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical and biochemical parameters.

Note: The AASLD Guidelines recommend that individuals with cirrhosis undergo surveillance regardless of whether or not they have been iron depleted [Bacon et al 2011] (full text).

Biochemical HFE-HH

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010].
