See 2014 consensus guidelines [Frohnmayer et al 2014] (full text).

Annual evaluation with a multidisciplinary team including an endocrinologist

Regular blood counts, every three to four months while stable and more often as needed

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy at least annually to evaluate morphology, cellularity (from the biopsy), FISH, and cytogenetics (the latter two for emergence of a malignant clone). Individuals on GCSF need to have a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy every six months, if possible.

In individuals who develop Sweet syndrome (neutrophilic skin infiltration), prompt investigation for hematologic disease progression including bone marrow evaluation

Notes: (1) Progressively changing blood counts without a potential cause (e.g., acute infection or suppression from medication) require immediate evaluation with a complete blood count and bone marrow examination with FISH and cytogenetics. (2) It is important to recognize that rising blood counts can be due to either the development of MDS/AML or, rarely, reversion of a germline mutation in a stem cell, which repopulates the marrow with normal cells (somatic stem cell mosaicism). These individuals may require immediate HSCT (for MDS/AML) or continued close monitoring with complete blood counts at least every one to two months and a bone marrow examination with cytogenetics every six months.

Individuals receiving androgen therapy

Liver function tests every three to six months

Liver ultrasound examination every six to 12 months for androgen-related changes, including tumors

Cancer surveillance

Annual gynecologic assessment for genital lesions beginning at age 13. Thorough vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear can begin when women become sexually active or by age 18 years, whichever is earlier. Suspicious genital tract lesions should be biopsied.

Examination every six months for oral, head, and neck cancers beginning by age nine to ten years. Screening should be performed by a dentist, oral surgeon, or ENT familiar with FA. Nasolaryngoscopy starting at age ten years, or within the first year after HSCT. Individuals with difficulty or pain with swallowing should be evaluated for esophageal cancer.

For individuals with a history of premalignant or malignant lesions: surveillance examinations every two to three months

For individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants in BRCA2: screening for neuroblastomas, brain tumors, and kidney tumors every six months (see also Risk to Family Members – Autosomal Recessive FA)
