Colon cancer. Regular colonoscopy with removal of precancerous polyps reduces the incidence of colon cancer in individuals with Lynch syndrome. A 2009 study of a Finish cohort with high compliance with screening found no increase in mortality for individuals with Lynch syndrome over their mutation-negative relatives, indicating that annual colonoscopy could help with the prevention and detection of colon cancer [Järvinen et al 2009]. In this study four individuals were diagnosed with colon cancer and lymph node metastases: one was diagnosed during baseline colonoscopy; the other three were diagnosed more than two years after their last colonoscopy. Therefore, the current recommendation is colonoscopy every one to two years beginning between ages 20 and 25 years or two to five years before the earliest diagnosis in the family, whichever is earlier [Järvinen et al 2009, Engel et al 2010, NCCN 2013].

In MSH6 and PMS2 heterozygotes the risk for colon cancer is lower; thus colonoscopy screening may be delayed until age 30 years [Senter et al 2008, Baglietto et al 2010].

Note: Colonoscopy is recommended rather than flexible sigmoidoscopy because of the predominance of proximal colon cancers in Lynch syndrome [Lynch & Smyrk 1996].

Endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer surveillance is less well established than that for colon cancer.

Because many endometrial cancers can be diagnosed at early stages on the basis of symptoms, women should be educated about the signs of endometrial cancers.

Currently the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does not recommend any specific screening for endometrial or ovarian cancer [NCCN 2013].

Studies on the effectiveness of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy have had conflicting results. Further studies are needed to determine if the combination of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy detect endometrial cancers at an early age.

In a study of the use of transvaginal ultrasound examination to screen for endometrial cancer, no cancers were detected; however, two cancers were detected on the basis of symptoms manifest during the course of the study [Dove-Edwin et al 2002].

A report from a Finnish cohort found that endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasound every two to three years resulted in the diagnosis of early stage cancers. However, because endometrial cancer often presents with symptoms at an early stage, it was not clear that the screening improved detection [Järvinen et al 2009].

Ovarian cancer. No specific ovarian cancer screening trials have been conducted in women with Lynch syndrome. Of note, screening for ovarian cancer using CA-125 blood tests and transvaginal ultrasound examination has not been effective in other high-risk populations such as women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant [Evans et al 2009].

Gastric and duodenal cancers. Upper endoscopy surveillance can be used to screen for cancers of the stomach and duodenum. Currently the NCCN recommends beginning upper endoscopy with a side-viewing scope and extended duodenoscopy between ages 30 and 35 years and repeating them every three to five years depending on the findings. Those with evidence of chronic inflammation, atrophic gastropathy, and/or intestinal metaplasia would be candidates for more frequent evaluation. Note: Biopsies should be evaluated for H pylori infections so that appropriate treatment can be given as needed [NCCN 2013].

Data regarding the effectiveness of upper endoscopy examination for the early detection of gastric cancer in Lynch syndrome are limited.

One study suggested no benefit from this screening for gastric cancer because of the lack of identifiable precursor lesions [Renkonen-Sinisalo et al 2002].

A study looking at gastric cancer risk in a Dutch study suggested that the level of risk is sufficient to warrant screening; however, since 87% of the cancers occurred after age 45 years, it may be most cost effective to initiate screening at age 45 years [Capelle et al 2010].

Schulmann et al [2005] found that approximately 50% of the small bowel cancers in a cohort with Lynch syndrome were located in the duodenum, suggesting that upper endoscopy may be useful for screening. However, no trials to determine the efficacy of upper endoscopy for screening for duodenal cancers have been conducted.

Distal small bowel. At this time data are limited regarding screening for cancer development in the distal small bowel. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enterography are available for evaluating the small bowel, but at this time there is no recommendation for routine use of these approaches for small bowel screening, although they may be helpful for evaluating symptomatic individuals.

Urinary tract. NCCN recommends consideration of annual urine analysis beginning between age 25 and 30 years [NCCN 2013].

Other cancers. At this time, no specific screening recommendations for other Lynch syndrome associated cancers exist. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow other general population screening guidelines and to seek prompt medical attention for changes in health or persistent symptoms.
