Multiple professional societies have published guidelines based on the available evidence to date as well as expert consensus [Church et al 2003b, Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. The following surveillance recommendations are based on these expert society guidelines.

In individuals known to have FAP

Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy every one to two years, beginning at age ten to 12 years

Colonoscopy, once polyps are detected

Annual colonoscopy thereafter if colectomy is delayed more than a year after polyps emerge. In individuals age ten to 20 years in whom adenomas are smaller than 6.0 mm and without villous component or high grade dysplasia, delay in colectomy may be considered.

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) including complete visualization of the ampulla of Vater (using a duodenoscope if necessary) is recommended, though the age of initiation is variable. The American College of Gastroenterology recommends beginning screening at age 23 to 30 years, whereas the NCCN recommends starting at age 20 to 25 years or prior to colectomy. Surveillance is recommended every six months to four years depending on duodenal adenoma burden. The frequency of EGD depends on the severity of duodenal adenomas; Spigelman staging criteria can help determine the frequency. The Spigelman staging criteria are summarized by Syngal et al [2015] (see Table 9). The NCCN recommends examination of the stomach at time of upper endoscopy (frequency determined by duodenal polyp surveillance). Fundic gland polyps are common in FAP and low-grade dysplasia can be found, but rarely progresses. Specific gastric polyp screening or surgery should be considered in the setting of high-grade dysplasia only. Non-fundic gland polyps should be removed endoscopically.

Annual physical examination including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations and neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm) and palpation of the thyroid starting in the late teenage years

Thyroid cancer. In addition to annual thyroid examination, starting in late teenage years [NCCN 2016], annual thyroid ultrasound may be considered with fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]; however, data supporting this recommendation are limited [NCCN 2016].

Annual abdominal palpation for desmoids. If family history of desmoids, consider MRI or CT scan within one to three years post colectomy and then every five to ten years. Data to support screening and treatment of desmoid tumors are limited.

Small-bowel polyps and cancer. Although the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] does not recommend routine small bowel screening distal to the duodenum, the NCCN recommends considering adding small bowel visualization to CT or MRI for desmoids (if applicable), especially if duodenal polyposis is advanced.

Screening for hepatoblastoma. Efficacy in individuals with FAP is unclear. Screening protocols in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, in which the risk for hepatoblastoma is also increased, often include frequent (every 2-3 months) abdominal ultrasound examinations and measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations, and have resulted in early detection of hepatoblastomas [Tan & Amor 2006]. Screening for hepatoblastoma in FAP using liver palpation, abdominal ultrasound, and measurement of AFP every three to six months during the first five years of life has been suggested [NCCN 2016].

Adrenal tumors. Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

In individuals who have undergone colectomy

If total colectomy with IPAA is performed, routine endoscopic surveillance of the ileal pouch is recommended every two years [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016].

If subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is performed, surveillance of the remaining rectum every six to 12 months, depending on the number of polyps that develop [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. Cancer may still occur in the remaining rectum, but the risk is low with current management [Church et al 2003a].

If total colectomy with end ileostomy is performed, ileoscopy is recommended every two years [NCCN 2016].

In individuals known to have attenuated FAP

Colonoscopy every two to three years, beginning in late teens

Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy with polypectomy every one to two years depending on polyp burden

Colectomy. The absolute and relative indications for colectomy are the same as for FAP (see Surveillance).

Screening and surveillance of the upper gastrointestinal tract as for FAP (see Surveillance)

Annual physical examination, including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations, neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm), and palpation of the thyroid with consideration of follow-up ultrasound examination and fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011].

Due to the lower risk of desmoid tumors and hepatoblastomas in attenuated FAP compared to FAP, screening of these tumors is currently not recommended.

In individuals known to have GAPPS. It is currently unknown if screening for gastric cancer or prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Due to the extent of gastric polyposis, in addition to reports of rapid progression of fundic gland polyposis, gastric cancer surveillance in this condition may have limited effectiveness [Repak et al 2016].
