GM1 Gangliosidosis

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist; yearly and before/after major medical events

Musculoskeletal

Yearly history and physical examination to evaluate for new skeletal abnormalities that might lead to decreased quality of life

Yearly evaluation for cervical spine instability including detailed physical examination and assessment for new neurologic findings, followed by imaging if indicated

Monitoring of hip joint stability re risk of hip dislocation. Obtain straight and frog-leg imaging if there is pain with movement or a change in mobility (which in neurologically compromised patients can present as inability to ambulate, unexplained crying, or pain).

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years, if there is a history of cardiac dysfunction and/or new symptoms

Growth. Monitoring of growth and nutrition by a nutritionist with knowledge of neurodegenerative or metabolic disease

Eye. Evaluation for visual acuity and corneal clouding every 1-3 years

Seizures. Yearly evaluation by a neurologist; consideration of EEG if there is an acute change in mental status, a sudden decline in activity/milestones, or abnormal movements

MPS IVB

Note: The recommendations for MPS IVA are appropriate for MPS IVB since MPS IVA and MPS IVB are clinically indistinguishable.

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist:

Yearly: track progress and optimize ambulation

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, and as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) and three-minute stair climb test (3MSC) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal and nervous systems

Musculoskeletal. Assessment for the following:

Lower-extremity misalignment: yearly clinical examinations to assess lower extremity alignment

Hip dysplasia/subluxation: yearly radiographs of the hips, as clinically warranted

Cervical spine instability

Note: Solanki et al [2013] recommend the following guidelines for monitoring spinal involvement in those with MPS IVA:

Neurologic examination every six months

Plain x-rays of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion/extension) every six months

Plain x-rays of the spine (AP and lateral thoracolumbar) every two to three years if there is evidence of kyphosis and/or scoliosis

MRI neutral position: whole spine every year

MRI: flexion/extension of the cervical spine every one to three years

These guidelines can be modified as appropriate.

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Respiratory. Assessment for the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea: yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Polysomnography if any clinical suspicion exists.

Restrictive lung disease: assessment of pulmonary function when age-appropriate at diagnosis and then yearly. Note: The benefit of non-invasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use of MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Eye

Yearly: measurement of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination of cornea; examination of the posterior segment

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy: Retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions at onset, then every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Dental. Evaluation every six months

Hearing. Yearly audiogram
