See also the management guidelines published by Welling et al [2017] (full text).

Biochemical Testing

Individuals with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia should be monitored routinely [Walter et al 1999] for the accumulation of analytes:

Measure erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at each clinic visit and as needed (e.g., during the introduction of a new food). Concentrations <5 mg/dL are considered within the therapeutic range.

Note: Erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate is a good way to evaluate for acute ingestion of galactose.

Urinary galactitol (a product of an alternate pathway for galactose metabolism) levels may be performed but are not necessary for long-term monitoring.

Note that erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate and urine galactitol may provide comparable information regarding compliance with a lactose restricted diet.

Urinary galactitol analysis is especially valuable in affected individuals who have been given red blood cell transfusions; values >78 mmol/mol creatinine are abnormal.

Urinary galactitol is often not affected by acute dietary ingestion of galactose.

If sudden increases in either erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate or urinary galactitol are detected, dietary sources of excess galactose should be sought or evaluation undertaken for other causes.

Schedule for Individuals with Classic or Clinical Variant Galactosemia

Biochemical genetics clinic visits

Every three months for the first year of life or as needed depending on the nature of potential acute complications

Every six months during the second year of life

Yearly thereafter

Metabolic dietician clinic visits. As above, plus interim visits and phone consultations as necessary

Ophthalmologic evaluations. The timing of follow-up examinations depends on the presence or absence of neonatal cataracts. If absent, an examination may be performed at age one year, age five years, and during adolescence. Note: It is very unusual for a person with classic galactosemia to present after early infancy with cataracts, as cataract development probably requires significant intake of cow’s milk and dairy products.

Speech evaluations

Evaluation by a speech expert at age 18 months (recommended for all affected children)

If the initial evaluation does not reveal a diagnosis of a speech or language disorder, reevaluation every three to 12 months during infancy and early childhood depending on the assessments performed by the developmental specialists and physicians

Developmental evaluations. Affected individuals should undergo a developmental examination by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician at age one year and thereafter every one to three years depending on the extent of delay in one or more spheres of development.

Evaluations for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). Measurement of plasma 17-beta-estradiol and FSH in females is recommended if they reach age 12 years with insufficient secondary sex characteristics or age 14 years with no regular menses [Welling et al 2017].

Evaluations for osteopenia

Measure plasma calcium, phosphorous, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D on a yearly basis and as needed.

Because decreased bone mineral density is prevalent in individuals with classic galactosemia, a DEXA scan is recommended for surveillance at age six years, during puberty, through adolescence, and then every five years during adult life.

Routine metabolic dietetic visits should verify that calcium and vitamin D intake is adequate for age and that plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range. Even so, bone mineral density may be decreased in certain affected individuals for reasons that are not understood. Under these circumstances, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.
