For individuals with JPS who have undergone surgical resection of bowel, endoscopic follow up is required regardless of the surgical procedure because of the high rate of subsequent development of polyps in the rectum and the pouch [Oncel et al 2005].

For individuals with an SMAD4 or BMPR1A pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing, individuals with a clinical diagnosis of JPS, or individuals with a family history of JPS who have not undergone molecular genetic testing or whose molecular genetic test results were uninformative [Howe et al 1998a] (see NCCN guidelines):

Monitor for rectal bleeding and/or anemia, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color. These symptoms may warrant additional screening.

CBC, colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy screening should begin in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier.

If negative, screening should be repeated in three years.

If only one or a few polyps are identified, the polyps should be removed. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

If many polyps are identified, removal of most of the colon or stomach may be necessary. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant, predictive molecular genetic testing may be appropriate before age 15 years because surveillance for potential complications of HHT begins in early childhood [Gallione et al 2004]. Until the frequency and spectrum of HHT complications in JPS/HHT syndrome are known, it may be appropriate to follow the HHT surveillance guidelines for individuals with JPS/HHT syndrome or a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant.

Precautionary screening for individuals at risk for JPS who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant was previously recommended [Howe et al 1998a]; however, this screening is unnecessary if molecular genetic testing was performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory. Family members who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be screened for colon cancer as recommended for the normal U.S. population.

For surveillance recommendations for individuals with HHT, see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
