Rod-cone dystrophy. Annual ophthalmologic follow-up is indicated as long as the affected individual has vision.

Obesity. Weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded annually and plotted on growth curves.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry should be performed yearly.

Cardiomyopathy

A detailed cardiac history and examination including echocardiography annually even in the absence of symptoms related to left ventricular dysfunction (signs of cardiac failure, such as sweating, fatigue, lethargy, asthma, decreased physical activity)

ECGs in parallel with echocardiography and 24-hour ECG monitoring if indicated

In individuals who have had infantile cardiomyopathy, annual monitoring by a pediatric cardiologist, even if the individual has recovered from cardiomyopathy and is asymptomatic

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes

Annual measurement of plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from early infancy

Measurement of fasting plasma glucose concentration every two to three months

If fasting blood glucose is greater than 7 mmol/L, or postprandial blood glucose is greater than 11 mmol/L, measurement of HbA1c concentration and serum glucose concentration regularly (every 6 months, although glucose estimations may be performed more frequently as determined by the 'diabetic control' of the affected individual)

Hyperlipidemia. Annual total lipid profile determination is appropriate unless hyperlipidemia is present, in which case more frequent monitoring may be indicated. When the affected individual is ill and/or dehydrated, pancreatitis precipitated by hyperlipidemia can be life threatening.

Renal disease

Urinalysis and measurement of plasma concentrations of electrolytes, uric acid, BUN, and creatinine twice yearly

Renal and bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal

Hepatic disease

Annual measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Ultrasonography to evaluate for possible steatosis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and portal hypertension

Pulmonary disease. Pulmonary function tests should be performed yearly to evaluate general lung function, even if symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis are not yet present.

Hypothyroidism. Patients should be monitored annually for thyroid abnormalities.
