Eye evaluations should be done at regular intervals, depending on the type and severity of abnormality. No formal guidelines exist. Because approximately 50% of males either present with glaucoma or develop glaucoma in time, regardless of cataract surgery, intraocular pressure should be monitored at least every six months life-long. Presence of clinical findings suggestive of increased intraocular pressure (e.g., excessive tearing, eye rubbing, change in the clarity/transparency of the cornea) warrant prompt evaluation.

Kidney function should be assessed at least yearly with measurement of serum concentrations of electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, intact parathyroid hormone, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.

If the patient has Fanconi syndrome requiring therapy with supplemental bicarbonate or citrate, serum concentrations of phosphate or calcitriol should be measured every three to six months or more often after dose changes.

BUN and serum creatinine are appropriate screening tests to detect the onset of chronic renal failure and to monitor its progression.

Urinalysis and random urine protein, calcium, and creatinine are useful to follow proteinuria and hypercalciuria.

If the patient has renal Fanconi syndrome and bone disease, radiographs of the long bones and growth plates should be obtained at regular intervals as needed, but no more than every six months.

Growth should be monitored regularly with height/length and weight plotted on growth charts for age. Height/length and weight should be measured more frequently in infants (every 2-3 months) than in older children and adolescents who are still growing (every 3-6 months). If patients are treated with growth hormone, growth assessment every three months is indicated.

Developmental progress should be assessed and the educational plan updated twice yearly for the first three years and annually after that. Any regression in abilities should be investigated with high-resolution imaging studies of the central nervous system.

Scoliosis and joint problems should be monitored as part of a routine annual physical examination.

Dental examinations should be performed twice a year by a pediatric dentist experienced in treating children with developmental delay.
