Hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Monitoring of blood glucose concentration should follow typical protocols for neonates at risk for hypoglycemia.

Cardiac. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with a cardiovascular abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history. Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we advise providers and families to receive individualized care by a pediatric cardiologist, transitioning to an adult specialist following the “best practices” for the particular defect. General guidelines [Lin et al 2011(see Figure 4)] can be pragmatically dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with close evaluation in the first two years of life depending on the severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations and appropriate risk stratification. It is beyond the scope of this review to delineate the complex decision making involved in treating HCM or atrial tachycardia.

Tumor screening consisting of abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and urine testing for catecholamine metabolites and hematuria was proposed by Gripp et al [2002]. However, a subsequent report [Gripp et al 2004] on elevated catecholamine metabolites in individuals with Costello syndrome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful.

Serial abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma was proposed every three to six months until age eight to ten years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annually beginning at age ten years to screen for bladder cancer [Gripp et al 2002].

Neither of the above screening approaches has yet been shown to be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important factor for early tumor detection continues to be parental and physician awareness of the increased cancer risk.

Bone density. Osteoporosis is common in young adults with Costello syndrome [White et al 2005]. Bone density assessment is recommended as a baseline, with follow up depending on the initial result.
