The following are appropriate:

A program of periodic MRI monitoring developed by the neurologist and primary care physician:

Wang et al [2011] propose guidelines for confirmatory testing and subsequent clinical management of presymptomatic individuals suspected to have MLD and other lysosomal storage diseases (click here for full text).

Eichler et al [2009] propose a scoring system for brain MR images in individuals with MLD.

Dali et al [2010] report that N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brains of patients with MLD as assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) correlate with motor and cognitive function. This finding could be used to monitor disease progression and the effects of treatments.

Not all persons with MLD show white matter lesions as the initial MRI finding. Cranial nerve enhancement by MRI in a child age 25 months with apparent MLD and without intraparenchymal white matter involvement was seen by Singh et al [2009]. Likewise, Morana et al [2009] report that cranial nerve and cauda equina nerve root enhancement by MRI may precede typical white matter abnormalities and could facilitate earlier diagnosis. Haberlandt et al [2009] present three individuals with peripheral neuropathy in whom initial MRI showed no white matter changes, but who later developed MLD.

Monitoring of changes in locomotion, communication, and behavior which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (e.g., introduction of walking aids and/or a wheelchair). A classification system for gross motor function for children with MLD has been developed and tested by Kehrer et al [2011b]; it can be used to monitor the course of the disease and should prove extremely useful in evaluating therapeutic trials.

Monitoring for onset of seizures and/or contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Monitoring for behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions or actions, problems in following directions, memory loss, and/or incontinence, which indicate a need for increasing physical restriction and curtailing of independence

Monitoring for difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration of gastrostomy

Special attention following general anesthesia or an infection with a high fever as these may trigger exacerbation of disease progression
