Surveillance should be tailored to an individual's specific phenotype and clinical history; however, most individuals benefit from routine age-dependent screening to allow for early detection and treatment of end-organ damage [NHS 2010, Yawn et al 2014]. The following are general guidelines compiled from several sources. Recently NHLBI has released updated guidelines that readers are encouraged to review. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Comprehensive medical and social evaluation. Affected individuals should be seen routinely for evaluation of risks, review of care plan, education, and assessment of growth and development. Social work assessment with emphasis on support, resources, and the impact of disease on lifestyle should be performed. Routine dental care is recommended.

Mental health and neurocognitive assessment. Periodic mental health screening for signs of depression, anxiety, and isolation should occur. Neurocognitive testing should be performed prior to school entry and repeated periodically to identify learning difficulties that may be related to silent cerebral infarcts as well as other factors.

Annual laboratory assessment should include the following:

CBC with differential and reticulocyte count

Assessment of iron status

Liver function tests (LFTs), BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis (UA)

LDH as a marker of hemolysis

Vitamin D level; may be indicated because of the high prevalence of deficiencies in this population

Baseline values should be given to parents for comparison during times of illness.

Extended red cell phenotyping should be done once to decrease risk of alloimmunization with transfusions.

Assessment of stroke risk. Historically more than 10% of young children with Hb S/S and Hb S/β°-thalassemia (as well as some others) had overt strokes. Yearly screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) starting at age two years followed by initiation of chronic therapy for those with high-velocity blood flow has drastically decreased stroke incidence in SCD [Fullerton et al 2004]. Individuals with an abnormally high arterial blood flow velocity have a high rate of stroke, which can be prevented by chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. Children with normal velocities require yearly reevaluation as a proportion of them convert to higher-risk velocities over time [Adams et al 2004]. Initial studies suggest that this approach is decreasing the incidence of overt stroke in individuals with SCD, but additional measure may be of benefit as well [Fullerton et al 2004, Jordan et al 2012, Webb & Kwiatkowski 2013].

End-organ evaluation. While there is a clear consensus for use of screening TCD starting at age two years through at least age 16 years, there is variability in recommendations for additional screening. The NHLBI [Yawn et al 2014] suggests screening for a proliferative retinopathy by an ophthalmologist starting age ten years, and additional screening based on clinical history that may include:

Chest x-ray examination

ECG

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to determine the tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet with consideration of right heart catheterization depending on symptoms

Six-minute walk test

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study (to assess nighttime hypoxemia)

Iron overload by MRI
