There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the recommendations given are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with known BHDS, individuals known to have a pathogenic variant in FLCN without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone genetic testing should have regular monitoring by physicians familiar with the spectrum of BHDS.

Renal tumor screening

Renal imaging is appropriate for individuals age 18 years or older when the clinical diagnosis of BHDS is established or if a pathogenic variant in FLCN is confirmed. However, earlier testing and surveillance for renal tumors should be personalized based on family history of renal tumor development, when available.

Yearly MRI of the kidneys is the optimal screening modality to assess for kidney lesions.

Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast is an alternative when MRI is not an option. However, the long-term effects of cumulative radiation exposure in individuals with BHDS is unknown and has not been studied.

As a result of the low aggressiveness of kidney tumors and the 3.0-cm rule used by surgeons in treating renal tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005], affected individuals without a family history of kidney tumors who have had two to three consecutive annual MRI examinations without the detection of kidney lesions may be screened every two years until a suspicious lesion is identified.

Note: The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in further characterization of kidney lesions but should not be used as a primary screening modality.

If any suspicious lesion (<1.0 cm in diameter, indeterminate lesion, or complex cysts) is noted on screening examination, annual MRI should be instituted. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast may be used as an alternative in those for whom MRI is not an option.

Renal tumors less than 3.0 cm in diameter are monitor by periodic imaging. When the largest renal tumor reaches 3 cm in maximal diameter evaluation by a urologic surgeon is appropriate with consideration of nephron-sparing surgery [Stamatakis et al 2013].

Rapidly growing lesions and/or symptoms including pain, blood in the urine, or atypical presentations require a more individualized approach. PET-CT scan is an option for evaluation of these lesions.

Melanoma. Because of a concern for a possible increased risk of melanoma in those with BHDS, full body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be considered.
