Close follow up is indicated. Management and surveillance guidelines have been proposed by the ACMG Work Group on Management of Pompe Disease [Kishnani et al 2006b]. Given the wide age range in individuals with LOPD, most of the recommendations can be applied to both IOPD and LOPD.

Twice-yearly clinical review of development, clinical status, growth, and use of adaptive equipment

Assessment of respiratory status with each visit with regard to cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise tolerance:

Chest x-rays at regular intervals

Pulmonary function tests; yearly or more frequently as indicated

Periodic sleep evaluation, which may include regular capnography and pulse oximetry

Monitoring of overall musculoskeletal and functional status to guide therapies aimed at preventing or minimizing physical impairment and its complications. This may include assessment for scoliosis and bone densitometry.

Regular nutritional and feeding assessment

At least annual renal function studies to monitor for secondary complications related to cardiac and/or pulmonary impairment as well as medication effects

Annual cardiology evaluation in those with LOPD and as needed for those with IOPD:

Periodic echocardiography. Aortic dilatation has been detected by echocardiography in late-onset Pompe disease [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring) at regular intervals [Cook et al 2006]. Sacconi et al [2014] noted that enzyme replacement therapy did not prevent development of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD.

Screening for cerebral arteriopathy with aneurysmal dilation and rupture leading to cerebral infarcts (strokes) and death, which have also been reported [Laforêt et al 2008, Sacconi et al 2010]. Screening strategies for these findings are being developed, but care teams should have a high index of suspicion for cerebral arteriopathy if an individual with late-onset Pompe disease develops unexplained stroke-like symptoms [Sacconi et al 2010].

Note: Individuals with LOPD may not be able to tolerate supine positioning in an MRI scanner due to diaphragmatic weakness.

Annual hearing evaluation
