To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome (KS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Height, weight, and head circumference are measured and plotted on standard growth charts. Evaluation for a hormone deficiency, including hypothyroidism or growth hormone deficiency, is recommended in children with abnormal growth velocity.

If feeding problems are severe and/or failure to thrive is apparent, an esophageal pH probe study can be considered. A barium swallow study may assist in determining whether the suck and swallow mechanism is normal.

Evaluation for developmental milestones is recommended and referral for formal developmental evaluation is indicated if delays are identified.

A physical therapy evaluation is indicated in those children with KS who exhibit hypotonia.

Evaluation by a neurologist is recommended in those individuals with suspected seizure activity.

Brain imaging at the time of diagnosis (if not already performed) is recommended in those with headaches, ocular disturbances, otoneurologic disturbances, lower cranial nerve signs, cerebellar ataxia, spasticity, or seizures to evaluate for a Chiari 1 malformation or for a brain malformation.

As the incidence of cardiac malformations is high, echocardiogram with good visualization of the aortic arch is indicated in all individuals at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a pediatric cardiologist for management should be considered if a cardiac defect is present.

Because of the frequency of ocular findings, formal ophthalmologic examination at the time of diagnosis is recommended for all individuals with KS.

A directed evaluation of the palate at the time of diagnosis is indicated. Individuals with cleft lip, cleft palate, submucous cleft palate, or any evidence of velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred for otorhinolaryngology evaluation.

A directed physical examination to evaluate for evidence of gastrointestinal abnormalities is indicated in neonates with KS. Evidence of cholestasis should prompt a full workup, as it would in any other child. By recognizing that eventration of the diaphragm is seen in this condition, the medical care provider can avoid further evaluation for possible phrenic nerve paralysis.

Because of the frequency of renal/urinary tract anomalies, renal ultrasound examination is indicated in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a nephrologist and/or urologist is recommended for those individuals with hydronephrosis. Referral to a urologist is indicated in those individuals with cryptorchidism.

Referral for evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon in those children with congenital dislocation of the hip(s) and other joints is recommended.

Spine radiographs at the time of diagnosis are indicated in all individuals with KS. If scoliosis is noted and/or vertebral abnormalities are detected, orthopedic evaluation should be considered.

Obtaining T cell count, T cell subsets, and serum immunoglobulin levels in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis or at one year of age (whichever comes second) is recommended. An evaluation by an immunologist is indicated if the levels are abnormal or if the affected individual has a history of recurrent infections.

Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Comprehensive management guidelines are also available online (pdf).
