To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA), the following evaluations are recommended [Hendriksz et al 2013, Solanki et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015]:

Baseline neurologic examination to assess for signs of spinal cord compression

Plain radiographs

Baseline radiographs of the cervical spine, including anterior-posterior (AP), neutral lateral, and flexion-extension views

Baseline AP and lateral radiographs of the entire spine

Baseline AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis

Baseline AP standing radiographs of the lower extremities; in individuals who are able to stand independently and have signs of lower extremity misalignment, baseline standing lower extremity alignment radiograph from hip to ankle

MRI

Baseline MRI of the entire spine (neutral position) focusing on potential sites of cord compression (occipitocervical, cervicothoracic, and thoracolumbar)

Flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine when clinically indicated – for example, if cervical spine instability is suspected on plain radiographs:

Because MRI is usually performed under sedation or anesthesia, cervical spine radiographs should be obtained prior to anesthesia to evaluate for upper cervical spine instability.

In individuals with cervical spine instability suspected on plain film or those with inconclusive radiographic findings, flexion-extension cervical spine MRI can be used to evaluate for cord compression.

Flexion-extension MRI can identify dynamic changes in canal diameter leading to cord compression.

Mackenzie et al [2013] demonstrated that cervical spine flexion-extension MRI under sedation/anesthesia in children with skeletal dysplasia was safe under adequate supervision and the result was useful for surgical decision making.

Evaluation by:

A physiatrist (i.e., specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to assess mobility and autonomy. Endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk test (T25FW) in patients with limited ambulation have been used to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. 6MWT and T25FW should be performed at the time of diagnosis.

A physical therapist to assess joint range of motion and mobility

An occupational therapist to assess activities of daily living such as the functional dexterity test (FDT). Baseline upper extremity strength assessments should be performed, including grip strength assessed by dynamometer and pinch strength assessed by a pinch meter [White et al 2014].

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. If coronary artery involvement is suspected, noninvasive stress imaging should be performed [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013].

Baseline pulmonary function and polysomnography, with evaluation by a pulmonologist

Audiology evaluation

Dental evaluation

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess visual acuity and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination and posterior segment examination for retinopathy

Plotting of height and weight on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Pain assessment and quality of life questionnaires
