Dietary Management

Nutrition. After stabilization, nutritional management is critical. This typically includes instituting a low-protein, high-calorie diet. When available, accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure can guide dietary and caloric prescriptions and eliminate overfeeding [Hauser et al 2011].

Natural protein needs to be carefully titrated to allow for normal growth, while avoiding an excessive propiogenic amino acid load (isoleucine, valine, methionine and threonine) into the pathway. Adjustment of dietary whole (complete)-protein intake, based on clinical and laboratory findings, is needed throughout life for these patients.

The FAO/WHO/UNU report [2007] recommended that safe levels per age group should be the aim for natural protein intake [Baumgartner et al 2014]; however, the individual protein amount prescribed will depend on growth parameters, metabolic stability, stage of renal failure, and other factors. A propiogenic amino acid-deficient formula (e.g., Propimex®-1/2,, XMTVI-1/2, OA-1/2) and protein-free formula (e.g., Pro-Phree®, Duocal®) are given to some individuals to provide extra fluid and calories. As the infant grows, the total protein load is slowly reduced, based on growth, plasma amino acid concentrations, and plasma and urine methylmalonic acid concentrations.

Of note, in patients with low protein tolerance, severe restriction of propiogenic amino acid precursors (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine) can produce a nutritional deficiency state. Furthermore, an iatrogenic essential amino acid deficiency can be induced by the relatively high leucine intake through the MMA formulas that can negatively affect long-term growth and possibly other outcomes [Manoli et al 2016b]. Medical foods should be used in moderation with the relative intake of natural protein to propiogenic amino-acid deficient formula not exceeding a ratio of 1:1. Isolated valine or isoleucine supplementation should be avoided.

These dietary guidelines do not apply for patients with CblC deficiency, a separate disorder in the pathway [Manoli et al 2016a].

Hydroxocobalamin injections. 1.0-mg injections every day to every other day are usually required in individuals who are vitamin B12 responsive. The regimen of B12 injections needs to be individually adjusted according to the patient's age and, possibly, weight.

Carnitine can be given at a dose of 50-100 mg/kg/day, up to approximately 300 mg/kg/day. As a dietary supplement, carnitine may replace the free carnitine pool and enhance the conjugation and excretion of propionylcarnitine. The contribution of propionylcarnitine excretion to the total propionate load is, however, small. The relief of intracellular CoA accretion may be the mechanism by which carnitine supplementation benefits some individuals.

Antibiotics. A variety of antibiotic regimens to reduce the production of propionate from gut flora can be used:

Oral neomycin, 250 mg by mouth 4x/day, was the original regimen reported by Snyderman et al [1972].

Metronidazole at 10-15 mg/kg/day has also been reported.

The intervals at which affected individuals are treated may vary, but a typical course is one week to ten days of treatment per one to three months.

Although oral antibiotics reduce the propionate load that derives from gut flora in affected individuals, chronic antibiotic therapy is not innocuous; it introduces the risk of repopulation of the individual with resistant flora. This could pose a serious infectious threat and could be especially dangerous to individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, since most deaths are related to metabolic decompensation, often precipitated by infection.

Response to antibiotic administration should be determined in treated persons by demonstrating either a decrease in whole body output of methylmalonic acid on antibiotic therapy by a timed urine collection or a decrease in the plasma methylmalonic acid concentration compared to the baseline value for that individual.

Rotating antibiotic regimens may be considered in some persons.

Antioxidants. One individual with isolated methylmalonic acidemia who was documented to be glutathione deficient after a severe metabolic crisis responded to ascorbate therapy [Treacy et al 1996]. Several recent studies document increased oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and specific respiratory chain complex deficiencies in persons with the mut0 enzymatic subtype with methylmalonic acidemia [Schwab et al 2006, Atkuri et al 2009, Chandler et al 2009, de Keyzer et al 2009, Manoli et al 2013], suggesting a potential benefit of treatment with antioxidants or other mitochondria-targeted therapies in these patients.

A regimen of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E has been shown to prevent progression of acute optic nerve involvement in a patient with MMA [Pinar-Sueiro et al 2010] and was shown to attenuate the progression of kidney disease in a mouse model of MMA [Manoli et al 2013].

Organ Transplantation

The number of individuals who have undergone liver and/or kidney transplantation, the detailed effects on the underlying metabolic disorder, and the overall outcome in those undergoing this procedure have yet to be determined [Sloan et al 2015]. Inclusion of enzymatic and genotype information in case series of transplanted patients will allow better comparisons of the outcomes and genotype-phenotype associations that could inform decisions about the indication and timing of transplantation in individual cases.

Liver transplantation. Because most of the metabolic conversion of propionate occurs in the liver, replacing the liver could contribute enough enzyme activity to avert metabolic decompensation. Liver transplantation has been shown to largely protect against metabolic instability but is not curative, and individuals with isolated MMA remain at risk for long-term complications of MMA including renal disease, basal ganglia injury, and neurologic complications [Chakrapani et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Vernon et al 2014]. To date, more than 35 individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia have undergone living donor or cadaveric, orthotopic, or partial liver transplantation or combined liver-kidney transplantation (>20 patients) [van't Hoff et al 1998, van't Hoff, McKiernan et al 1999, Kayler et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Hsui et al 2003, Kasahara et al 2006, Morioka et al 2007, McGuire et al 2011, Niemi et al 2015].

The underlying biochemical parameters and the frequency of metabolic decompensation improved significantly in individuals undergoing liver transplantation despite persistent metabolic abnormalities [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Niemi et al 2015], probably as a result of increased extrahepatorenal methylmalonic acid production primarily from the skeletal muscle [Chandler et al 2007].

Following liver transplantation, some individuals continued to have progressive renal failure as well as high CSF concentrations of methylmalonic acid [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006].

Neurologic complications post-transplant, including globus pallidus injuries [Chakrapani et al 2002, Cosson et al 2008, McGuire et al 2011] suggest that adequate protein restriction and supportive care should be continued after the transplantation.

Earlier transplantation particularly for individuals with mut0 (who are very fragile) is gaining support as surgery techniques and outcomes improve [Niemi et al 2015, Spada et al 2015]. The choice of the kind and timing of the indicated transplant procedure remains challenging for families and treating physicians [Sloan et al 2015]. In the long term, the details regarding development of renal disease, optic nerve atrophy, and neurologic complications will be most important.

Kidney transplantation. Some individuals have received only renal allografts [Van Calcar et al 1998, Lubrano et al 2001, Coman et al 2006, Cosson et al 2008, Clothier et al 2011].

One of the first reports on isolated renal transplantation in mut0 methylmalonic acidemia was claimed to provide enough enzyme activity to normalize methylmalonic acid excretion and allow for increased dietary protein tolerance; however, it was later determined that that patient had cblA deficiency and responded to vitamin B12. Thus, this individual, who has a much milder case, is not representative of the outcomes of isolated renal transplantation in individuals with severe MMA subtypes (mut0 or cblB) [Lubrano et al 2001, Lubrano et al 2007, Lubrano et al 2013].

Elective kidney transplantation, even before the onset of renal disease, has been advocated as a form of “cell therapy” to help stabilize individuals with mut0 MMA [Brassier et al 2013]. However, one patient died after developing hepatoblastoma, neurologic deterioration accompanied by CSF lactic acidosis, and multiorgan failure; a second patient developed progressive neurologic symptoms; and two others developed metabolic decompensations post transplant. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if this is a safe alternative to liver transplantation or liver-kidney transplantation, especially in persons with severe mut0 MMA.
