All individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency (<10% mean normal enzyme activity), even those who have some residual biotinidase enzyme activity, should be treated with biotin independent of their genotype [Wolf 2003]. Note: Although Möslinger et al [2003] stated that children with greater than 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may not need treatment, a child with 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may be just as likely to develop symptoms as one with total loss of enzyme activity [Wolf 2002]. It is therefore strongly recommended that all children with profound biotinidase deficiency, regardless of the residual biotinidase enzyme activity, be treated with biotin.

Note: Because genotype/phenotype correlations in biotinidase deficiency are not well established, decisions regarding treatment should be based on the results of enzyme activity rather than molecular genetic testing.

Biotinidase deficiency is treated by supplementation with oral biotin in free form as opposed to the bound form. Children with biotinidase deficiency identified by newborn screening will remain asymptomatic with compliance to biotin therapy.

All symptomatic children with biotinidase deficiency have improved after treatment with 5-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin is usually dispensed as a tablet or a capsule (most of which is filler: the quantity of biotin is minute relative to the quantity of filler). To administer biotin to an infant or young child, the tablet can be crushed or the contents of the capsule can be mixed with breast milk or formula in a spoon, medicine dispenser, or syringe. Note that the contents of the tablet or capsule should not be put into a bottle because the mixture will stick to the bottle and/or fail to pass through the nipple, thus delivering inconsistent doses.

Although biotin occasionally is dispensed as a solution or syrup, these liquid preparations are not recommended because the mixture – which is a suspension – tends to settle (especially upon refrigeration) and to grow bacteria upon storage. The liquid preparations usually do not provide a consistent dose and should not be added to milk in a bottle.

The biochemical abnormalities and seizures rapidly resolve after biotin treatment, followed by improvement of the cutaneous abnormalities. Hair growth returns over a period of weeks to months in children who have alopecia. Optic atrophy and hearing loss may be resistant to therapy, especially if a long period has elapsed between their onset and the initiation of treatment. Some treated children have rapidly achieved developmental milestones, whereas others have continued to show delays.

Only a few anecdotal reports exist regarding symptoms in children with partial biotinidase deficiency who were not treated with biotin. Because there is no known toxicity for biotin, children with partial deficiency are usually treated with 1-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin therapy is lifelong. There are no known adverse side effects from pharmacologic doses of biotin. In fact, the major problem is the lack of treatment or non-compliance with prescribed treatment.

More data are required to determine the dosage of biotin that is necessary for older children with either profound or partial biotinidase deficiency, but essentially all children have tolerated 10 mg/day of oral biotin with no side effects. Anecdotally, two girls with profound biotinidase deficiency developed hair loss during adolescence that resolved following increase of their biotin dosages from 10 mg per day to 15 or 20 mg per day.

A protein-restricted diet is not necessary.
