See Treatment of Manifestations for discussion of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT).

Infection

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii (PCP) is indicated for infants with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as they are at risk of developing PCP. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy. Individuals with recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic use.

Intravenous immune globulin. Replacement therapy with IVIgG by age six months is administered every three to four weeks or subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis. IVIgG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies).

Routine childhood immunizations. Live vaccines should be avoided. Other “non-live” vaccinations can be given safely to individuals with a WAS-related disorder but may not generate protective levels of antibody.

Bleeding

Splenectomy. Splenectomy is palliative, and while it may be life-saving in an individual with severe bleeding, it does not prevent any of the other possible complications of the disorder [Mullen et al 1993]. In a survey of clinical immunologists performed by the European and Pan American Groups on Immunodeficiencies, respondents from centers treating the highest numbers of individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome did not recommend splenectomy [Conley et al 2003]. Because splenectomy significantly increases the risk of life-threatening infections in males with XLT [Albert et al 2011] as well as in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who subsequently undergo HCT [Ozsahin et al 2008], it should be used with caution.

Males who have had splenectomy must take antibiotics routinely for the rest of their lives because of the increased risk for overwhelming infection.

Platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions should be administered judiciously (e.g., for significant bleeding and surgical procedures).
