Prevention of acute attacks

involves the following:

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives to identify those heterozygous for the CPOX pathogenic variant identified in the proband

Education of CPOX heterozygotes regarding circumstances that may trigger an acute attack (See Clinical Description.)

Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are risky and not recommended. The recommended method of birth control for HCP heterozygotes is an IUD plus a barrier (diaphragm and/or condom).

A copper-eluting IUD is theoretically the safest in porphyria.

The hormone-eluting variety may also be safe because the systemic increase in hormone is quite small; however, little information exists.

Suppression of menses using a GnRH agonist. Leuprolide, nafarelin, and other GnRH agonists may help CPOX heterozygotes who experience monthly exacerbations.

CPOX heterozygotes undergoing surgery are at increased risk for an acute attack because of the routine preoperative fast and the (former) use of barbiturate (thiopental) induction of anesthesia. Adherence to the following recommendations greatly reduces the risk of an acute attack:

Minimizing the preoperative fast as much as possible and providing intravenous glucose (10% dextrose in half-normal saline) in the perioperative period

Anesthesia induction using non-barbiturate agents that have little or no P450-inducing activity (e.g., propofol, ketamine, short-acting benzodiazepines). Inhalation agents (isoflurane) and muscle relaxants also appear to be low-risk for triggering an attack.

Prevention of acute attacks

does not

involve the following:

Use of glucose. Because glucose is used to treat acute attacks, its use in preventing attacks has been suggested, and is in fact touted in lay discussions of porphyria; however, there is no evidence that heterozygotes can protect themselves by overeating or adopting a high-carbohydrate diet, and they risk becoming obese. Heterozygotes should adhere to a healthful diet with the usual balance of protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Weight loss is possible but only by incremental restriction of calories combined with exercise. Extreme diets (e.g., all bacon, all brown rice, starvation) are risky and should be avoided.

Liver transplantation. Because the vast majority of attacks respond to hematin and other supportive measures, liver transplantation has no role in prevention of acute attacks in a CPOX heterozygote.
