Dietary restriction of protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays of long-term management.

Diet. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for dietary protein is higher than the minimum needed for normal growth and, hence, most children with a urea cycle disorder (UCD) can receive less than the RDA of protein and still maintain adequate growth. To achieve this end [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]:

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, branched chain amino acids, and arginine should be maintained within normal ranges.

Serum plasma total protein and prealbumin levels should be maintained within the low normal ranges.

Plasma glutamine concentration should be maintained at less than 1000 µmol/L if possible [normal range for individuals ages two to 18 years is 266-746 µmol/L].

Some of the correlations between compliance with the prescribed diet and outcome are contradictory. Although in some patients dietary therapy along with arginine supplementation have been shown to reverse the abnormalities of hair, to improve cognitive outcome, and to reverse abnormalities on EEG [Coryell et al 1964, Kvedar et al 1991, Ficicioglu et al 2009], in many dietary therapy has not been shown to influence the outcome of liver disease or cognitive impairment [Mori et al 2002, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010].

Arginine base supplementation. The doses of arginine base routinely recommended are 400-700 mg/kg/day in persons weighing less than 20 kg and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day in those weighing more than 20 kg. Supplementation with arginine base helps replenish this amino acid (which is deficient in persons with ASL deficiency) and promote excretion of nitrogen through the urea cycle as argininosuccinate. Arginine base is preferred for long-term chronic treatment as the chronic use of arginine hydrochloride may lead to hyperchloremic acidosis.

Arginine base supplementation has been shown to reverse the hair changes; however, its efficacy in preventing the chronic complications is not known. While evidence suggests that arginine base supplementation may prevent metabolic decompensations in those with severe early-onset disease, long-term follow up of persons identified through newborn screening programs did not detect a difference in outcomes between those who were supplemented with arginine base and those who were not [Batshaw et al 2001, Ficicioglu et al 2009, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. As the renal clearance of argininosuccinic acid is high, increasing its production through arginine supplementation effectively increases waste nitrogen disposal, thereby decreasing the risk of hyperammonemia. However, because of the theoretic risk of argininosuccinic acid toxicity on hepatocytes, reducing the amount of supplemental arginine by initiating nitrogen scavenging therapy may have merits.

Oral nitrogen scavenging therapy. Patients who have had frequent metabolic decompensations or episodes of elevated ammonia despite being on a protein-restricted diet and arginine base supplementation are candidates for oral nitrogen scavenging therapy, an alternative pathway therapy in which sodium benzoate and sodium phenyl butyrate stimulate the excretion of nitrogen in the form of hippuric acid and phenylacetylglutamine, respectively [Batshaw et al 2001]. The dose of sodium phenyl butyrate is 400-600 mg/kg/day for persons weighing up to 20 kg and 9-13 g/m2/day for those weighing more than 20 kg; the dose of sodium benzoate is 250-500 mg/kg/day.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Long-term correction of ASL deficiency in the liver can be accomplished by OLT [Lee & Goss 2001] which has resulted in “biochemical cure” [Robberecht et al 2006, Marble et al 2008, Newnham et al 2008]. However, OLT does not correct the arginine deficiency or elevation of argininosuccinic acid at the tissue level, two abnormalities thought to account for the long-term complications of ASL deficiency. Thus, the authors have recommended OLT only in patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations that are resistant to conventional medical therapy, or in patients who develop cirrhosis with associated metabolic decompensations [Author, personal observations].
