Prospective randomized trials have not been conducted in ARVC for the prevention of arrhythmias. Management relies on personalized recommendations based on clinical assessment.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). Observational studies support that ICD placement is effective in reducing the risk for sudden cardiac death in ARVC. ICD placement should be considered in anyone with a clinical diagnosis of ARVC. Corrado et al [2010] reported results of ICD implantation in 106 individuals with ARVC who met task force criteria. Device placement was based on the presence of arrhythmia risk factor defined as syncope, family history of sudden death, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and whether ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation was inducible in an electrophysiology done at the time of device implant. Over the follow-up interval of 58 months, 24% of subjects had an appropriate ICD discharge. Syncope was found to predict appropriate ICD discharge. The advisability of placing an ICD for primary prevention remains a question of debate [Zorzi et al 2016].

The ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, which are based on experience and previously published reports recommend as a Class I indication (i.e., procedure/treatment should be performed) ICD implantation for prevention of sudden cardiac death in individuals with documented sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation who have a reasonable expectation of survival with good functional status for more than one year. Class II indications (i.e., it is reasonable to perform procedure/treatment) for ICD implantation include extensive disease (e.g., left ventricular involvement), family members with sudden death, or undiagnosed syncope when ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia cannot be excluded as the cause of syncope while the individual was on optimal medical therapy [Tracy et al 2013, Priori et al 2015].
