In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele because the 1%-3%/year risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated less than 1%/year risk for thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation. Because the initial thrombosis in factor V Leiden heterozygotes occurs in association with other circumstantial risk factors in 50% of cases, a short course of prophylactic anticoagulation during exposure to hemostatic stresses may prevent some of these episodes.

Prophylactic anticoagulation should be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for all asymptomatic carriers.

Decisions regarding prophylactic anticoagulation should be based on a risk/benefit assessment in each individual case. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in consensus guidelines [Geerts et al 2008].

Pregnancy. No consensus exists on the optimal management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are similar to those for individuals who are not pregnant [Kujovich 2004b, Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Until more specific guidelines are defined by prospective trials, decisions about anticoagulation should be individualized based on the thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis. These women should be warned about potential thrombotic complications, counseled about the risks and benefits of anticoagulation during pregnancy, and offered a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation after delivery, as the greatest thrombotic risk is in the initial postpartum period [Bates et al 2008].

Is recommended for women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of unprovoked VTE. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin should be given during pregnancy, followed by a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation post partum [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for heterozygous women with a prior estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for asymptomatic women with homozygous factor V Leiden or double heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or with other combined thrombophilic defects, especially those with circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Barbour 2001, Bates et al 2008].

Graduated elastic compression stockings are recommended for all women with a prior DVT [Bates et al 2008].
