Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The two ERTs using recombinant or gene-activated human α-Gal A enzyme that have been evaluated in clinical trials are Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and Replagal™ (agalsidase alfa 0.2 mg/kg every 2 weeks). Both were approved in 2001 by the European Agency for Evaluation of Medical Products; only Fabrazyme® was approved by the FDA for use in the United States.

The following is a summary of some of the clinical trials for each drug:

Single-center double-blind placebo-controlled studies of agalsidase alfa have shown a beneficial effect of ERT on neuropathic pain [Schiffmann et al 2001] and left ventricular hypertrophy [Hughes et al 2008]. Data from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) suggest that ERT with agalsidase alfa improves pain and quality of life, reduces the natural rate of decline of renal and cardiac function in males and females with Fabry disease [Mehta et al 2009] and may improve life expectancy [Beck et al 2015]. The enzyme is safe in children [Ramaswami et al 2006]. In persons with advanced renal disease, weekly administration of 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa may be associated with a slower decline in renal function [Schiffmann et al 2007, Schiffmann et al 2015].

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of agalsidase beta demonstrated increased clearance of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) from the endothelial cells of the kidney, heart, and skin among treated subjects [Eng et al 2001].

A Phase IV extension study showed that the risk of major clinical events (a combination of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, development of ESRD, or a 33% increase in serum creatinine concentration) was reduced by 53% with agalsidase beta treatment after adjustment for baseline proteinuria (P=0.06) [Banikazemi et al 2007]. In a ten-year follow up of these individuals, with additional data from the Fabry Registry, Germain et al [2015] reported that 49 of 52 were alive and 42/52 (81%) did not experience any severe clinical events during the ten-year treatment interval. Disease progression was most likely to be observed in those individuals who initiated treatment after age 40 years and/or had advanced renal disease at baseline. A study of cardiac outcomes from the Fabry Registry of 115 males treated with agalsidase beta for at least two years reports that treated individuals fared better than 48 untreated males. Left ventricular mass fell at a slope of -3.6 g/year in 31 males aged 18-30 years but rose by 9.5 g/year in 15 males who were not treated [Germain et al 2013].

The largest comparative study is the Canadian Fabry Disease initiative. Sirrs et al [2014] have reported five-year follow-up data on 362 subjects for a composite endpoint (death, neurologic or cardiovascular events, development of ESRD, or sustained increase in serum creatinine of 50% from baseline). Ninety-two of 178 individuals treated with ERT were randomly allocated to either agalsidase alfa or agalsidase beta. No differences were found with regard to the clinical efficacy of the two medications, and individuals who switched from agalsidase beta to agalsidase alfa during the time of Fabrazyme® shortage were stable. In comparison with the placebo group in the Banikazemi study individuals treated with ERT had a significant reduction in clinical events, which occurred at an older age. The eight-year follow-up data continued to suggest that the two medications are equivalent at their standard doses [M West, personal communication].

Antibody formation has been reported with both agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta in males, but not females [Linthorst et al 2005, Wilcox et al 2012]. Lenders et al [2015] reported that 40% of 68 males with Fabry disease on ERT have evidence of serum-mediated inhibition of agalsidase activity. They further reported that inhibition-positive individuals have worse clinical outcomes and higher levels of lyso-Gb3 than inhibition-negative individuals. There appeared to be no difference between agalsidase alfa and beta with regard to the development of serum inhibitors. The impact of antibody formation on the overall efficacy of treatment is currently unknown.

During 2009-2012, a shortage of agalsidase beta resulted in the substitution of agalsidase alfa for agalsidase beta in several cohorts of affected individuals. Reports thus far have not indicated any significant difference in clinical parameters as a result of this transition [Smid et al 2011, Tsuboi & Yamamoto 2012, Pisani et al 2013, Goker-Alpan et al 2016].

Lubanda et al [2009] have shown in a small study of 21 individuals that those who have been ‘stabilized’ with agalsidase beta at 1 g/kg can thereafter be safely treated with a maintenance dose of 0.3 g/kg every other week. A study of lower-dose agalsidase beta has been conducted in children (FIELD study [Wijburg et al 2015]); it will be interesting to observe if lower doses of agalsidase beta are equally efficacious in children.

There is an emerging consensus that ERT has, at best, a limited impact on the long-term outcome of Fabry disease. Studies of consecutive affected persons from individual centers suggest that cardiac, renal, and cerebrovascular outcomes are comparable among treated and untreated cohorts [Rombach et al 2013, Weidemann et al 2013]. A recent Cochrane review has also highlighted the generally poor quality of evidence in favor of ERT for Fabry disease.

Despite these emerging data, a panel of physician experts have recommended that ERT be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease, including children and those with ESRD undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation, and in heterozygous females with significant disease [Desnick et al 2003, Eng et al 2006] because all are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and neurologic complications including transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The treatment initiation guidelines from a group of European physicians are generally more conservative [Biegstraaten et al 2015]. They emphasize the need to start ERT before the advent of irreversible complications and suggest that initiation of ERT after irreversible organ damage has occurred is to be avoided. ERT should be discontinued if it is making no impact on organ function in an individual; and compliance should be closely monitored.
