The ability to prevent the primary manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis (regardless of genetic cause) is limited.

The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation. If a low-fat diet is chosen, extra attention to providing fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) is needed.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals may minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]. Anti-oxidant therapy is very low risk and low cost, and thus, an appropriate first course of action [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Cessation/abstinence from smoking and alcohol, the strongest recommendation for all persons with pancreatitis. Substantial evidence shows that oxidative stress from alcohol and tobacco smoke is inherently linked to progression and pain in pancreatitis [Schoenberg et al 1995, Petrov 2010, Tandon & Garg 2011]. This observation provides a pathophysiologic link for alcohol and tobacco smoking as risk factors, and also suggests that nutrition control may be an important preventive measure. Smoking is also a major risk for pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Note: Men with one high-risk CLDN2 variant and women with two high-risk CLDN2 variants should be strongly urged to stop drinking immediately and directed to effective treatment programs.

Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels & Whitcomb 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].
