Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)

HSCT is considered standard of care for children with severe MPS I. Outcome from HSCT is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time of diagnosis (and thus, with the age of the patient). Due to the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with severe MPS I.

HSCT should be used only in carefully selected children with extensive pretransplantation clinical assessment and counseling in whom systematic long-term monitoring will be possible [Aldenhoven et al 2015a, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Adults have not undergone HSCT.

Pulmonary and cardiac complications in the peri-transplant period appear to be significant predictors of transplant complications [Orchard et al 2010].

In general, the outcome of children undergoing HSCT is varied and depends on the degree of clinical involvement and the child's age at the time of transplantation. It is generally recommended that HSCT be performed before age two years to maximize benefit.

HSCT has been successful in reducing the progression of some findings in children with severe MPS I [Vellodi et al 1997, Guffon et al 1998, Neufeld & Muenzer 2001, Souillet et al 2003, Staba et al 2004, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Although the heterogeneity of the disease makes the outcomes of HSCT somewhat difficult to interpret, available data show that:

Successful HSCT reduces facial coarseness, and hepatosplenomegaly, improves hearing, and maintains normal heart function;

The skeletal manifestations and corneal clouding continue to progress at the same rate in children treated with HSCT and in untreated children [Weisstein et al 2004, Taylor et al 2008];

The degree to which HSCT relieves neurologic complications other than progressive intellectual decline is not clear: a few reports suggest improvement [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Valayannopoulos et al 2010] whereas others do not [Eisengart et al 2013, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. In children undergoing HSCT before evidence of significant developmental delay (i.e., usually between ages 12 and 18 months), HSCT appears to slow the course of cognitive decline. Children showing significant cognitive impairment prior to undergoing HSCT do not show correction of existing impairment.

HSCT is not curative and does not ameliorate cardiac valvular or skeletal manifestations.

In individuals predicted to have severe MPS I based on the presence of known severe pathogenic variants, use of HSCT resulted in stabilization and improvement of myocardial function with regression of hypertrophy and normalization of chamber dimensions [Braunlin et al 2003]. In that cohort, HSCT did not appear to show significant effects on the presence and progression of valvular involvement.

In part because of increased longevity after HSCT, treated individuals develop increasing pain and stiffness of the hips and knees, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord compression, and progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis [reviewed in Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. As a result, various orthopedic procedures intended to maintain function and gait have been performed post-HSCT [Masterson et al 1996, Tandon et al 1996].

Pathophysiology. The beneficial effect of HSCT is thought to result from the replacement of deficient macrophages by marrow-derived donor macrophages (Kupffer cells; pulmonary, splenic, nodal, tonsilar, and peritoneal macrophages; and microglial cells) that constitute an ongoing source of normal enzyme capable of gaining access to the various sites of storage [Guffon et al 1998, Prasad & Kurtzberg 2010]. As existing damage is not reversed, early HSCT is critical for optimal effect.

One hypothesis regarding the failure of HSCT in treating skeletal manifestations is the relatively poor vascularity of bone tissues [Taylor et al 2008].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Laronidase (Aldurazyme®) is currently licensed in the US, Europe, and Canada for use in treating non-CNS manifestations of MPS I. The current dose regime involves premedication with an anti-inflammatory and antihistamine drugs and intravenous weekly infusion of 100 U/kg of Aldurazyme® over four hours. Note that the package insert provides details that may differ by country.

The potential effect of Aldurazyme® on the progression of somatic findings and (more importantly) the effect that Aldurazyme® may have when started very early in the treatment of an individual with attenuated disease remain to be answered. The latter is particularly important as early diagnosis is critical. Aldurazyme® does not cross the blood-brain barrier and thus is not expected to influence the CNS disease in severely affected individuals.

A Phase I open label study included ten individuals with attenuated MPS I treated with human α-L-iduronidase and studied over one year. This study showed improvement in liver size, growth, joint mobility, breathing, and sleep apnea. Increased ability to perform daily functions was reported [Kakkis et al 2001]. A six-year follow up of five of the treated individuals showed sustained improvements in joint range of motion and sleep apnea and no progression of heart disease, but evidence of progression of valvular involvement [Sifuentes et al 2007].

A Phase III double-blind placebo-controlled study included 45 individuals with attenuated MPS I treated for 52 weeks with a 26-week placebo phase [Wraith et al 2005]. This study showed statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function and a six-minute walk test and clear biologic effect with reduction in urinary GAG excretion and liver volume. Patients who had significant sleep apnea at the start of the study improved significantly.

Other case reports representing smaller numbers of treated patients show variable responsiveness to treatment. The heterogeneity of treated patients published to date complicates any conclusions that can be drawn. It appears that the ability of ERT to reverse disease symptoms in individuals with attenuated disease relates closely to the burden of disease prior to commencement of treatment.

All published reports indicate that ERT is well tolerated. Although most individuals treated in either clinical trial developed IgG antibodies, no apparent clinical effects have been reported. These antibodies may, however, hinder therapeutic benefit by promoting more rapid clearance of the enzyme. Follow up of individuals who were part of the Phase I and Phase III studies indicates that immune tolerance is eventually reached [Kakavanos et al 2003, Wraith et al 2005].

A Phase III extension trial included 40 of the individuals from the Phase III trial for an additional four years of treatment [Clarke et al 2009].

Urinary GAG levels decreased 60%-70% before the reduction rate plateaued after 12 weeks (with 15% of patients achieving normal values).

Hepatic volume normalized in 92%.

Respiratory function either improved slightly or remained constant.

Shoulder joint mobility increased gradually, with larger increases being seen in persons with more severe disease.

Timed walk measurements remained largely constant.

Quality of life index improved in most (especially with respect to pain).

Visual acuity improved in 24% although corneal clouding was unchanged.

Growth resumed in approximately 70%; although the growth rate increased with treatment, the final height was still reduced.

The most common reactions were of an immune nature; most were not serious, indicating that Aldurazyme® is generally well tolerated. IgG antibodies to Aldurazyme® were produced in 93% of patients, in inverse correlation to urinary GAG excretion levels; they were not, however, directly related to adverse immune reactions.

Other studies have shown:

Improvement in height and cranial diameter with earlier administration of Aldurazyme® (age <1 year) as compared to later administration (age ≥3 years), despite no measurable improvement in growth rate when treatment was started at age one year [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010b];

Improvement of learning performance in one of three patients and noticeable alteration of MRI profile after 3.5-4.5 years of ERT in 3/3 persons with attenuated disease [Valayannopoulos et al 2010]; however, many more individuals would need to be treated to confirm this finding.

Clear differences between early initiation (age 5 months) and late initiation (age 5 years) of ERT in sibs with attenuated MPS I [Coppa et al 2010].

Pathophysiology. The effectiveness of ERT depends on the ability of recombinant enzymes (supplied intravenously) to enter cells and to localize to the lysosome, the appropriate intracellular site [Russell & Clarke 1999].
