Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is necessary for the treatment/management of HFI (Table 3).

Specific ingredients to avoid include fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, agave syrup, inverted sugar, maple-flavored syrup, molasses, palm or coconut sugar, and sorghum.

In addition, medicines and formulas in which fructose/sucrose may not be listed as a primary component, examples of which include syrups, enema solutions, some immunoglobulin solutions, and many infant and pediatric nutritional drinks. When ingredients are listed, the terms “sugar,” “table sugar,” “natural flavorings” and even in some cases “sugar-free” or “no added sugar” (with no further clarification on the type of carbohydrate used) should raise suspicion for the presence of fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Table 3. 

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Food Category

Foods Permitted

Foods Prohibited

Dairy

Any milk, cheese, eggs

Milk products w/added sugar (sweetened yogurt, fruit yogurt, milkshake, chocolate milk)

Meat

Beef, veal, lamb, pork

Ham, bacon, hot dogs, processed meats; any other meat where sugar is used in processing

Fish

All fish

None

Poultry

Chicken, turkey

None

Cereal

Cooked or ready-to-eat cereals (except sweetened & sugar-coated cereals)

Sweetened/sugar-coated cereals

Fruit

None

All fruits, fruit juices, including squashes & cordials, & fruit extracts prohibited

Vegetables

Asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, green beans, green peppers, lettuce, nuts, onions, potatoes, spinach, wax beans

All other vegetables, including sweet potatoes

Bread

Breads prepared w/out fructose, sucrose, sugar, or sorbitol; soda crackers & saltines

Any breads or crackers prepared w/fructose/sucrose/sugar/sorbitol

Fat sources

Butter, margarine, oil, mayonnaise / mustard prepared w/out sugar

Mayonnaises, mustards, & salad dressings made with sugar

Desserts and sweeteners

Dietetic jello, dietetic ice cream, dietetic puddings; natural yogurt; glucose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose & zero-calorie sweeteners

All desserts containing sugar (cake, pie, cookies, candy, jello, ice cream, sherbet, honey, fruit juice); sugar, sucrose, sorbitol, fructose

Miscellaneous

Vegetable juices, coffee, tea, salt, pepper, broths/soups from permitted vegetables; some sugar substitutes; some dietetic beverages; pasta; rice; cinnamon, garlic, poppy seeds; peanut butter (when pure & w/out added sugars)

Ketchup & any other sauces / condiments containing sugar, jam, jelly, preserves, carbonated beverages / soda; peanut butter if prepared w/added sugars; chewing gum w/sorbitol

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

During hospitalizations special caution should be taken to avoid use of fructose-containing intravenous fluids. A number of reported accidental and iatrogenic fructose infusion-related deaths have prompted greater awareness of HFI [Locher 1987, Sachs et al 1993, Curran & Havill 2002, Müller et al 2003]; however, with a rare disorder such as HFI and in circumstances in which specific dietary (and infusion) restrictions may not be adequately disclosed, the danger of exposure in a hospital setting remains [Cox 1993]. The following are recommendations:

During any hospitalization, all members of the care team should be aware of the diagnosis of HFI and the patient is advised to wear at all times a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace that provides information about the diagnosis of HFI.

‘Red flags’ should be placed in the patient’s chart or medical record to alert practitioners to the HFI diagnosis and to medical risks associated with exposures to foods and/or medications (oral or parenteral) containing fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Specific medicines known to contain fructose or fructose-like substances should be avoided.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should be utilized and medications should be cleared for use on a case-by-case basis.

Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a favorable approach to diagnosis of HFI.

Dietary restriction should be strictly followed and maintained, especially in infancy. Although some have suggested that after age two years dietary restrictions can be relaxed somewhat [Steinmann & Santer 2011], currently, there are no specific guidelines regarding dietary fructose limits in any age group.

Tolerance of dietary fructose probably depends on an individual’s residual enzyme activity. Furthermore, because actual fructose content in foods may be unreliably reported or difficult to ascertain, adherence to complete dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol may be difficult attain and unrealistic for some patients with HFI.
