Preventive treatment is intended to decrease the frequency and intensity of paralytic attacks. Triggering factors need to be identified and, if possible, avoided (see Table 7).

A diet rather low in sodium and carbohydrate and rich in potassium is recommended.

Potassium supplementation for prevention and treatment of attacks is an empiric but effective treatment for shortening attacks and sometimes preventing their occurrence (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Oral intake of potassium salts (10-20 mmol/dose, 3 doses/day) can prevent attacks, especially if the dose of potassium is taken some hours before the usual time of the attack (i.e., a nocturnal dose if crises occur at awakening).

Acetazolamide is generally considered the additive treatment of choice for prevention of paralytic attacks and myopathy in HOKPP. However, there is no standardized treatment regimen and no consensus as to when to start treatment with acetazolamide.

Typical dosage for acetazolamide in adults is between 125 mg/day and 1000 mg/day (usually 250-500 mg/day), divided into three doses and taken with meals; in children a dose of 5-10 mg/kg/day, divided into three doses and taken with meals, is used.

Acetazolamide treatment:

Is beneficial in approximately 50% of individuals with HOKPP;

Has no effect in 30% of affected individuals;

Exacerbates symptoms in approximately 20% (this deleterious effect may be predicted by genotype, see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations).

In some affected persons, permanent weakness may be partly reversed and muscle strength may be improved by acetazolamide treatment [Links et al 1988].

Whether acetazolamide treatment prevents or treats myopathy and the resulting fixed weakness that occurs with age is unknown.

Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect of preventive acetazolamide treatment on attack rate, severity-weighted attack rate, permanent weakness, and myopathy.

Alternatives to acetazolamide. If acetazolamide is not tolerated or if it is not effective after prolonged use, alternatives include dichlorphenamide (50-200 mg/day), triamterene (50-150 mg/day), and spironolactone (25-100 mg/day).

Other drugs have been used with limited success: lithium gluconate [Confavreux et al 1991] (though Ottosson & Persson [1971] earlier demonstrated lack of efficacy); pinacidil [Ligtenberg et al 1996]; and bumetanide [Wu et al 2013].
