Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Idursulfase (Elaprase®) is a recombinant form of human iduronate 2-sulfatase that has been approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of MPS II [US Food and Drug Administration 2006a, US Food and Drug Administration 2006b].

Clinical efficacy of ERT was shown in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of 96 patients [Muenzer et al 2006]. When compared to the placebo group after one year of treatment, persons in the weekly idursulfase group demonstrated statistically significant improvement of the primary endpoint (a composite of distance walked and lung function). Based on the better clinical response in the group in which medication was administered weekly compared to group in which it was administered every other week, idursulfase was approved in both the US and EU for the treatment of MPS II at a weekly dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Because this trial only studied individuals with the slowly progressive form of the disease, it yielded little information on outcomes in individuals younger than age five years or with early progressive CNS disease.

Results of a study on ERT in children younger than age five years or individuals with severe pulmonary compromise or severe CNS disease have been published [Muenzer et al 2012].

More recently, in a 3.5 year independent follow-up of 27 individuals with MPS II, Tomanin et al [2014] determined that:

Long-term use of ERT was safe;

ERT efficacy was similar in both a younger age group (age 1.6-12 years at the start of ERT) and an older age group (age 12-27 years at the start of ERT); and

Improvement/stabilization of findings such as GAG level, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otologic disorders, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and cardiac valve regurgitation (except mitral valve) was greater in individuals with the early progressive form compared to those with the slowly progressive form.

Since Elaprase® does not cross the blood-brain barrier, no effect on CNS disease is anticipated; however, there is reason to believe that somatic manifestations of those with severe CNS involvement would benefit from ERT. The young age is not adding any safety concerns, and patients have significant amelioration of somatic symptoms [Lampe et al 2014a].

Infusion-related reactions that may occur with use of Elaprase® ERT are comparable to similar reactions seen with other ERT products used in treatment of lysosomal storage disease and with other infused proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., infliximab). The etiology of the more severe forms of these non-allergic reactions, referred to as anaphylactoid, is unknown. Current evidence suggests that anaphylactoid (as opposed to anaphylactic) reactions are not immune mediated [Mayer & Young 2006].

Infusion reactions are generally mild and include brief, insignificant decreases or increases in heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory rate; itching; rash; flushing; and headache. Mild reactions can usually be managed by slowing the infusion rate for several treatments and then slowly returning to the prior rate.

Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines, as is often done for ERT in other conditions, is not suggested on the label for Elaprase®; however, if mild or moderate infusion reactions (e.g., dyspnea, urticaria, or systolic blood pressure changes of ≤20 mm Hg) cannot be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate, the addition of treatment one hour before infusion with diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (or ibuprofen) to the regimen usually resolves the problem. Pretreatment can typically be discontinued after six to ten weeks.

Severe non-allergic anaphylactoid reactions such as major changes in blood pressure, wheezing, stridor, rigors, or drop in oxygen saturations should be immediately addressed by stopping the infusion and giving appropriate doses of subcutaneous (SQ) epinephrine, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine, and hydrocortisone or methylpredinsolone. Subsequent infusions should then be given at a significantly reduced rate with pretreatment with prednisone 24 hours and eight hours before the infusion, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen or ibuprofen orally one hour before the infusion, and IV methylpredinsolone just before beginning the infusion.

Because of the limitation of the design of the clinical trial, it is not known at this time whether the incidence or severity of infusion-related reactions is different for patients younger than age five years with severe respiratory compromise or with severe CNS disease.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using umbilical cord blood or bone marrow is a potential way of providing sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression of the disease [Guffon et al 2009, Annibali et al 2013]; however, the use of HSCT is controversial because of the associated high risk of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, it remains unclear if treatment early in life significantly reduces the progression of neurologic disease [Mullen et al 2000], and anecdotal case reports published to date have been disappointing, quite unlike the reports of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Hurler syndrome (MPS I). Overall, the efficacy of BMT for MPS II cannot be determined until a number of children with MPS II younger than age two years with known or probable severe CNS disease undergoes transplantation, along with documentation of long-term follow up [Tanaka et al 2012]. Although this study needs to be validated, the use of HSCT is difficult to justify since HSCT and ERT have equal efficacy in restoring growth in children with MPS II [Patel et al 2014].
