To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS), the following evaluations are recommended.

Cutaneous/cranial

Consultation with a plastic surgeon regarding aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) or any significant cutis aplasia on the body

Consultation with a dermatologist, which may be especially useful in those with extensive cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (CMTC)

Consideration of skull x-ray; on occasion a bony defect may be present even in the absence of ACC, which may require use of a protective helmet. Ultrasonography and CT can also help assess skull involvement.

Consultation with a neurosurgeon in children with a significant calvarial defect

Cardiovascular

Consultation with a pediatric cardiologist. Echocardiography should be performed even when clinical signs of congenital heart disease are absent.

Any evidence for pulmonary hypertension should be sought.

Systemic blood pressure should be checked.

Abdominal ultrasound examination should be performed to check for splenomegaly and patency of the portal vein.

Neurologic

Brain MRI to delineate any brain malformations and identify lesions suggestive of micro-hemorrhage or ischemia. Infants with brain anomalies are at increased risk for seizures, developmental disability, or motor deficits and warrant evaluation and close follow-up by developmental specialists.

MR angiography and venography to show the vascular anatomy. Surgical procedures may result in unexpected complications if anomalous vasculature is unrecognized. MRI and MRV are also important to guide wound care when the ACC lesion is large and to determine whether protection of the superior sagittal sinus is sufficient.

Ocular. Pediatric ophthalmology assessment of the retina should be obtained within a short time-frame so that lesions at high risk can be treated prior to retinal detachment and/or visual loss.

Other

Abdominal ultrasound to look for liver or renal anomalies

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor
