To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with juvenile hemochromatosis, the following evaluations are recommended:

Serum iron status. Measurements of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity, transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin concentration

Pituitary-gonadal axis. Recording of signs and symptoms of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and measurement of serum concentration of gonadotropins (i.e., FSH, LH) (pituitary gland) and testosterone (testes) or estradiol (ovaries). In several clinical situations, a dynamic evaluation of the pituitary-gonadal axis is required, consisting mainly of a GnRH (gonadotropic releasing hormone) stimulation test. Pituitary MRI may be considered in some cases.

Affected joints. Radiographic evaluation

Bone mineral density. Dual photon absorptiometry of the lumbar spine

Cardiac manifestations. ECG, transthoracic echocardiogram. In individuals without overt clinical manifestations of cardiac failure or arrhythmias, findings suggestive of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (reduced left ventricular compliance) often precede evidence of ventricular dilatation and compromised ejection fraction.

Liver function. Liver histology to determine the extent of liver damage. Documentation of the presence or absence of cirrhosis is of prognostic significance. Current recommendations for HFE-associated classic hereditary hemochromatosis are that HFE p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes with serum ferritin concentration lower than 1000 ng/mL and/or normal liver function enzymes need not be biopsied. Liver biopsy should be considered for individuals with higher serum ferritin concentrations and/or raised liver function enzymes in order to establish prognosis [Morrison et al 2003]. Because of the rarity of juvenile hemochromatosis, a specific protocol for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis is not available, but adaptation of the classic HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis recommendation is a reasonable approach.

Diabetes mellitus. Screening for diabetes mellitus by overnight fasting plasma glucose measurement and, when indicated, by oral glucose tolerance test.
