To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with craniofacial microsomia (CFM), the authors recommend the following evaluations:

Upper airway obstruction. Evaluate all individuals with CFM for clinical findings of upper-airway obstruction with physical examination to assess for tachypnea, stridor, stertor, glossoptosis (e.g., tongue-based upper airway obstruction) increased work of breathing with visible retractions, and/or episodic upper-airway obstruction with apnea.

Children with findings of upper-airway obstruction should be referred to a craniofacial center and/or otolaryngologist.

For those without obvious findings of upper-airway obstruction, a sleep history should be obtained from caretakers to screen for airway obstruction during sleep, and a sleep study and/or sleep medicine consultation should be pursued in those with concerning reports.

Clinical feeding and nutrition evaluation. Assess the nutritional status of the infant/child as part of the general physical examination with weight and height plotted on standard growth charts.

If the child demonstrates both normal parameters for age and normal rate of growth, no further studies are needed.

If the child’s rate of growth and/or current measurements is below the fifth percentile, consultation with a clinical dietitian/nutritionist should be considered. Caretakers should be queried regarding feeding history with particular attention to inadequate suction with breast/bottle feeding, nasal regurgitation, coughing or choking during meals, or recurrent pneumonia. If any of these findings are reported, evaluation by a clinical feeding specialist (often occupational therapist or speech pathologist) and/or videofluoroscopic swallowing study is indicated.

Hearing evaluation. An ear-specific diagnostic hearing evaluation (with either brain stem auditory evoked response or otoacoustic air emissions) in the first two months of life is recommended (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss). Timing of subsequent hearing evaluations should be determined by the patient’s results and medical history.

Cervical spine films. Perform screening cervical spine imaging at age three years, or earlier if there are concerns (e.g., torticollis). If there are abnormalities on the radiographs, referral to an orthopedist is indicated.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis and yearly thereafter with annual physical examination. Radiographs should be obtained for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Echocardiogram. If there are concerns based on history or physical examination, obtain an echocardiogram.

Renal ultrasound examination. A screening renal ultrasound examination should be obtained at the time of diagnosis.
