To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Ophthalmologic assessment to determine visual acuity, field deficits, or refractive errors. Fundoscopic photographs should be filed for later comparison.

Examination of the genitalia in both sexes. It is important to image the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina in all affected females. Pelvic ultrasound examination is preferred.

Calculation of body mass index (BMI) (weight in kg divided by the height in meters squared) can aid in identifying medically significant obesity.

Dietary evaluation if obesity is present (BMI >30)

Renal function studies and renal ultrasound examination for assessment of possible structural renal anomalies. If significant abnormalities are identified, referral to a nephrologist is desirable.

Baseline blood pressure assessment

As nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a commonly overlooked feature of BBS, questioning the individual or parents with regard to the individual’s fluid intake and output can be a simple but helpful diagnostic aid. In some instances, tests of renal concentrating ability by initial urinalysis may be helpful.

Cardiac evaluation including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography

Developmental assessment and/or educational evaluation for the purpose of intervention and planning

Endocrinologic testing as needed including glucose tolerance testing (GTT) for diabetes mellitus, lipid levels, and assessment of thyroid and liver functions. More formal tests of pituitary function may be warranted particularly in assessing fertility and development of secondary sex characteristics. Infertility should not be assumed in all males or females.

Hearing evaluation. Otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and audiometry may reveal subclinical sensorineural hearing loss in adults. Conductive hearing loss is common in children as a result of recurrent otitis media.

Dental evaluation to assess for hygiene, dental crowding, and hypodontia

Neurologic examination to assess for ataxic gait, poor coordination, dysdiadochokinesia, inability to perform tandem gait walking, poor two-point discrimination, and diminished fine motor skills

Consider referral to a clinical geneticist.
