To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Alström syndrome, a complete history of disease should direct detailed physical examination and investigations. A multidisciplinary team should be established to formulate and coordinate monitoring, management, and therapeutic interventions.

Cone-rod dystrophy. Ophthalmologic evaluation, including electroretinogram and visual field testing

Obesity. Measurement of weight and height; calculation of body mass index (BMI)

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry with auditory brain stem response (ABR) and otoacoustic emissions (OAE) to detect sensorineural or conductive hearing loss; assessment of otitis media and conductive hearing loss

Dilated cardiomyopathy. A detailed cardiac history and examination, including auscultation, echocardiography and ECGs. Echocardiography is required to demonstrate ventricular dilation, fibrosis, and decreased myocardial function.

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus

Fasting plasma glucose, even in infancy

A glucose tolerance test (GTT) as early as age six years

Plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from infancy

Hyperlipidemia. A fasting lipid profile, including triglycerides

Endocrine abnormalities

Assessment of thyroid function, including plasma TSH and free T4 concentration. If hyperthyroidism is suspected, free T3 concentration should be done.

Measurement of pituitary hormones

Urologic

History to document urinary difficulties

If the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal, renal ultrasound examination to detect pelvi-calyceal dilatation and bladder ultrasound examination to measure post-voiding residual volumes

Renal disease

Baseline blood pressure; 24-hour blood pressure monitoring

Measurement of plasma BUN, creatinine, urea and electrolytes. If renal function testing is abnormal, ultrasound examination. If abnormalities, refer to a nephrologist.

Hepatic disease

Measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Liver ultrasonography to evaluate for possible hepatomegaly and portal hypertension

If clinically indicated, screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy for varices

Pulmonary disease. Detailed assessment of pulmonary function by chest radiography, combined with pulmonary function tests

Developmental assessment. Educational evaluation for intervention and IEP

Other

Gastrointestinal. If symptoms of reflux esophagitis remain severe, despite acid blockers, perform barium swallow or upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.

Skin. Note acanthosis nigricans (indication of insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus), alopecia, body hair, hirsutism on physical examination.

Orthopedic abnormalities. Note flat feet, scoliosis, barrel chest, kyphoscoliosis on physical examination.

Neurologic manifestations. Neurologic evaluation with EEG to examine for seizures. Note autistic-spectrum behavioral abnormalities, excessive startle, tactile defensiveness, unexplained joint or muscle pain, muscle dystonia, or hyporeflexia.

Medical genetics consultation
