Clinical practice guidelines for MEN type 1 have been developed [Thakker et al 2012] (full text).

PHPT

Parathyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with MEN1, but it is controversial whether to perform subtotal (3.5 glands) or total parathyroidectomy, and whether surgery should be performed at an early or late stage of the disease.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy (i.e. removal of ≤3.5 glands) has resulted in persistent or recurrent hypercalcemia within ten to 12 years after surgery in 40%-60% of patients with MEN1, and in hypocalcemia requiring long-term therapy with vitamin D or its active metabolite calcitriol in 10%-30% [Thakker et al 2012].

Total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation in the forearm may use both fresh and cryopreserved parathyroid tissue. Procedure is dependent on the vitality of cryopreserved cells, which declines with the time interval from cryopreservation to autotransplantation.

Intraoperative monitoring of PTH by rapid assay during surgery to determine successful removal of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue, and to help with the decision to implant parathyroid tissue in the forearm.

Recurrent hypercalcemia is present in more than 50% of patients with autotransplanted parathyroid tissue, and surgical removal of the transplanted grafts is not always successful.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy is suggested as the initial treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN1; total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation may also be reserved for those with extensive disease either at first or at repeat surgery [Thakker et al 2012].

Parathyroidectomy may be reserved for symptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 while asymptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 do not undergo parathyroid surgery but have regular assessment for symptom onset and complications.

Bone anti-resorptive agents administered prior to surgery help to reduce hypercalcemia and limit PTH-dependent bone resorption, thus reducing future risk of osteoporosis.

Some studies have reported that treatment of MEN1-associated hyperparathyroidism by calcimimetics (which act on the calcium-sensing receptor) or octreotide LAR could be also effective, particularly for individuals in whom surgery either has failed or is contraindicated [Faggiano et al 2008, Falchetti et al 2008, Moyes et al 2010].

Pituitary Tumors

PRL-secreting tumors (prolactinomas)

Dopamine agonists such as cabergoline, bromocriptine, pergolide, and quinagolide are the preferred treatment for PRL-secreting tumors.

Cabergoline may be considered the current treatment of choice because of its limited side effects and greater potency [Tichomirowa et al 2009].

Growth hormone-secreting tumors

Transsphenoidal surgery, the first treatment of choice in growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, is effective in 50%-70% of cases.

Somatostatin analogs are the medical therapy of choice for the treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors. Octreotide and lanreotide normalize serum concentration of hGH and IGF1 in more than 50% of treated individuals [Beckers et al 2003].

Dopamine agonists are only rarely effective in treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, although they can be effective in mixed GH-PRL-secreting adenomas and 10%-20% of tumors resistant to somatostatin analogs [Colao et al 1997, Marzullo et al 1999, Freda 2002].

ACTH-secreting tumors

In most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome, the treatment is excision of an adenoma. In the series of Beckers et al [2003], 92% of individuals with an identified microadenoma and 67% with a macro-adenoma were considered to be cured immediately after surgery.

For those ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome that are not cured neurosurgically, radiotherapy may be necessary to reduce the production of ACTH.

Non-secreting pituitary adenomas

In non-secreting pituitary adenomas, surgical treatment using a transsphenoidal approach is the treatment of choice. However, in rare cases of very large adenomas with considerable extracellar extension, the transfrontal approach is the only possibility [Beckers 2002].

In 5%-15% of cases, medical treatment with potent dopaminergic agonists or with somatostatin analogs may shrink the adenoma before surgery [Colao et al 1998].

Published data are not sufficient to compare the treatment of sporadic versus MEN1 syndrome-associated pituitary tumors. Although opinion on this issue differs, Beckers et al [2003] have suggested that aggressive therapy is more frequently needed in MEN1-associated pituitary tumors than in sporadic tumors.

Well-Differentiated Tumors of the Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic (GEP) Tract

Gastrinoma

Medications that can control some of the GEP hormone excess-dependent features of MEN1 syndrome and thus prevent severe and sometimes life-threatening morbidity in MEN1 syndrome include proton pump inhibitors or H2-receptor blockers to reduce gastric acid output [Jensen 1999].

Surgical (versus nonsurgical) management of gastrinoma in MEN1 syndrome is controversial as successful outcome of surgery is rare.

Because MEN1 syndrome gastrinomas occur most commonly in the first and second portions of the duodenum, and less commonly the third and fourth portions of the duodenum and the first jejunal loop, it is important that all these sites be examined during preoperative imaging, intraoperative exploration, and pathologic examination of surgical specimens [Tonelli et al 2005].

A case of a primary lymph node gastrinoma in an individual with MEN1 has been reported and a review of similar cases in the international literature reveals that some gastrinomas in lymph nodes are not the result of metastastic spread. A long-term symptom-free follow up after the excision of a lymph node gastrinoma is the only reliable criterion for the diagnosis of a primary lymph node tumor. Thus, the findings of Zhou et al [2006] supported the possibility that any gastrinoma in persons with MEN1 syndrome should be surgically resected for cure if possible. Anlauf et al [2008] reported the presence of a primary lymph node gastrinoma or occult duodenal microgastrinoma with lymph node metastases in a person with MEN1 syndrome, confirming the need for a systematic search for the primary tumor.

Pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic surgery for asymptomatic individuals with MEN1 syndrome is controversial.

Surgery is usually indicated for insulinoma and most of the other pancreatic tumors observed in MEN1 syndrome. According to Tonelli et al [2005], the best surgical approach for an MEN1 insulinoma is intraoperative localization of nodules greater than approximately 0.5 cm diameter by palpation or intraoperative ultrasound followed either by enucleation (removal) of these nodules or by pancreatic resection if multiple large deep tumors are present.

The optimal therapy of gastrinoma is controversial.

In non-metastasizing gastrinoma within the pancreas, surgery may be curative and should be performed by an experienced endocrine surgeon. MEN1 patients will have multiple small submucosal duodenal gastrinomas and in experienced surgical centers local excision of these tumors with lymph node dissection, duodenectomy, or less commonly duodenopancreatectomy may be also considered together with patient preferences, as such approaches may improve the cure rate.

Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy provides the greatest likelihood of cure for gastrinoma in patients with MEN1, but can be associated with an increased operative mortality and long-term morbidity unless performed by an experienced surgeon.

Non-resectable tumor mass can be treated with somatostatin analogs, biotherapy, targeted radionuclide therapy, locoregional treatments and chemotherapy.

Inoperable or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may be subjected to a chemotherapy. Sunitinib and everolimus may be used for patients with advanced (inoperable or metastatic) progressive well differentiated pancreatic NETs [Thakker et al 2012].

Treatment for non-functioning pancreatic NETs is controversial, some centers considered surgical resection for lesions that are greater than 1 cm in size; other centers recommend surgery only if the tumor is greater than 2 cm.

Occult metastatic disease (i.e. tumors not detected by imaging investigations) may be present in a substantial proportion of these patients at the time of initial presentation.

Carcinoid Tumors

Long-acting somatostatin analogs can control the secretory hyperfunction associated with carcinoid syndrome [Tomassetti et al 2000]; however, the risk for malignant progression of the tumor remains unchanged [Schnirer et al 2003]. Therefore, the treatment of choice for carcinoid is surgical removal, if resectable.

Thymic carcinoid recurred in all individuals with MEN1 syndrome who were followed for more than one year after resection of the tumor [Gibril et al 2003].

For unresectable tumors and those individuals with metastatic disease, treatment with radiotherapy or chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cisplatin, etoposide) may be used [Oberg et al 2008].

Adrenocortical Tumors

Consensus guidelines for the management of MEN1-associated non-functioning tumors do not exist. The risk for malignancy is increased if the tumor has a diameter greater than 4 cm, although adrenocortical carcinomas have been identified in tumors smaller than 4 cm [Thakker et al 2012]. Surgery is suggested for adrenal tumors greater than 4 cm in diameter, for tumors that are 1-4 cm in diameter with atypical or suspicious radiologic features, or for tumors that show significant measurable growth over a six-month interval [Langer et al 2002, Schaefer et al 2008, Gatta-Cherifi et al 2012].
