Bleeding tendency

Local measures are the first-line treatment for mucocutaneous bleeding and often are sufficient to control mild or moderate bleeding. Local measures include packing or endoscopic cauterization of the bleeding site for treatment of epistaxis; suturing for treatment of accidental or surgical wounds; and compression and application of gauzes soaked in tranexamic acid for bleeding from superficial wounds. Mouthwash with tranexamic acid may control gingival bleeding.

Transfusions of platelet concentrates are currently used to transiently increase platelet count. Platelet transfusions have associated risks of possible alloimmunization and subsequent refractoriness to platelet infusions, infectious diseases, and acute reactions. Thus, platelet transfusions should be limited to treatment for active hemorrhages that cannot be otherwise managed, life-threatening bleedings, and/or hemorrhages at critical sites; platelet concentrates may also be used as prophylaxis prior to surgery or other major hemostatic stresses. When available, platelets from HLA-matched donors should be used to prevent or overcome alloimmunization.

Eltrombopag. A Phase II study in 12 persons with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia demonstrated that eltrombopag, an oral drug mimicking the natural hormone that stimulates platelet production, increased platelet counts and abolished bleeding tendency in most instances [Pecci et al 2010]. Thereafter, short-term eltrombopag courses have been successfully used in one affected adult prior to major surgery and in one child with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia [Pecci et al 2012b, Favier et al 2013b]. At the present time, this drug is approved in the US and Europe only for individuals with some forms of acquired thrombocytopenia.

Antifibrinolytic agents. Some authors recommend the systemic administration of antifibrinolytic agents, such as tranexamic or epsilon-aminocaproic acid, to treat mild or moderate mucocutaneous bleeding [Bolton-Maggs et al 2006, Althaus & Greinacher 2009].

Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, DDAVP) shortened bleeding time in some individuals with MYH9RD [Balduini et al 1999]. Successful surgery after prophylaxis with DDAVP has been reported [Pecci et al 2014b]. As not all affected individuals respond to the treatment, a test dose is recommended to identify those who will benefit from this treatment either in future bleeding episodes or in prevention of bleeding at the time of invasive procedures.

Deafness. A total of 11 individuals with an established diagnosis of MYH9RD and severe to profound deafness have received cochlear implantations [Pecci et al 2014b, Nabekura et al 2015]. Ten of them benefited from cochlear implants; nine of them obtained restoration of practically normal hearing and verbal communication abilities.

Glomerular nephropathy

Four affected individuals with renal involvement had their proteinuria greatly reduced by treatment with angiotensin receptor blockers and/or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [Pecci et al 2008]. It is premature to conclude whether this therapeutic approach prevents or delays the development of ESRD.

Dialysis or kidney transplantation is required in individuals with ESRD.

Cataracts. Cataract surgery remedies clouding of the lens.

Elevation of liver enzymes does not require any specific treatment.
