Primary hyperparathyroidism. While the preferred treatment for sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism is parathyroidectomy by a high-volume parathyroid surgeon (most of whom prefer a minimally invasive or targeted approach), the optimal surgical approach to primary hyperparathyroidism in HPT-JT syndrome has not yet been established. However, because many individuals with HPT-JT syndrome present with a single parathyroid tumor, a minimally invasive approach to remove the parathyroid tumor followed by close monitoring for recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism has been suggested. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy requires the use of:

Preoperative imaging (e.g., ultrasound examination, 99mTc-sestamibi scanning [often with concomitant SPECT/CT], CT, and/or MRI to localize the abnormal parathyroid gland); AND

Intraoperative measurement of iPTH (IOPTH) to ensure an adequate resection of all hyperfunctioning tissue.

IOPTH involves measurement of serum iPTH at the initiation of the surgery and again at five minutes and ten minutes following excision of the presumed parathyroid tumor. An IOPTH that drops more than 50% in the first five minutes is highly suggestive of cure. The success rate of such a measurement is over 95%. If the IOPTH does not drop more than 50% in five minutes, residual hyperfunctioning tissue likely remains in situ and further exploration is recommended to look for other abnormally hyperfunctioning glands. Standard cervical exploration to visualize all four parathyroid glands is generally not recommended unless it appears that residual hyperfunctioning tissue remains.

If there is any suggestion of adherence of the parathyroid gland to the thyroid parenchyma, a concomitant thyroid lobectomy should be considered. In the past, prophylactic total parathyroidectomy was suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma in HPT-JT syndrome; however, given the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not widely accepted. Because the disease usually involves a single gland, a multigland resection increases the risk for hypoparathyroidism with no true benefit of reducing disease recurrence. Therefore, subtotal parathyroidectomy (the standard surgery in MEN1) is not recommended.

Regardless of the surgical approach, the risk of recurrent and/or new metachronous disease exists; therefore, regular lifelong serum testing for biochemical evidence of hyperparathyroidism is recommended (see Surveillance).

Parathyroid carcinoma is suspected in those with extremely elevated serum calcium and iPTH levels, more profound symptoms, and clear radiographic evidence of parathyroid neoplasia. In this situation, an en bloc resection including the ipsilateral thyroid lobe should occur. Care to prevent fracture of the tumor, which could seed the local area, is critical. Experienced surgeons can usually distinguish typical benign parathyroid tissue from carcinoma. Benign tissue is peanut butter in color, soft, small, and non-adherent to surrounding structures. Benign tumors are usually oval, round, or kidney-shaped in appearance. In contrast, parathyroid carcinoma is usually hard, firm, white-grey, large, and intimately attached to surrounding structures [Author, personal experience].

Cinacalcet hydrochloride (Sensipar®), a calcimimetic that binds to the calcium-sensing receptor, has been approved for the treatment of severe hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism in individuals who are unable to undergo parathyroidectomy and for the treatment of parathyroid carcinoma-related hypercalcemia [Messa et al 2011]. Its use in CDC73-related disorders has not been reported, but cinacalcet has proven effective in cases of inoperable parathyroid carcinoma [Silverberg et al 2007].

Jaw tumors. Jaw tumors should be treated surgically as indicated based on the size, location, and symptoms of the lesion. Treatment of choice is complete resection, which may not be possible in all cases. There are no well-defined medical approaches to unresectable jaw tumors. Patients should be followed closely because of the possibility of recurrence.

Renal manifestations. No treatment guidelines for renal manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Management guidelines are available for other polycystic kidney diseases, such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; however, the natural history and likelihood of ESRD is likely to be different in HPT-JT syndrome-associated renal disease. Individuals with evidence of cystic kidney disease should be managed by nephrologists on a case-by-case basis.

Uterine tumors. No treatment guidelines for uterine manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Individuals with evidence of a uterine tumor should be managed by a gynecologist on a case-by-case basis.
