Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs). Early identification of an enlarging giant cell astrocytoma permits medical therapy with mTOR inhibitors [Franz et al 2006, Krueger et al 2010], which may obviate the need for neurosurgical intervention in many individuals. However, neurosurgery may still be indicated when the size of the SEGA causes life-threatening neurologic symptoms.

Seizures. Early control of seizures is thought to prevent subsequent epileptic encephalopathy and reduce cognitive behavioral consequences [Muzykewicz et al 2009a, Bombardieri et al 2010]. The efficacy of different treatments for infantile spasms varies among individuals. Despite earlier studies suggesting the contrary, a retrospective review found that vigabatrin controlled infantile spasms in 73% of children with TSC [Camposano et al 2008] (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

The seizures in TSC may be resistant to polydrug therapy with anticonvulsants. A number of small studies have reported excellent results after epilepsy surgery [Avellino et al 1997, Baumgartner et al 1997, Weiner et al 1998, Romanelli et al 2002, Thiele 2004].

Jarrar et al [2004] found that unifocal-onset seizures and mild to no developmental delay at the time of surgery predict excellent long-term outcome.

Romanelli et al [2004] discussed the use of electroencephalographic techniques, functional neuroimaging, and invasive cortical mapping to aid the surgeon in evaluating options for surgical resection in individuals with TSC who have multifocal epileptogenic zones.

Kagawa et al [2005] found that increased radiolabeled alpha-methyl-L-tryptophan uptake on PET scans identifies epileptogenic tubers with 83% accuracy, thus enhancing successful epilepsy surgery.

Weiner et al [2006] used a three-staged bilateral surgical approach in 22 persons with TSC. They suggest that this approach can help identify both primary and secondary epileptogenic zones in young persons with multiple tubers.

Case reports and clinical trials assessing the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of intractable epilepsy in individuals with TSC have been published with encouraging results [Muncy et al 2009, Krueger et al 2013b]; additional trials are underway to confirm these preliminary findings.

Renal angiomyolipoma

For asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipoma measuring >4 cm in diameter or >3 cm and growing rapidly, treatment with an mTOR inhibitor is currently recommended as the most effective first-line therapy in the short term [Davies et al 2011, Bissler et al 2013]. The demonstrated tolerability to date is far preferable to the renal damage caused by angiomyolipoma progression or surgical and embolitic/ablative therapies, though studies are still needed to confirm long-term benefits and safety [Krueger et al 2013b].

Selective embolization followed by corticosteroids, kidney-sparing resection, or ablative therapy for exophytic lesions are acceptable second-line therapy for asymptomatic angiomyolipomas [Bissler et al 2002].

For acute hemorrhage, embolization followed by corticosteroids is more appropriate [Mourikis et al 1999]. Nephrectomy is to be avoided because of the high incidence of complications and increased risk for future renal insufficiency and end-stage renal failure, and the poor prognosis that results from chronic kidney disease.

Facial angiofibromas. Topical mTOR inhibitor formuations have been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of facial angiofibromas.

Cardiac rhabdomyomas. Previous standard of care for the treatment of newborns with cardiac rhabdomyomas resulting in life-threatening complications (i.e., outflow tract obstruction) was surgery. There have now been several reports of off-label use of mTOR inhibitors to treat cardiac rhabdomyomas in infants with TSC with encouraging results [Tiberio et al 2011, Dogan et al 2015, Goyer et al 2015, Mlczoch et al 2015]. These reports indicate that mTOR inhibitors may be a better alternative than surgery for clinically significant cardiac rhabdomyomas.

LAM affects almost exclusively women of childbearing age in whom estrogen is suspected to be involved in stimulating growth of smooth muscle cells in the lung. Medroxy-progesterone treatment and/or oophorectomy reduce the production of estrogen; however, response to treatment is highly individual. Oxygen therapy is necessary with impaired lung function. Persons with severe disease require lung transplantation.

Other trials have demonstrated efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for renal angiomyolipomas and LAM [Bissler et al 2008, McCormack et al 2011]. The FDA approved use of mTOR inhibitors for treatment of the lung issues in people with TSC (May 28, 2015).
