No consensus management guidelines have been developed to date.

Corticosteroids may relieve many of the symptoms of Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED). Several investigators report success with corticosteroid treatment in reducing pain and weakness; improving gait, exercise tolerance, and flexion contractures; and correcting anemia and hepatosplenomegaly [Lindstrom 1974, Baş et al 1999, Wallace et al 2004]. Unsuccessful steroid therapy was reported in one adult.

Individuals with severe symptoms can be treated with a bolus of prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg/day followed by rapid tapering to the lowest alternate-day dose tolerated. Less symptomatic individuals can be started on 0.5-1.0 mg/kg every other day. Some individuals may be able to discontinue steroid therapy during quiescent periods.

Higher-dose steroids may help with acute pain crises.

Note: Steroids may delay bone hyperostosis and prevent or delay the onset of skull involvement. Although histologic studies following steroid therapy showed increased bone resorption and secondary remodeling with increased osteoblastic activity and decreased lamellar bone deposition, several authors reported no regression of sclerosis on radiographic evaluation [Verbruggen et al 1985] or on scintigraphic evaluation [Baş et al 1999]. Lindstrom [1974] and Baş et al [1999] reported diminished sclerosis on radiographs following steroid therapy. Verbruggen et al [1985] and Inaoka et al [2001] reported reduced radioactivity on bone scintigraphy. Long-term follow-up studies should be conducted to evaluate the success of corticosteroid therapy in preventing anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, headaches, and cranial nerve impingement.

Calcitonin. Pain relief from intranasal calcitonin is reported in one patient [Trombetti et al 2012].

Losartan. Reduced bone pain and increased physical activity are reported in two patients treated with losartan [Ayyavoo et al 2014, Simsek-Kiper et al 2014]. Losartan has an anti-TGFβ effect and is being tested in individuals with Marfan syndrome.

Other analgesics and non-pharmacologic methods are frequently used for alleviation of pain.

Surgical treatment for persistent bone pain by intramedullary reaming was reported in a woman age 22 years diagnosed with Ribbing disease [Oztürkmen & Karamehmetoğlu 2011]. Pain in the tibia resolved completely following the surgery; at five-year follow-up, the individual remained pain free.

Craniectomy relieved increased intracranial pressure and headaches in two patients [Author, personal observation].

Hearing loss evaluation by an otolaryngologist should include a BAER and a CT with fine cuts through the inner ear. Reports of successful treatment of hearing loss in CED are rare. Surgical decompression of the internal auditory canals can improve hearing. However, the skull hyperostosis is progressive, and cranial nerve compression often recurs.

Corticosteroids may delay skull hyperostosis and cranial nerve impingement. Lindstrom [1974] reported no change in conductive hearing loss with steroid therapy. A woman age 30 years with a 75-dB neurosensory hearing loss on the right and a 65-dB neurosensory hearing loss of the left experienced some improvement in hearing with prednisone. Her hearing stabilized after decompression of the right internal auditory canal.

Bilateral myringotomy can improve conductive hearing loss resulting from serous otitis in individuals with CED.

A woman age 71 years with bilateral conductive hearing loss and patent internal auditory canals underwent a cochlear implantation, and speech detection improved from 75 dB to 45 dB [Friedland et al 2000]. General contraindications for cochlear implants include a narrowed internal auditory canal and absence of a functioning eighth nerve, both of which can be found in individuals with CED.

Carlson et al [2010] report six individuals with CED and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Three underwent internal auditory canal decompression with mixed results. Conservative management was used in the other three individuals with no worsening of symptoms (see also Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview).
