To date, the treatment of individuals with VPS35-PD does not differ from that of Parkinson disease in general. The following is a brief summary of recommended treatment for PD, based on extensive existing guidelines and recommendations for pharmacotherapy of motor and non-motor manifestations of PD as well as neurosurgical interventions for motor findings [Zesiewicz et al 2010, Oertel et al 2011a, Oertel et al 2011b, Seppi et al 2011, Ferreira et al 2013, Odin et al 2015, Trenkwalder et al 2015].

Pharmacotherapy. Drugs to treat motor manifestations include the precursor of dopamine, levodopa, in combination with a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa, benserazide), dopamine agonists, inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B), anticholinergics, and amantadine. A good levodopa response was seen in nearly all reported individuals with VPS35-PD.

General recommendations for treatment of Parkinson disease of unknown cause include the following:

To reduce or delay side effects (e.g., dyskinesias, hallucinations, impulse control disorder) of levodopa and dopaminergic medication, doses should not exceed the levels required for a satisfactory clinical response. In younger patients, dopamine agonists should be given a preference.

Dyskinesias can be treated with reduction of levodopa doses, use of dopamine receptor agonists, deep-brain stimulation, and continuous application of levodopa or apomorphine.

Patients treated with ergot-derived dopamine agonists require periodic echocardiograms. Ergot-derived dopaminergic drugs should be discontinued if fibrotic heart-valve changes are revealed [Antonini & Poewe 2007].

Deep brain stimulation to the subthalamic nucleus was repeatedly reported to be effective in the treatment of disabling motor fluctuations or dyskinesia in persons with VPS35-PD.

Other. Overall, effective treatment for neuropsychiatric and autonomic symptoms (which may be disabling) is limited. Atypical neuroleptic agents such as low-dose clozapine and reduction of dopaminergic therapy can decrease delusions and hallucinations. If depression occurs, it should be treated according to guidelines. Droxidopa may be used to treat orthostasis.

Patients also benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.
