Initial treatment. Rehydration and intravenous insulin infusion should be started promptly after diagnosis, particularly in infants with ketoacidosis.

Long-term medical management. An appropriate regimen of subcutaneous insulin administration should be established when the infant is stable and tolerating oral feedings. Few data on the most appropriate insulin preparations for young infants are available.

Intermediate-acting insulin preparations (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) tend to have a shorter duration of action in infants, possibly because of smaller dose size or higher subcutaneous blood flow.

The longer-acting preparations with no significant peak-of-action effect such as Lantus® (glargine) or Levemir® (detemir) may work better in small infants.

In individuals with very low insulin requirements, diluted insulin (5 or 10 U/mL) may be more appropriate if used with caution.

Some centers recommend the use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for young infants [Polak & Cave 2007] as a safer, more physiologic, and more accurate way of administering insulin.

Caution:

In general, rapid-acting (lispro and aspart) and short-acting (regular) preparations (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) should be avoided as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events.

Extreme caution should be observed when using a diluted insulin preparation in order to avoid dose errors.

Identification of a KCNJ11 or ABCC8 pathogenic variant is important for clinical management since most individuals with these pathogenic variants can be treated with oral sulfonylureas. Children with pathogenic variants in KCNJ11 or ABCC8 can be transitioned to therapy with oral sulfonylureas; high doses are usually required (0.4-1.0 mg/kg/day of glibenclamide). Transfer protocols are available at www.diabetesgenes.org. Treatment with sulfonylureas is associated with improved glycemic control [Hattersley & Ashcroft 2005, Pearson et al 2006, Thurber et al 2015, Babiker et al 2016].

Long-term insulin therapy is required for all other causes of PNDM, although mild beneficial effect of oral sulfonylureas in persons with GCK pathogenic variants has been reported [Turkkahraman et al 2008, Hussain 2010].

High caloric intake should be maintained to achieve weight gain.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is required in persons with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
