Currently, there is no cure or targeted treatment for AD-HIES, and the mainstay of therapy is prevention of staphylococcal abscesses and pneumonias with anti-staphylococcal prophylactic antibiotics as well as early aggressive treatment of infections. It is important to institute antibiotic therapy at the earliest sign of infection. Many affected individuals progress from minor to major infection rapidly, and systemic signs of infection may be minimal.

Prophylactic antibiotics targeting Staphylococcus aureus and other pyogenic bacteria are primarily used to prevent the pneumonias and their complications.

If structural damage to the lungs (e.g., bronchiectasis and/or pneumatocoeles) occurs, the breadth of antimicrobial coverage is usually extended, as these structural abnormalities become secondarily infected with Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas) or fungi (e.g., Aspergillus).

The combination of prophylactic antimicrobials and aggressive diagnosis and treatment of pneumonias helps to diminish these secondary lung parenchymal abnormalities.

Continued use of antifungal agents to control mucocutaneous candidiasis and to prevent pulmonary disease may be necessary.

The skin disease of eczema and recurrent boils is usually well controlled with antiseptic therapies such as diluted bleach baths (~1/2 - 1 cup of bleach per bath tub of water for 15 minutes 3 times weekly) or frequent swimming in a chlorinated pool.

Adequate skin lubrication is needed with frequent bleach baths.

Medications such as histamine-1 antagonists to control pruritus are helpful for more significant eczema.

Intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin is used with anecdotal improvement for some individuals, especially those who fail to make protective levels of specific antibodies following vaccination challenge; but prospective, randomized controlled studies of immunoglobulin supplementation have not been performed.

There is no known treatment or prevention for the non-immunologic characteristics.

As many individuals have osteopenia and minimal trauma fractures, optimizing of calcium and vitamin D intake is prudent. The role of medications such as bisphosphonates for persons with AD-HIES with osteoporosis is largely unexplored.

Optimal blood pressure management seems appropriate in light of the arterial abnormalities.

Anti-platelet or anticoagulation therapies may be considered for individuals with significant coronary artery aneurysms to prevent myocardial infarction related to clotting with aneurysm.

However, any anti-clotting therapies need to be weighed against the risk of hemoptysis, a recognized complication of fungal or bacterial lung disease in individuals with AD-HIES.

The role of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HSCT) in AD-HIES remains unknown. An adult treated for lymphoma with HSCT had improvement of many of the clinical features of HIES and decreasing IgE concentrations, but then died of transplant-related complications [Nester et al 1998]. A young girl with recurrent infections had full engraftment and reduction of serum IgE concentration that rebounded with the cessation of immunosuppression [Gennery et al 2000]. Recently, two unrelated affected teenagers who received HSCT for non-Hodgkin lymphoma were reported. Their immunologic and non-immunologic features, such as osteoporosis and course facial skin, were corrected [Goussetis et al 2010].
