Lung Disease

Patients with obstructive lung disease should receive standard therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which may include bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, pulmonary rehabilitation, supplemental oxygen, and vaccinations (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal).

Specific therapy for AATD-related lung disease, called augmentation therapy, is the periodic intravenous infusion of pooled human serum alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT). Concordant observational studies show that AAT augmentation therapy can slow the rate of FEV1 decline among individuals with AATD-related emphysema [Seersholm et al 1997, AADRSG 1998, Wencker et al 1998, Tonelli et al 2009].

Two placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials [Dirksen et al 1999, Dirksen et al 2009] have shown trends toward preservation of lung density as determined by chest CT in treated individuals vs. controls.

Results from a third placebo-controlled randomized, clinical trial are pending; however, preliminary findings are consistent with slowing of progression of emphysema [Chapman et al 2013].

Guidelines available from the American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society [2003] and from the Canadian Thoracic Society [Marciniuk et al 2012]:

Recommend intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with established emphysema. Of note, the greatest benefit evident is observed in individuals with moderate degrees of airflow obstruction (e.g., FEV1 35%-60% predicted).

Do not recommend prophylactic treatment with intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with severe AATD but no demonstrable emphysema.

In addition, the Canadian Thoracic Society guidelines specify that AAT augmentation therapy should be offered to individuals with AATD and evidence of emphysema only when they have stopped smoking and have demonstrated accelerated loss of lung function despite optimal therapy for COPD.

AATD-related lung disease can be modified in asymptomatic individuals by lifestyle changes, including avoidance of smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. It is suspected that regular exercise and good nutrition help maintain lung health.

Approximately 8% of lung transplants in the US are performed in individuals with COPD related to AATD. Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for individuals with end-stage lung disease (i.e., FEV1 <30%) and severe functional impairment despite optimal therapy [Seersholm et al 1994, Trulock 1998]. Some evidence suggests that among comparably affected individuals with AATD, those who receive a lung transplant survive longer (median survival of 11 years in transplant recipients compared to 5 years in those who do not receive a transplant) [Tanash et al 2011].

Note: Though effective in specific subsets of patients with AAT-replete COPD [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003], lung volume reduction surgery confers smaller and shorter-lived improvements in lung function in patients with AATD, and so is not generally recommended [Stoller et al 2007].

Liver Disease

Vitamin E therapy improves liver function in infants with the PI*MZ genotype and in children with cholestasis [Sokol et al 1986, Pittschieler 1991], and could be predicted to help prevent oxidative damage to the lungs. Nonetheless, firm evidence that antioxidant therapy (like Vitamin E) is beneficial in AATD is lacking.

Liver transplantation, the definitive surgical treatment for advanced liver disease, can restore serum AAT levels to normal because a liver from a donor with a PI*MM genotype produces qualitatively and quantitatively normal AAT [Francavilla et al 2000]. Serial lung function measurements following liver transplantation have been studied in a small number of patients to date (N = 17) with a highly variable course following liver transplant [Carey et al 2013]. Overall, 65% of patients experienced a decline in FEV1 post-liver transplant with the mean decline being modest over an average of 49.2 months post-liver transplant and not achieving statistical significance.

The risk for childhood-onset liver disease in infants with the PI*ZZ genotype who are breast-fed during the first month of life was reported to be reduced; however, breast-feeding does not confer absolute protection against the development of severe liver disease [Sveger 1985].

Other

Panniculitis. The often painful nodular lesions of panniculitis may resolve spontaneously or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy [Yesudian et al 2004]; however, when panniculitis is refractory to conventional treatment, it has been shown (anecdotally) to respond to intravenous AAT augmentation therapy in doses higher than the conventional dose of 60 mg/kg [Stoller & Piliang 2008]. Of note, it is presumed that the panniculitis improves because AAT augmentation therapy restores the proteolytic screen in the skin, thereby lessening inflammation.
