Treatment by physicians experienced in diagnosis and management of persons with HCM improves survival and quality of life. Treatment modalities include pharmacologic therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy, and pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibrillators. Cardiac transplantation may be necessary for patients who progress to advanced heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

No treatments currently exist to prevent or decrease disease development or to reverse established manifestations.

Medical management used for symptom palliation typically relies on the following:

Beta blockers

L-type calcium channel blockers

Disopyramide (its negative inotropic effects can reduce obstructive physiology)

Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for treatment of atrial fibrillation and/or ventricular arrhythmias

Note: Direct vasodilators (e.g., ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) should be avoided in patients with obstructive physiology as they may exacerbate obstruction.

Diastolic dysfunction, a common feature of familial HCM that may contribute significantly to symptoms of exertional dyspnea and volume overload independent of obstruction, is typically challenging to treat:

Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers can be used to slow heart rate and increase diastolic filling time.

Diuretics may be considered judiciously to relieve symptomatic volume overload with the caveat that patients may be preload-dependent to maintain adequate cardiac output, particularly if obstructive physiology is present.

When symptomatic obstruction is refractory to medical therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy may be considered to alleviate symptoms:

Surgical myectomy (removal of a section of muscle from the interventricular septum) has a long and established track record for reducing or eliminating symptoms.

Alcohol septal ablation is a more recently developed catheter-based procedure in which ethanol is injected through a septal perforator vessel to induce focal myocardial infarction targeting the portion of the septum that is primarily responsible for obstructive physiology.

For atrial fibrillation (AF), rate control and medical or invasive attempts at rhythm control may be required, based on symptom burden [Gersh et al 2011]. Because of high thromboembolic risk from atrial fibrillation (AF) in HCM, anticoagulation is recommended, even with paroxysmal occurrences.
