Feeding problems in newborns may require special nipples and other strategies to manage weak or uncoordinated sucking.

Gastroesophageal reflux can be associated with poor weight gain and emesis; the customary medical treatment (i.e., upright positioning, motility drugs) is usually effective; sometimes fundoplication as required.

Many antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have been used to treat seizures in individuals with AS; no one drug has proven superior. Medications used for minor motor seizures (e.g., valproic acid, clonazepam, topiramate, lamotrigine, ethosuximide) are more commonly prescribed than medications for major motor seizures (e.g., diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital) [Thibert et al 2009]. Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants. Single medication use is preferred, but seizure breakthrough is common. A few individuals with AS have infrequent seizures and are not on AEDs. Some with uncontrollable seizures have benefited from a ketogenic or low glycemic diet [Thibert et al 2012].

Hypermotoric behaviors are typically resistant to behavioral therapies; accommodation by the family and provision of a safe environment are important.

Most children with AS do not receive drug therapy for hyperactivity, although some may benefit from the use of stimulant medications such as methylphenidate (Ritalin®).

Behavioral modification is effective in treating undesirable behaviors that are socially disruptive or self-injurious.

A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.

Unstable or nonambulatory children may benefit from physical therapy. Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor and oral-motor control. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required, especially for extremely ataxic children.

Speech therapy is essential and should focus on nonverbal methods of communication. Augmentative communication aids such as picture cards or communication boards should be used at the earliest appropriate time. Attempts to teach signing should begin as soon as the child is sufficiently attentive.

Individualization and flexibility in the school are important educational strategies.

Special physical provisions in the classroom, along with teacher aides or assistants, may be needed for effective class integration. Children with AS with excessive hypermotoric behaviors need an accommodating classroom space.

Many families construct safe but confining bedrooms to accommodate disruptive nighttime wakefulness. Administration of 0.3 mg melatonin one hour before sleep may be helpful in some, but should not be given in the middle of the night if the child awakens.

Strabismus may require surgical correction.

Constipation often requires regular use of laxatives such as high fiber or lubricating agents.

Orthopedic problems, particularly subluxed or pronated ankles or tight Achilles tendons, can be corrected by orthotic bracing or surgery.

Thoraco-lumbar jackets may be needed for scoliosis, and individuals with severe curvature may benefit from surgical rod stabilization.
