Cholesterol Supplementation

Devising a treatment strategy for SLOS has been difficult as all factors contributing to the clinical phenotype are not yet known with certainty. It is likely that both low cholesterol levels and elevation of the cholesterol precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC contribute to many of the clinical findings in affected individuals. Therefore, treatment strategies to date have focused on supplying exogenous cholesterol (either as egg yolks or as crystalline cholesterol in either an oil-based or aqueous suspension) in an attempt to raise cholesterol levels and secondarily decrease the levels of the precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC. In general, affected individuals with a more severe biochemical defect require larger doses of cholesterol.

It should be emphasized that dietary studies on cholesterol supplementation have not been conducted in a randomized fashion.

There are multiple reports of dietary cholesterol treatment for SLOS [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997, Linck et al 2000, Chan et al 2009]. Improved growth [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997], reduced photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001, Starck et al 2002a], and increased nerve conduction velocity [Starck et al 2002a] have been objectively documented. However, dietary therapy does not appear to increase the levels of cholesterol in CSF to effect therapeutic effects [van Rooij et al 1997]. There is objective evidence that cholesterol supplementation may alleviate skin photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001]. Additional studies have shown improved tone and achievement of ambulation as well as developmental cognitive and behavioral changes [Irons et al 1997, Tierney et al 2000, Tierney et al 2001]. However, these studies did not have well-defined clinical outcome measures [Svoboda et al 2012].

Nonetheless, cholesterol supplementation should be considered in all individuals with SLOS because it may result in clinical improvement and has minimal side effects [Elias et al 1997, Nwokoro & Mulvihill 1997, Battaile & Steiner 2000].

Other Treatments

Referral to appropriate early intervention and physical/occupational/speech therapies is often required for identified disabilities.

Many infants have difficulty with suck and/or swallow and may require gastrostomy for feeding and support of a nutritionist to help monitor caloric intake and growth. Infants with severe feeding problems generally require the insertion of gastrostomy tubes and/or the use of hypoallergenic, elemental formulas. Because children with SLOS have low muscle mass, careful monitoring of weight gain and growth is necessary so that overconsumption of calories does not lead to obesity.

For those with frequent vomiting or apparent gastroesophageal reflux, a diagnosis of pyloric stenosis should be considered and treated as in the general population. Gastrointestinal reflux and/or constipation require treatment by a gastroenterologist.

Neonatal cholestatic liver disease often resolves with cholesterol and/or bile acid therapy.

Surgical repair may be required for cataracts, ptosis, and/or strabismus.

Syndactyly of hands and/or feet and/or polydactyly may require surgical repair.

Orthopedic management of the early hypotonia and later hypertonia includes the use of AFOs and other orthotics, as well as physical and occupational therapy.

Tendon release surgery or Botox® therapy may be indicated in older children with significant hypertonia.

Dental management can be challenging. Proper positioning, choice of dental devices, and sedation techniques need to be considered [Muzzin & Harper 2003].

Recurrent otitis media may require tympanostomy tube placement.

Photosensitivity can be severe and many children cannot tolerate any exposure to sunlight; others can tolerate varying periods of exposure if properly clothed and protected with a UVA- and UVB-protection sunscreen.
