Management of heart failure. There is no specific treatment for cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmia in Barth syndrome. Standard heart failure (HF) medications are used to improve symptoms, effect reverse remodeling of the ventricle, and improve ventricular function as measured by ejection fraction (EF).

These medications include ACE-inhibitors, beta blockers, and digoxin for typical outpatient management, and intravenous inotropes, including milrinone for in-patient management of acute decompensation.

Therapy received by 22 individuals in the French cohort [Rigaud et al 2013] included: 16/22 beta blockers, 9/22 beta blockers, 11/22 digoxin, 17/22 diuretics, 5/22 anticoagulants, and 5/22 aspirin.

Although no studies are available to evaluate the effectiveness of medical therapy in males with Barth syndrome, when medications are stopped a decline in heart function is often observed. However, this can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from the natural fluctuations of the clinical phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description, Heart failure).

Aspirin should be considered for prevention of clot formation (and thus reduction in the risk for stroke) in males with severe cardiac dysfunction and/or marked LVNC. Suggested aspirin dose is 5 mg/kg daily for children and 81 to 325 mg daily for adults.

The potential role of prophylactic antiarrhythmic medication or implantable cardiac defibrillator for primary arrhythmia prevention has not been clarified.

Cardiac transplantation has been successful when heart failure is severe and intractable [Mangat et al 2007, Roberts et al 2012]; however, given the natural history of improving ventricular function after infancy, cardiac transplantation should be carefully considered.

Management of neutropenia. The treatment of neutropenia in children with Barth syndrome varies, including regular administration of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), administration of G-CSF during times of high risk only (e.g., surgery or infection), prophylactic antibiotics, and other preventive treatment strategies.

Early on, it was suggested that the administration of G-CSF during times of suspected or known bacterial infection may be effective in reducing the incidence of severe infections [Cox et al 1995]. The usual starting dose of G-CSF is 2-3 μg/kg/dose with a frequency of administration ranging from twice a week to every other day [Clarke et al 2013].

In 83 patients, 42 of whom had been treated with G-CSF, the median dose was 2.78 ± 0.78 (SEM) μg/kg/dose (range: 0.45-12.8 μg/kg/dose) [Dale et al 2013]. On average, G-CSF was begun at age 5.8 years, with an average exposure of 7.3 years; none developed acute myeloid leukemia, and treatment responses to G-CSF were maintained long-term.

Of note, although neutropenia appears to improve with G-CSF treatment, in the French cohort in which six affected males were actively treated with G-CSF, two developed a severe infection, including one episode of septic shock [Rigaud et al 2013].

Nutrition. Uncooked cornstarch given prior to bedtime has been recommended as a means of avoiding muscle protein loss overnight. Specific dosing according to age and weight can be obtained from the Barth Syndrome Foundation [Avery 2006].

Educational support in school. The excessive fatigue that boys with Barth syndrome experience and the characteristic cognitive phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description) warrant educational support during the early school-age years [Mazzocco et al 2007] with particular attention to mathematics [Raches & Mazzocco 2012].

Physical therapy. The goal should be attainment of development milestones and functional outcomes while at the same time monitoring cardiovascular status [Jarvis et al 2001].
