Respiratory

Infants and children with abnormal breathing patterns should be considered for apnea monitoring if the abnormality is severe. Supportive therapy may include stimulatory medications such as caffeine or supplementary oxygen, particularly in the newborn period.

Anesthetic management during surgical procedures for infants with significant respiratory disturbance may be accomplished in some cases by the use of:

Regional anesthesia without opioids to avoid exacerbation of apneic episodes [Vodopich & Gordon 2004];

Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine or dexmedetomidine to avoid respiratory depression and other complications of opioids while achieving motion-free images [Sriganesh et al 2014].

In rare cases, mechanical support and/or tracheostomy may be considered in a child with severe respiratory dysfunction.

Aggressive treatment of middle ear infections is indicated to avoid conductive hearing loss.

Hypotonia and therapeutic interventions

Appropriate management and therapy of oromotor dysfunction by a speech therapist

Nasogastric feeding tubes or gastrostomy tube placement for feeding in children with severe dysphagia

Occupational, physical, and speech therapy through early intervention programs

Individualized educational assessment and support for school-aged children to maximize school performance

Periodic neuropsychologic and developmental testing at appropriate ages

Other CNS malformations

Neurosurgical consultation is indicated for those with evidence of hydrocephalus (rapidly increasing head circumference and/or bulging fontanel). Note: When hydrocephalus occurs in JS, it rarely requires shunting.

Posterior fossa cysts and fluid collections rarely require intervention.

Encephalocele may require primary surgical closure.

Seizures should be evaluated and treated by a neurologist using standard antiepileptic drugs.

A variety of psychotropic medications have been used to treat the behavioral complications in Joubert syndrome; no single medication has been uniformly effective for all children.

Ophthalmologic

Surgery as needed for symptomatic ptosis, strabismus, or amblyopia

Corrective lenses for refractive errors

Possible vision therapies for oculomotor apraxia, although specific studies are lacking in this disorder

Interventions for the visually impaired when congenital blindness or progressive retinal dystrophy are present

Renal disease

Consultation with a nephrologist is indicated.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) resulting from nephronophthisis frequently requires dialysis and/or kidney transplantation during the teenage years or later.

Hypertension, anemia, and other complications of ESRD require specific treatment.

Hepatic fibrosis

Consultation with a gastroenterologist is indicated.

Liver failure and/or fibrosis should be managed by a gastroenterologist with arrangements for surgical intervention such as portal shunting for esophageal varices and portal hypertension, as appropriate.

Some individuals have needed orthotopic liver transplantation.

Skeletal

Surgical treatment for polydactyly

Appropriate medical management by an orthopedic specialist for scoliosis

Other

Orofacial clefting is treated by standard surgical interventions.

Tongue tumors that impair normal swallowing or cause respiratory obstruction may require surgical resection.

Symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea and/or tongue hypertrophy in older individuals may require evaluation with a polysomnogram and/or by an otolaryngologist for consideration of adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy, or surgical tongue reduction. Some children have used BiPAP or C-PAP at night.

Consultation with an endocrinologist for menstrual irregularities and for pituitary hormone deficiency (with hormone replacement as indicated) is appropriate.

Obesity should be managed with appropriate measures, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies

Congenital heart defects and situs abnormalities should be treated by conventional therapies.

Surgical correction of Hirschsprung disease (if present) is indicated.
