Neurologic. Supportive therapy can minimize drooling, choreoathetosis, myoclonus/tremor, and ataxia. However, individual responses to specific medications (e.g., amantadine and 4-aminopyridine) and to treatments used for myoclonus vary [Perlman et al 2012, Nissenkorn et al 2013, Shaikh et al 2013, van Egmond et al 2015]. Thus, it is recommended that treatment options be discussed with an experienced neurologist.

Early and continued physical therapy can minimize the risk for contractures (which appear in almost all individuals with time and often lead to other problems such as pressure sores and pain) and scoliosis (which can, for example, be the consequence of prolonged sitting in a wheelchair – particularly the tendency to lean on the same elbow).

Although steroids are reported to temporarily improve the neurologic symptoms of A-T in children, the symptoms reappear within days of their discontinuation [Gatti 1985, Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. (See also Therapies Under Investigation.)

Immunodeficiency. IVIG replacement therapy should be considered for individuals with frequent and severe infections and very low IgG levels [Nowak-Wegrzyn et al 2004].

Pulmonary. The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which can contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in persons with A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Cancer. Because cells from individuals with A-T are 30% more sensitive to ionizing radiation than cells from controls, conventional doses of ionizing radiation are potentially lethal in individuals with A-T. Thus, the use of radiotherapy and some radiomimetic chemotherapeutic agents should be administered carefully and monitored closely [Schütte et al 2016].

Doses of some chemotherapeutic agents are often reduced by 25%-50% and longer recovery periods between treatments are considered to allow for the slower DNA repair that occurs in A-T [Schütte et al 2016].
