The management of thrombosis in individuals with prothrombin-related thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide) [Kearon et al 2012]. Low molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux have largely replaced unfractionated heparin because of their many advantages [Garcia et al 2012].

Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with LMWH or fondaparinux (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international-normalized ratio (INR). A target INR of 2.5 (therapeutic range: 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in F2 20210G>A homozygotes.

Rivaroxaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, is also approved for the treatment of acute DVT and PE and secondary prevention of recurrent VTE.

Note: LMWH and warfarin are both safe in women who are breast-feeding. Rivaroxaban is contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding because animal studies showed reproductive toxicity, and evidence that the drug crosses the placenta and is secreted in milk [Ageno et al 2012].

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be based on an individualized assessment of the risks of VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with VTE experience recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent five years [Prandoni et al 2007]. Recurrence risk is determined by the clinical circumstances of the first event (provoked or unprovoked), adequacy of early treatment, and individual risk factors (see Clinical Description, Recurrent Thrombosis, Risk for recurrent thrombosis in adult 20210G>A heterozygotes.

20210G>A heterozygosity is generally not an indication for long-term anticoagulation in the absence of other risk factors. The presence of a hereditary thrombophilia was not a factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis based on evidence that inherited thrombophilic disorders are not major determinants of VTE recurrence risk [Kearon et al 2012] (full text). Other clinical guidelines and expert opinion also conclude that identification of 20210G>A heterozygosity should not affect clinical decision making [Baglin et al 2010, Bauer 2010, Kyrle et al 2010, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012, National Clinical Guideline Centre 2012]. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2012].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring [Kearon et al 2012]. The decision should be based on an assessment of potential risks and benefits regardless of 20210G>A status [Berg et al 2011]. Long-term anticoagulation is considered in selected individuals homozygous for the 20210G>A allele or with multiple inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders [De Stefano & Rossi 2013]. In these individuals at higher risk for recurrence, the potential benefits of long-term anticoagulation may outweigh the bleeding risks.

LMWH, fondaparinux, warfarin, and rivaroxaban are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of VTE. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin, argatroban, and dabigatran), and apixaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, are approved for use in specific circumstances [Schulman 2014].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. Treatment recommendations for children with VTE are largely adapted from studies in adults. There is no evidence that a 20210G>A allele should influence decisions about the intensity or duration of anticoagulation in children [Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012]. British guidelines for antithrombotic therapy in children do not consider inherited thrombophilia as a determinant of either the intensity or duration of therapy.

Children with a first VTE should receive initial treatment with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH for at least five days. LMWH is favored over warfarin for continued therapy, especially in very young children and those with complex medical problems. Recommendations on the duration of antithrombotic therapy are based on the nature of the thrombotic event (e.g., spontaneous or provoked) [Chalmers et al 2011, Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Anticoagulation is recommended:

For at least three months after a VTE provoked by a clinical risk factor that has resolved.

Beyond three months until the risk factor has resolved in children with ongoing but potentially reversible risk factors.

For six to 12 months after a first idiopathic (unprovoked) VTE.

Indefinitely for those with recurrent idiopathic VTE

Expert opinion emphasizes the importance of a careful risk/benefit assessment in each individual [Raffini & Thornburg 2009, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011].

Consensus guidelines are also available for management of stroke in infants and children [Monagle et al 2012].
