Detailed management guidelines for hereditary spherocytosis (HS) have been published [Eber & Lux 2004, Bolton-Maggs et al 2012].

Conservative management recommendations for mild EPB42-HS (Hgb 11-15 g/dL, reticulocytes 3-8%) (Table 1) include the following:

Folic acid supplementation (400 µg 1x daily until age 1 year; then 1 mg 1x daily thereafter)

Avoidance of iron supplementation unless concurrent iron deficiency is confirmed with iron studies, in which case treatment with supplemental iron should be carefully monitored and discontinued after iron stores are repleted to avoid iron overload

Note: Hereditary spherocytosis (as all chronic hemolytic anemias) involves an increased risk for iron overload even with oral iron supplementation (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, if needed, for hemolytic or aplastic crisis

Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. However, when disease is moderate (see Table 1) and normal activity or quality of life is compromised, splenectomy can be performed after age five years provided that hereditary stomatocytosis has been ruled out (see Differential Diagnosis). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).

Although splenectomy is curative, it entails potential long-term increased risk for life-threatening infection and, thus, should not be undertaken before the risks and benefits have been fully weighed [Casale & Perrotta 2011].

Ideally, the following immunizations should be completed before splenectomy:

Immunizations for Streptococcus pneumoniae with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and for N. meningitidis with a meningococcal conjugate vaccine against the serogroups A, C, W, and Y (MenACWY) at least two weeks before splenectomy. A two-dose primary series of MenACWY is recommended 8-12 weeks apart [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2011].

Prevnar-13® and H. influenzae type b vaccines during infancy per general pediatric immunization guidelines

The incidence of post-splenectomy sepsis varies among studies. Although low overall, the risk for sepsis, a life-threatening complication, is higher than in the general population [Iolascon et al 1998]. To reduce the risk of infection post splenectomy, the following are recommended:

Give booster vaccination for PPSV23 five years after the first dose. No more than two PPSV23 doses are recommended [Pekka Nuorti & Whitney 2010].

Give booster dose for meningococcal vaccine three years after the primary series if the primary two-dose series was given between ages two and six years and every five years for persons whose two-dose primary series or booster dose was given at age seven years or older [Cohn et al 2013].

Serogroup B meningococcal vaccines are recommended for people age ten years and older with history of splenectomy.

Controversy exists regarding the duration of use of antibiotics for prophylaxis post-splenectomy: some hematologists recommend prophylactic antibiotics for the first three years post splenectomy and others for life [Eber & Lux 2004]. The antibiotics recommended are penicillin V-K 250 mg twice daily or erythromycin for those allergic to penicillin.

In any case, an individual who has undergone splenectomy needs immediate medical attention for fever and prompt use of IV antibiotics with good coverage for encapsulated organisms (typically ceftriaxone in doses adequate to treat meningitis: 100 mg/kg/day up to 2 g/day in single daily dose).

Partial splenectomy appears to be associated with a lesser risk for post-splenectomy sepsis and a sustained decrease (although not elimination) of hemolysis and may be preferable for young children if the surgeon is experienced in the procedure [Bader-Meunier et al 2001]. An ongoing prospective observation of more than 100 children in a congenital hemolytic anemia multi-institutional registry, who have undergone total or partial splenectomy, may elucidate better the risks and benefits of each procedure [Rice et al 2012, Rice et al 2015].

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be discontinued one year after partial splenectomy if immune splenic function is adequate as assessed by pit count (percentage of pitted or pocked red cells) or the uptake of radioactive colloid by the spleen [Eber & Lux 2004].

Cholecystectomy

The gallbladder should be removed in affected individuals undergoing splenectomy who have a history of cholelithiasis.

In children who require cholecystectomy, concurrent splenectomy is not recommended automatically any more. The need for splenectomy should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and the indication of splenectomy justified independently [Bolton-Maggs et al 2012, Ruparel et al 2014].
