Treatment options vary based on the predicted disease burden in a particular individual.

Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome

[Buchbinder et al 2014]

Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The only curative treatment clinically available for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is allogeneic HCT. Affected males who receive HCT from a matched healthy sib or closely matched unrelated donor before their second birthday have a greater than 90% probability of being cured of the disorder [Moratto et al 2011, Shin et al 2012].

Currently, males with a WAS pathogenic variant who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS score 3-5), have markedly decreased WASP expression, and have a suitably matched donor are candidates for HCT. Myeloablative conditioning prior to transplantation is the most widely used approach, as reduced-intensity conditioning increases the risk of partial engraftment, which may not be curative [Moratto et al 2011]. Some symptoms (e.g., autoimmune disease) may take months to resolve following complete engraftment.

Since the phenotype of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome may evolve over time, optimal timing of transplantation is challenging. Individuals with absent intracellular WASP detection in hematopoietic cells are likely to develop Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, although a minority will exhibit the milder X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) phenotype throughout their life span. HCT before development of autoimmunity and malignancy is highly desirable, and younger age at transplant is associated with improved long-term outcome following HCT; however, the use of multiple chemotherapeutic agents necessary to achieve myeloablation presents a risk in young infants.

Individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who do not have a suitably matched donor but who experience life-threatening complications are candidates for gene therapy (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Eczema. Topical steroids are the mainstay of therapy. When chronic infections of the skin worsen eczema, antibiotics may be useful.

Infection. For those individuals with clinical signs or symptoms of infection, prompt evaluation and treatment is necessary. The initiation of empiric parenteral antibiotic treatment is necessary in the majority of individuals. The evaluation should be exhaustive until the source of the infection is uncovered. This may include invasive assessments, as cultures and isolation of the offending organism should be sought in order to guide therapy. If HCT is being considered, attention to the prevention and treatment of infectious complications is necessary to limit pre-transplant morbidity.

Autoimmune disease. Treatment usually consists of judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

X-Linked Thrombocytopenia (XLT)

The primary management of individuals with XLT (WAS score 1-2) remains controversial. Although long-term survival is excellent with conservative management of presenting symptoms, event-free survival is reduced by the substantial risk of severe, life-threatening or potentially debilitating complications [Albert et al 2010]. Serious bleeding episodes are generally restricted to the first 30 years of life. In contrast, the risk of developing autoimmune disease, malignancy, or a life-threatening infectious episode is rather constant throughout the individual’s lifetime. This persistent morbidity argues for HCT as a treatment option for such individuals. Given the excellent success in young children with classic Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, HCT may be considered a viable option for individuals with XLT if an HLA–identical donor can be identified. However, one needs to carefully weigh the advantage of a possible cure against the acute risks and long-term consequences of this procedure (e.g., risk of secondary malignancy, infertility). Thus, HCT in XLT needs to be decided on an individual basis.

X-Linked Neutropenia (XLN)

Treatment of XLN is with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and appropriate antibiotics.
