Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including Neurology, Nutrition, Clinical Genetics/ Metabolism, and Developmental Pediatrics. Other specialties including Gastroenterology, Cardiology, Hematology, Immunology, Ophthalmology, and Nephrology may be involved based on the associated complications.

No definite treatment is available to date; thus, treatment is mainly supportive (Table 5). Administration of cofactors and antioxidants, used in mitochondrial disorders with (generally) limited evidence of benefit, may be considered.

Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Inadequate nutrition

A nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube are frequently needed due to feeding difficulties & failure to thrive

In one affected child, improved nutrition resulted in improvement in hypogammaglobulinemia & neutropenia 1

Seizures

Standard treatment w/antiepileptic drugs

Immobility/wheelchair dependence

Consultation w/physical medicine & rehabilitation (PM&R) specialists to help w/mobility or assistive devices (e.g., wheelchair

Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia

Standard treatment per Cardiology recommendations

Neutropenia

Consider granulocyte colony stimulating factor 2

Significant acidosis

Consider bicarbonate therapy

Cataract and/or strabismus

Surgical treatment if indicated

Hearing loss

Hearing aids

1. 

Antoun et al [2016]

2. 

Huemer et al [2015]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Antoun et al [2016]

Huemer et al [2015]

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.
