No disease-modifying drug treatment exists for PNPLA6-related disorders. Given the great phenotypic variability and broad spectrum of the disorders, management of symptoms must be individually tailored.

Ataxia. Management should be directed to providing continuous training in the form of active speech, fine-motor, and gait exercises [Fonteyn et al 2014, Ilg et al 2014, Synofzik & Ilg 2014]:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on active, physically demanding tasks [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010]

Videogame-based whole-body training (“exergames”) with specific videogames aiming to improve coordination and rapid adaptation to changing environments [Ilg et al 2012, Synofzik et al 2013b]

Speech therapy [Sapir et al 2003]

Swallowing therapy

Spasticity. Management should be directed to improving balance, strength, and agility:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on improving muscle strength and gait and reducing spasticity

Assistive walking devices and ankle-foot orthotics

Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., baclofen [oral or intrathecal], tolperison; Botox® injections) and urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin)

Visual impairment. Low vision aids such as magnifiers may facilitate reading for individuals with reduced central acuity.

In the US, publicly funded agencies for the visually impaired at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine) at the time of diagnosis. Thyroid hormone levels should be normalized by replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Growth hormone deficiency. Growth hormone deficiency is treated with hormone replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is treated with hormone replacement therapy, often including gonadotropins, at the expected time of puberty. (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency) for more details about treatment.)
