A team approach to management is recommended [Goldstone et al 2008, Cassidy & McCandless 2010].

Feeding, hyperphagia, and obesity. Special feeding techniques, including special nipples or gavage feeding, may be necessary for the first weeks to months of life to assure adequate nutrition and avoid failure to thrive. Individuals diagnosed with PWS typically do not need a G-tube since the feeding will improve with time.

When weight centiles begin increasing in nutritional phase 2a (typically between 18 and 36 months), a program of a well-balanced, low-calorie diet, regular exercise, and close supervision to minimize food stealing should be instituted to prevent obesity (i.e., BMI Z score of <2) and its consequences. The same program is appropriate if obesity is present at any time. Consultation with a dietician and close follow up are usually necessary, and locking the kitchen, refrigerator, and/or cupboards is often needed once the child is able to open the refrigerator and cupboards. Caloric needs of infants and children with PWS are typically 60%-80% of the recommended daily allowance (RDA). The energy requirement of adults with PWS, which rarely exceeds 1200-1400 Kcal/day, should be considered in planning daily food intake. Assessment of adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake by a dietician, and prescription of appropriate supplementation, is indicated, especially for calcium and vitamin D.

No medications are known to aid in controlling hyperphagia, but several clinical trials are underway (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Gastric bypass is not recommended in PWS, as it does not appear to correct the lack of satiety and will not prevent overeating. In addition, complication rates are high [Scheimann et al 2012].

Growth hormone treatment normalizes height, increases lean body mass, decreases fat mass, and increases mobility, which are beneficial to weight management. Dose recommendations in young children are generally similar to those for individuals with isolated growth hormone deficiency (i.e., ~1 mg/m2/day) but the dose must be individualized as the child grows. Therapy can be started in infancy or at the time of diagnosis. The adult dose of growth hormone is 20%-25% of the dose recommended in children. Monitoring of growth velocity, head circumference, and serum IGF-1 is important to avoid overtreatment.

Controlled trials of growth hormone therapies have demonstrated significant benefit from infancy through adulthood [Carrel et al 2010, Sode-Carlsen et al 2010, Wolfgram et al 2013].

An increase in language and cognitive skills in treated infants [Myers et al 2007] and an improvement in mental speed and flexibility as well as motor performance in adults [Höybye et al 2005] have been reported based on controlled trials.

A review of the results of one to two years of growth hormone treatment among 328 children documented in the database of one pharmaceutical company indicated improved height velocity, particularly in prepubertal children, but no change in BMI [Craig et al 2006].

Significantly greater adult height was demonstrated in 21 individuals treated long term versus 39 untreated individuals without an increase in adverse side effects [Angulo et al 2007].

Some improvements in cognition have been suggested with growth hormone therapy in individuals with PWS [Osório 2012, Siemensma 2012], but more work and longer studies need to be done.

Although there was initial concern about growth hormone treatment contributing to scoliosis in PWS, later studies showed no difference in frequency or severity in those treated compared to those who were not treated [Nagai et al 2006, Angulo et al 2007].

Decreased saliva production can be addressed with products developed for the treatment of dry mouth, including special toothpastes, gels, mouthwash, and gum.

Therapies, education and behavior management. Early intervention in children before age three years, particularly physical therapy, may improve muscle strength and encourage achievement of developmental milestones. In older individuals, daily muscle training increases physical activity and lean body mass [Schlumpf et al 2006].

Initiate appropriate educational programming in children:

Begin speech therapy for language delay and articulation abnormalities in infancy and childhood.

Special education, either in an inclusion setting or in a self-contained classroom setting, is usually necessary during school age. An individual aide is helpful in assuring attendance to task. Social skills training groups have been beneficial.

Behavioral disturbance should be addressed with behavioral management programs, including firm limit setting. While no medication is beneficial in managing behavior in all individuals with PWS, serotonin reuptake inhibitors have helped the largest proportion of affected teenagers and adults, particularly those with obsessive-compulsive symptoms [Brice 2000, Dykens & Shah 2003].

Psychosis is reported to respond well to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, but not to mood stabilizers [Soni et al 2007]. There are no well-designed studies of the effectiveness of treatment for psychosis in PWS [Ho & Dimitropoulos 2010].

Hypogonadism. Cryptorchidism may resolve spontaneously, even up to adolescence, but usually requires hormonal and surgical approaches; however, preservation of fertility is not an issue. Standard treatment is appropriate. Human chorionic gonadotropin treatment for infants with undescended testes should be considered as it can improve the size of the scrotal sac and improve surgical outcome [McCandless 2011; Angulo & Miller, unpublished data].

Replacement of sex hormones produces adequate secondary sexual characteristics but is somewhat controversial because of the possible role of testosterone replacement in behavior problems in males and the role of estrogen replacement in the risk of stroke as well as hygiene concerns related to menstruation in females. Daily use of the testosterone patch or gel may avert exacerbation of behavioral problems by providing a more even blood level than use of a slow-release depo-testosterone injection every month. Also, it was shown in the non-PWS adult population that depo- testosterone injections were associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular events, hospitalizations, and deaths compared with gels and patches [Layton et al 2015].

Concern about osteoporosis should be considered in deciding about hormone replacement. Recent reports of fertility in four women with PWS raise the issue of need for birth control [Akefeldt et al 1999; Schulze et al 2001; Vats & Cassidy, unpublished data].

Sleep issues. Disturbed sleep in children and adults should prompt a sleep study, as treatment may be available. Treatment depends on the cause and may include tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy and/or CPAP or BiPAP, as in the general population.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (unrelated to the degree of sleep apnea) is frequently seen in individuals with PWS. Modafinil has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for this condition [De Cock et al 2011].

Skin picking. One study demonstrated decreased skin picking with topiramate treatment in some individuals [Shapira et al 2004]; other clinicians have reported anecdotally that approximately half of individuals with PWS who skin pick benefit from low-dose (25-50 mg daily) topiramate.

A recent study of 35 individuals with PWS (age 5-39 years) using 450-1200 mg/day of N-acetylcysteine found a high degree of success in reducing or eliminating skin picking [Miller & Angulo 2014].

Other

Management of strabismus is as for any infant.

Management of scoliosis, hip dysplasia, and complications of obesity is as in the general population.

Adulthood. For adults with PWS, the most successful living situation for behavior and weight management is a group home specially designated for individuals with PWS, where diet and access to food are tightly restricted and exercise is included in daily activities. Affected individuals generally require a sheltered employment environment.

Issues of guardianship, wills, trusts, and advocacy should be investigated no later than adolescence.
