Hematologic and immunologic defects

The only treatment that cures the hematologic and immunologic defects is allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). A conditioning regimen, described in detail by Haddad et al [1995], generally includes a combination of etoposide, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide. The current standard of care is HSCT as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed and the accelerated phase has either been ruled out or is in remission.

The most favorable outcome is achieved when HSCT is performed prior to development of the accelerated phase.

If signs of the accelerated phase are present, hemophagocytosis must be brought into clinical remission before HSCT can be performed.

Guidelines for treatment of the accelerated phase, revised in 2004 [Henter et al 2007], are the same as those for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH-2004 protocol). Combination therapy consists of etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine A. Select individuals may also receive intrathecal methotrexate and prednisilone. Remission is achieved in 75% of individuals within eight weeks [Filipovich 2006]; however, relapses are common and response to treatment declines over time. Once remission occurs, prompt HSCT is recommended.

The overall five-year survival rate in 35 children with CHS who underwent HSCT was 62% [Eapen et al 2007]. Success was highest with HLA-matched siblings or unrelated donors; transplantation during the accelerated phase had a higher mortality rate. Individuals in remission following symptoms of the accelerated phase can have successful outcomes following HSCT [Eapen et al 2007].

Ocular abnormalities

Correction of refractive errors may improve visual acuity.

Sunglasses should be used to protect sensitive eyes from UV light.

Skin hypopigmentation. Skin protection varies depending on the degree of hypopigmentation. Regardless, all individuals should use sunscreen to prevent sun damage and skin cancer.

Neurologic abnormalities. Because of the progressive nature of the neurologic symptoms, older patients should engage rehabilitation specialists early in the course of the disease.
