Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Up to 25% of persons with 1p36 deletion syndrome develop infantile spasms associated with a hypsarrhythmic EEG; the spasms are responsive to ACTH.

In most individuals, all seizure types are well controlled by standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), provided that the first-choice drug is started as early as possible.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices, e.g., the "Haberman feeder," can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with an unrepaired cleft palate. Gavage feeding is recommended for those with poorly coordinated swallow. Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner. In one study, a few individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome were managed with gastrostomy [Heilstedt et al 2003b].

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair. "Non-compaction" cardiomyopathy responds well to the standard pharmacotherapy (e.g., furosemide, captopril, digoxin) [Battaglia et al 2008].

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner. Visual inattentiveness, reported in up to 64% of individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome, can be treated with an appropriate rehabilitation program [Bolognini et al 2005, Battaglia et al 2008].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Other. Structural anomalies (e.g., gastrointestinal, renal) should be addressed in a standard manner. Hypothyroidism is treated in a standard manner.
