Adrenal Insufficiency

Acute episodes. Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency are usually treated in an intensive care unit with close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Correction of hyperkalemia may be needed. Individuals are treated by the IV administration of saline, glucose, and hydrocortisone (e.g., Solu-Cortef®). If the serum concentration of electrolytes does not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of Solu-Cortef® is increased. Adequate sodium must be provided.

Chronic treatment. Once the initial acute episode has been treated, affected individuals are started on replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, and oral supplements of sodium chloride (NaCl) in younger children.

Steroid doses need to be adjusted to allow normal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

Maintenance hormone treatment is best managed in growing children by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Treatment during stress. Steroid dosage must be increased during periods of stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgery, trauma); glucose and sodium may be needed.

Local hospitals should provide parents with a plan for emergency treatment and instruction regarding when extra oral or injected hydrocortisone is needed. Parents should have access to rapid medical advice; guidelines for hospital admission should be clear.

Children should carry appropriate documentation indicating that they are steroid deficient. Death from acute adrenal insufficiency in individuals known to have X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita may still occur if steroid replacement therapy is not adequate, particularly during times of stress.

Steroid replacement therapy is monitored clinically and hormonally by an endocrinologist. ACTH levels should normalize when replacement therapy is adequate. A sudden rise in ACTH despite steroid treatment has revealed the presence of a pituitary adenoma in one case [De Menis et al 2005].

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

If there is evidence of HH, treatment with increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty may be necessary and should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.
