Allopurinol. Treatment with the XDH inhibitor allopurinol is effective and generally well-tolerated in individuals with APRT deficiency. Allopurinol 5-10 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 800 mg), either once daily or in two divided doses, minimizes DHA crystalluria, stone formation, crystal deposition in the kidney, and the development of kidney failure [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Treatment with allopurinol can even dissolve DHA kidney stones and improve kidney function in individuals with advanced CKD [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Allopurinol treatment is monitored by clinical evaluation and urine microscopy; the absence of urinary DHA crystals is indicative of adequate therapy.

Febuxostat. The recently introduced XDH inhibitor febuxostat provides an alternative treatment option for affected individuals allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol [Becker et al 2005]. The complete disappearance of urinary DHA crystals was recently described in an indvidual with APRT deficiency treated with febuxostat in the daily dose of 80 mg [Arnadóttir 2014]. Furthermore, the authors of this review have noted a significant reduction or even disappearance of DHA crystalluria in several adult individuals with APRT deficiency treated with a daily febuxostat dose of 80 mg [unpublished observations].

Low purine diet and ample fluid intake provide adjunctive benefits to pharmacologic therapy.

Surgical management of DHA kidney stones is the same as for the management of other types of stones, including extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy.

Treatment of ESRD

Dialysis. Of note, it is not known if individuals with APRT deficiency on dialysis benefit from allopurinol therapy. The allopurinol dose should not routinely be reduced in affected individuals who have impaired kidney function.

Kidney transplantation. All individuals with APRT deficiency undergoing kidney transplantation require treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat) for at least six weeks prior to transplant surgery, whenever possible. Affected individuals who have undergone kidney transplantation require lifelong therapy with allopurinol (or febuxostat) to prevent recurrent DHA crystal nephropathy in the transplanted organ.
