See Nichols et al [2008] (full text) and Castaman et al [2013] (full text) for treatment guidelines.

Individuals with VWD benefit from referral to a comprehensive bleeding disorders program for education, treatment, and genetic counseling.

The two main treatments are desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]) and clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII (VWF/FVIII concentrate). Individuals with VWD should receive prompt treatment for severe bleeding episodes.

Desmopressin

Most individuals with type 1 VWD and some with type 2 VWD respond to intravenous or subcutaneous treatment with desmopressin [Castaman et al 2008, Federici 2008, Leissinger et al 2014], which promotes release of stored VWF and raises levels three- to fourfold. Intranasal preparations are also available.

Following VWD diagnosis, a desmopressin challenge is advisable to assess VWF response.

Desmopressin is the treatment of choice for acute bleeding episodes or to cover surgery.

Desmopressin has been used successfully to cover delivery in women with type 1 VWD and also for a proportion of pregnant women with type 2 VWD [Castaman et al 2010b] (see Pregnancy Management).

In persons who do not tolerate desmopressin or who have a poor VWF response, clotting factor concentrate is required.

Desmopressin is contraindicated in individuals with arteriovascular disease and in those older than age 70 years for whom VWF/FVIII concentrate is required.

Note: Because desmopressin can cause hyponatremia (which can lead to seizures and coma), fluid intake should be restricted for 24 hours following its administration to minimize this risk.

Intravenous Infusion of VWF/FVIII Clotting Factor Concentrates

In those who are non-responsive to desmopressin (i.e., VWF deficiency is not sufficiently corrected) and for those in whom desmopressin is contraindicated (see Treatment by VWD Type), bleeding episodes can be prevented or controlled with intravenous infusion of virally inactivated plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII [Federici 2007]. Such concentrates are prepared from pooled blood donations from many donors. Virus inactivation procedures eliminate potential pathogens.

Indirect Treatments

In addition to treatments that directly increase VWF levels, individuals with VWD often benefit from indirect hemostatic treatments, including:

Fibrinolytic inhibitors (i.e., tranexamic acid for treatment or prevention of bleeding episodes);

Hormonal treatments (i.e., the combined oral contraceptive pill for the treatment of menorrhagia).

Treatment by VWD Type

Type 1 VWD. Treatments that directly increase VWF levels (e.g., desmopressin or VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates) are usually only needed for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding, as with major trauma or surgery.

Indirect treatment with fibrinolytic inhibitors or hormones is often effective.

Type 2A VWD. Treatment with clotting factor concentrates is usually only required for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding episodes such as during surgery.

Responsiveness to desmopressin is variable and should be confirmed prior to therapeutic use.

Indirect treatments can be beneficial.

Type 2B VWD. Clotting factor concentrates are usually required to treat severe bleeding or at the time of surgery.

Treatment with desmopressin should be undertaken cautiously as it can precipitate a worsening of any thrombocytopenia. People with certain pathogenic variants associated with mild or atypical 2B VWD, however, do not appear to develop thrombocytopenia when exposed to desmopressin. [Federici et al 2009]

Indirect treatments (i.e., fibrinolytic inhibitors) can be useful.

Type 2M VWD. Because desmopressin response is generally poor, VWF/FVIII concentrate is the treatment of choice.

Type 2N VWD. Desmopressin can be used for minor bleeding, but because the FVIII level will drop rapidly (as FVIII is not protected by VWF), concentrate containing VWF as well as FVIII is required to cover surgical procedures.

Type 3 VWD. Treatment often requires the repeated infusion of VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates [Franchini et al 2007].

Desmopressin is not effective in type 3 VWD.

Indirect treatments may also be beneficial.

Pediatric Issues

Special considerations for the care of infants and children with VWD include the following:

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.

Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group.

VWF levels are higher in the neonatal period; thus, phenotypic testing for milder forms of VWD should be delayed until later in childhood.
