Thickened feedings and appropriate positioning after meals may improve reflux symptoms.

Gastrostomy tube placement is typically considered in those with severe feeding difficulties, especially if a poorly coordinated suck and swallow are noted.

Thorough psychoeducational testing is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Special education services are tailored to address strengths and weaknesses for each child with KS since no characteristic pattern of disabilities has been identified.

Formal evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or psychiatrist may be helpful in those children who exhibit features suggestive of autism spectrum disorders, since educational interventions may be influenced by the result.

Standard antiepileptic treatment is efficacious in treating seizures in individuals with KS.

Evidence of sensorineural hearing loss is typically followed up with referral to an otorhinolaryngologist and imaging to screen for inner ear anomalies.

Persistent, unexplained head and neck pain or other evidence of intracranial abnormality could be secondary to Chiari I malformation and is a clear indication for brain imaging in affected individuals.

Monitoring for nocturnal lagophthalmos by parents or caregivers is recommended. If present, evaluation by an ophthalmologist is indicated.

A dental evaluation as a toddler is indicated in every child with KS. Referral for orthodontic assessment should be arranged if abnormalities such as hypodontia or significant malocclusion are noted at any point in childhood.

Individuals with documented immunoglobulin deficiency may benefit from scheduled intravenous immunoglobulin infusions.

Treatment of premature thelarche is not warranted unless other signs of premature puberty are apparent.

At least one individual has shown no change in linear rate of growth when treated with human growth hormone [Kawame et al 1999].
