The specific treatment for DC-related complications must be tailored to the individual. The recommendations in this section were first discussed at a DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and subsequently at a meeting of experts convened to review the publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015] Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials. Affected individuals may have few or many of the complications associated with DC. Comprehensive coordinated care among specialties is required.

Bone marrow failure (BMF). Following the model of the Fanconi anemia consensus guidelines [Eiler et al 2008] and updated on the DC treatment guidelines [Savage & Cook 2015], treatment of BMF is recommended if the hemoglobin is consistently below 8 g/dL, platelets lower than 30,000/mm3, and neutrophils below 1000/mm3. If a matched-related donor is available, hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) should be the first consideration for treatment for hematologic problems such as BMF or leukemia regardless of age.

HCT from an unrelated donor can be considered, although a trial of androgen therapy (e.g., oxymetholone or danazol) may be considered first [Khincha et al 2014].

Persons with DC may be more sensitive to androgens than individuals with Fanconi anemia, and the dose must be adjusted to reduce side effects such as impaired liver function, virilization, or behavioral problems (e.g., aggression, mood swings). The suggested starting dose of oxymetholone is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day, half the dose used in Fanconi anemia. It may take two to three months at a constant dose to see a hematologic response.

Side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, need to be monitored carefully. Baseline and follow-up liver ultrasound examinations should be performed for individuals receiving androgen therapy because of the possibility of liver adenomas and carcinomas, which have been reported in Fanconi anemia and in persons using androgens for benign hematologic diseases or for non-hematologic disorders [Velazquez & Alter 2004].

Hematopoietic growth factors may be useful in BMF. However, splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and splenic rupture have been reported in two individuals with DC receiving androgens and G-CSF [Giri et al 2007]. G-CSF with erythropoietin has occasionally been useful but perhaps should also not be used in combination with androgens [Khincha et al 2014].

HCT is the only curative treatment for severe BMF or leukemia in DC. It should be performed at centers experienced in treating DC. Reported problems include graft failure, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), sepsis, pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, and veno-occlusive disease [Berthou et al 1991, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007] that is caused in part by underlying pulmonary and liver disease [Yabe et al 1997, Dror et al 2003, Brazzola et al 2005, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007, Ostronoff et al 2007]. As a result, long-term survival of persons with DC following HCT has been poor. Reduced-intensity preparative regimens being studied in a few institutions may improve long-term outcomes [Dietz et al 2011, Nishio et al 2011, Vuong et al 2010, Gadalla et al 2013, Algeri et al 2015].

The range of clinical phenotypes seen in DC and the possibility of non-manifesting or very mildly affected heterozygotes within families may complicate the selection of related HCT donors [Fogarty et al 2003, Denny et al 2008]. Potential related HCT donors should be tested either for the pathogenic variant present in the proband or, if the pathogenic variant is not known, for telomere length.

Cancer. Specific treatment should be tailored to the type of cancer.

Affected individuals undergoing chemotherapy for cancer may be at increased risk for prolonged cytopenias as a result of underlying BMF. This risk has not been quantitated; studies are ongoing.

Individuals with DC may be at increased risk for therapy-related pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Pulmonary function tests and liver function should be monitored carefully.

Long-term data on the effects of cancer radiotherapy in DC are not available. Affected individuals may be at increased risk for radiotherapy-related complications based on observations in persons undergoing radiotherapy in HCT [Author, personal observation].

Although the risk of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is high in DC, many persons have abnormal cytogenetic clones and/or morphologic changes consistent with abnormal myelopoiesis but may not have severe cytopenias.

Pulmonary fibrosis. The options for therapy in persons with DC and pulmonary fibrosis are primarily supportive care. Lung transplantation may be considered in severe cases, although long-term outcomes have not been studied (see Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis).
