Cystic Fibrosis (CF)

Respiratory

Inhaled dornase alfa in all individuals age ≥6 years

Inhaled hypertonic saline in all individuals age ≥6 years

Azithromycin in individuals age ≥6 years with persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled tobramycin in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled aztreonam in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Ibuprofen in individuals age 6-17 years with FEV1 ≥60% predicted

Recommended sequence for inhaled medications:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

An aerosolized antibiotic

Ivacaftor for individuals age ≥2 years who are heterozygous for p.Gly551Asp and other specific pathogenic variants

Ivacaftor/lumacaftor combined therapy for individuals age ≥12 years who are homozygous for p.Phe508del

Lung or heart/lung transplantation; an option for some individuals with severe disease

Topical steroids, antibiotics, and/or surgical intervention if required for nasal/sinus symptoms

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Oral pancreatic enzyme replacement with meals

Nutritional therapy that may include breast milk, special infant formulas, supplemental feeding, salt supplementation, fat-soluble vitamin supplements, and zinc

Management of CF-related diabetes mellitus with endocrinology consultation and (if required) glucose monitoring and insulin therapy

Gastrointestinal. Meconium ileus and distal intestinal obstructive syndrome requires surgical evaluation and management.

Liver disease

Biliary sludging or frank obstruction, and associated hepatic inflammation, are treated with oral ursodiol.

Liver transplant indications include progressive hepatic dysfunction, intractable variceal bleeding, and hepatopulmonary and portopulmonary syndromes

Fertility. Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Congenital Absence of the Vas Deferens (CAVD)

Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

A variety of airway clearance techniques (ACTs) can mobilize airway secretions, minimize airway obstruction, and reduce airway infections. ACTs include manual chest percussion with postural drainage, hand-held devices (e.g., flutter valve, or Acapella®), and inflatable vest therapy devices that vibrate the chest wall. These treatments are most effective when used at least twice daily.

Dornase alfa and hypertonic saline help mobilize airway secretions in individuals age six years or older.

Airway clearance should be used in conjunction with inhaled medications given in a standard sequence:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

Inhaled corticosteroids and/or long-acting beta agonist (for select individuals)

Aerosolized antibiotic

The rationale for this sequence is to open the airway, decrease sputum viscosity, promote expectoration of secretions, and then deliver anti-inflammatory treatments and/or antibiotics as widely and deeply as possible within the bronchial tree.

Aggressive antibiotic treatment at the time of initial isolation of P. aeruginosa from cultured airway secretions helps prevent chronic airway infection.

All routine immunizations should be given at the recommended times. Especially important are vaccines that protect against microorganisms associated with pulmonary manifestations, including pertussis, measles, varicella, Haemophilus influenzae type B, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Influenza vaccine should be administered annually in infants age six months and older. Note: (1) Because the influenza vaccine may not be fully protective, consider immunizing an affected individual’s entire family. (2) CF individuals with suspected influenza should receive anti-viral medications targeted toward influenza A and B.

Anti-RSV monoclonal antibody (Synagis®) should be considered for infants up to age 12 months for the duration of the local RSV season, particularly in individuals with ongoing pulmonary symptoms.

Physical activity, exercise, and conditioning help maintain bone health and improve airway clearance.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Pancreatic enzyme replacement and supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins

High-calorie, high-fat nutritional supplements

Consultation with a nutritionist specializing in CF

Extra salt and water for hydration and salt losses in hot dry climates

Surveillance – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

Newborns are examined monthly by a CF care provider for the first six months of life and then bimonthly until age one year.

Individuals age one year and older should be examined quarterly by a CF care provider to monitor for subtle changes in physical examination that are not yet manifest as symptoms.

Culture respiratory tract secretions at least four times yearly. Some individuals may benefit from more frequent visits and respiratory tract surveillance cultures (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Pulmonary function studies, chest radiographic examination, and at least annual blood tests for electrolytes, fat soluble vitamin levels, and IgE levels are appropriate.

Bronchoscopy and chest CT examination are indicated for individuals with symptoms and signs of lung disease who fail to respond to intervention.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Weight gain and caloric intake are monitored monthly in newborns until age six months.

Fecal elastase may need to be repeated during the first year of life, particularly if infants have signs or symptoms of malabsorption or inadequate weight gain.

Measure oral glucose tolerance annually after age ten years during a period of stable health. Plasma glucose is measured fasting and two hours after an oral glucose load of 1.75 g/kg, or 75 g maximum.

Evaluate bone mineral density in adolescence.

Liver disease. Annual screening of liver function tests and liver ultrasound to monitor progression of liver disease is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid – Cystic Fibrosis

Avoid the following:

Respiratory irritants (e.g., smoke, dust)

Individuals with respiratory infections

Dehydration; add extra salt and water to diet in hot, dry climates because of perspiration-related salt losses (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
