No specific treatment exists for WSS. All treatment is symptomatic.

Endocrine

Hypogonadism. Sex hormone replacement therapy at the usual age of puberty to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and promote bone health

Note: Standard replacement hormonal treatment will not promote fertility. It may be possible to stimulate testes with gonadotropins and harvest sperm with assisted reproductive technology.

Low IGF-1. Treatment with recombinant IGF-1 not recommended: no evidence shows that it improves the clinical features of WSS [Agopiantz et al 2014]. Of note, IGF-1 levels may increase with sex hormone replacement therapy.

Diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment

Hypothyroidism. L-thyroxine replacement therapy

Ectodermal

Treatment is symptomatic and cosmetic only.

Neurologic

Movement disorders

Dystonia. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2015]:

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics such as trihexyphenidyl (moderately effective for ~40%-50% of individuals)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (~100 mg/day) in younger individuals.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam

Other medications tried alone or in combination with the above categories: levodopa, carbamazepine, and dopamine depleting agents (reserpine, tetrabenazine)

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful, and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail, surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for some forms of medically refractory primary generalized dystonia [Vidailhet et al 2007, Crowell & Shah 2016]. Its use in WSS has not been documented.

Dysarthria. Consultation with a speech therapist may be helpful.

Dysphagia. Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning. Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management by a knowledgeable nutritionist is helpful.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.
