Acute Attacks

Further details on the treatment of acute porphyria are available in published reviews [Anderson et al 2005, Stein et al 2013].

In an individual presenting with acute abdominal symptoms:

Identify and discontinue any medications that are thought to induce attacks (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Discontinue all nonessential medications.

Evaluate those with nausea and vomiting for dehydration and hyponatremia, which is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

Provide glucose-containing IV solution to reverse the fasting state.

Note: Caution is indicated in patients with hyponatremia, as aggressive administration of dextrose in water may cause the serum sodium concentration to drop to a critically low level.

Treat seizures with a short-acting benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) or with magnesium, which has been used for eclamptic seizures [Sadeh et al 1991].

Note: A number of the commonly used anti-seizure medications, including phenytoin and sodium valproate, are contraindicated because of the risk of further exacerbating an attack (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Intravenous hematin is the treatment of choice in moderate to severe acute attacks. Order hematin at the time that an acute attack requires hospitalization. Although hematin is not stocked by most hospital pharmacies, it can be obtained by overnight express from the manufacturer (Panhematin®, Recordati, 1-888-575-8344). An alternative in Europe and elsewhere is heme arginate (Normosang®; not yet approved in the US).

Some individuals recover with a glucose infusion only; those who do not respond in 24 to 48 hours should receive intravenous hematin.

When signs of a motor neuropathy are present, hematin is given as soon as possible. Hematin given at the initial signs of motor neuropathy may halt its progression; however, it has no effect on established motor deficits, which are the result of axonal degeneration.

Hematin is reconstituted at the bedside as described in the package insert. Human albumin may be used in place of water (132 mL of a 25% albumin solution) to reduce the risk of a chemical phlebitis, which is the main side effect of hematin administration [Anderson et al 2006].

The infusion is started without delay, as hematin in solution decays rapidly [Goetsch & Bissell 1986].

The preparation is given into a large peripheral vein or via central line over 10-15 minutes so as to minimize the risk of phlebitis. The dose is weight based at 3-4 mg/kg; 200 mg once daily is appropriate for most individuals.

The following responses to hematin infusion can be expected:

Decrease in the urine concentration of PBG, the first sign, occurs after two doses.

Clinical improvement is seen after a total of three or four doses, and typically is dramatic, with no further need of narcotic analgesia [Bissell 1988].

The motor neuropathy of acute attacks, when it occurs, does not respond to hematin administration. Return of function requires axonal regeneration and takes many months. Although it can be complete, some individuals have residual wrist drop or foot drop.

Liver transplantation. The experience with liver transplantation in acute porphyria is growing, with accumulating evidence that transplantation is curative in selected severe cases [Singal et al 2014]. The status of the disease in candidates for liver transplantation must be well-documented biochemically: they must not have responded to multiple courses of hematin and must be demonstrating neurologic complications.

Chronic (Cutaneous) Manifestations

For low-grade chronic or seasonal cutaneous symptoms, the only effective current treatment is avoidance of sun/light, whether direct or through window glass. Damage is caused by blue light and long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA), both of which pass through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing such as long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to blue light. Grey or smoke colored filters provide only partial protection.

Note: Topical sunscreens are not helpful because they block UVB light, not the blue light that causes porphyrin-related skin injury.

The association of cutaneous manifestations with severe attacks (in which porphyrins as well as ALA and PBG are markedly increased) suggests that the cutaneous, as well as the neurovisceral, symptoms could respond to hematin administration. Indeed, this is the finding of a recent case report of an individual with severe HCP who was given ‘maintenance’ hematin [Ma et al 2011].

Other. For more prolonged control of seizures, the combination of gabapentin and propofol is effective and safe.
