Monitor fluid intake to assure adequate intravascular volume.

Use of nutritional support, including TPN or elemental or low-carbohydrate-containing formula if necessary, can be beneficial [Sherman et al 2004].

Follow the standard treatment protocols for diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease.

The most effective treatment for the enteropathy of IPEX syndrome is T cell-directed immune suppression (i.e., cyclosporin A and FK506) either alone or in combination with steroids [Di Rocco & Marta 1996]. Toxicity, tachyphylaxis, and increased susceptibility to infection related to chronic use of these agents reduce their potential for long-term amelioration of symptoms in most individuals.

Sirolimus (rapamycin) has been successfully used in patients for whom FK506 was either ineffective or toxic [Bindl et al 2005, Yong et al 2008]. The ability of sirolimus to suppress effector T cell function while allowing Treg cells to continue to develop and function offers some theoretic advantages for its use [Strauss et al 2007].

In persons with autoimmune neutropenia, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF, filgrastim) may be beneficial.

In one person who developed pemphigus nodularis, use of rituximab improved pemphigus and other IPEX syndrome-associated symptoms [McGinness et al 2006]. It has also been effective in controlling autoimmune hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoimmune neutropenia in persons with IPEX syndrome [Torgerson, unpublished results].

In persons with severe disease in whom other therapies have failed and symptoms remain severe, cytotoxic drugs or biologic agents that target T cells may be beneficial, as demonstrated by complete remission of symptoms during a bone marrow transplantation conditioning regimen of anti-thymocyte globulin, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide [Baud et al 2001].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers the only potential cure for IPEX syndrome. Early attempts at BMT using myeloablative conditioning regimens met with only limited success because of transplant-related mortality and other complications related to the underlying disease [Baud et al 2001]. Recent approaches using non-myeloablative conditioning regimens have markedly improved outcomes and survival [Burroughs et al 2007, Lucas et al 2007, Rao et al 2007]. While generally less toxic, these reduced-intensity conditioning regimens still appear to generate long-term, stable engraftment of a regulatory T cell population [Burroughs et al 2010] and, if performed early, can prevent the development of irreversible diabetes mellitus or thyroiditis.
