The management of individuals with arginase deficiency should closely mirror that described in the Urea Cycle Disorders Overview, with one caveat: individuals with arginase deficiency are less prone to episodes of hyperammonemia and when present, hyperammonemia is more likely to respond to conservative management such as intravenous fluid administration. However, the individual who is comatose and encephalopathic is at high risk for severe brain damage and should be treated accordingly. Arginine supplementation is obviously contraindicated.

Infants should be managed by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a specialized center. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following:

Rapidly reducing plasma ammonia concentration. The best way to reduce plasma ammonia concentration quickly is by dialysis; the faster the flow rate of dialysate, the faster the clearance of ammonia from the plasma. The method employed depends on the affected individual's circumstances and available resources. Fastest is use of pump-driven dialysis, in which an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) pump is used to drive a hemodialysis (HD) machine. Other methods are “routine” hemodialysis, hemofiltration (both arteriovenous and venovenous), peritoneal dialysis, and continuous-drainage peritoneal dialysis. Dialysis can usually be discontinued when plasma ammonia concentration falls below 200 µmol/L. Affected individuals often experience a "rebound" hyperammonemia that may require further dialysis, although rarely is this level of intervention required in arginase deficiency.

Pharmacologic management to allow alternative pathway excretion of excess nitrogen. Blocking of ammonia production and the need for ureagenesis is accomplished by diminishing catabolism with adequate non-protein calories and with a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. A loading dose of the drugs is followed by maintenance administration, initially intravenously and later orally when the individual is stable. Intravenous forms of these medications are now approved by the FDA and are generally available.

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of calories supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, calories should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free oral formula, such as Mead Johnson 80056® or Ross Formula ProPhree®; however, complete restriction of protein should not exceed 24-48 hours, as depletion of essential amino acids may result in endogenous protein catabolism and nitrogen release. High parenteral glucose plus insulin can be used acutely to diminish endogenous protein catabolism. Individuals should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. In early treatment, feeding 1.0 to 1.5 g of protein/kg body weight with 50% as essential amino acids is advised, particularly for infants. Older children require and tolerate lower protein intake.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage. Cautionary measures are physiologic stabilization with intravenous fluids (10% dextrose with one-quarter normal saline) and cardiac pressors as necessary while avoiding overhydration and resulting cerebral edema, the duration of which correlates with poor neurologic outcome.

Older individuals are at risk for episodes of hyperammonemia and should continue to be managed by a specialist in metabolic disorders.

Seizures are easily treated by phenobarbital or carbamazepine.

Acute intercurrent illnesses should be treated promptly with special dietary intervention or hospitalization to minimize the effect of catabolism.
