Management of LDS is most effective through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a medical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Cardiovascular

All individuals with LDS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Two important considerations when managing cardiovascular features of LDS:

Aortic dissection occurs at smaller aortic diameters than observed in Marfan syndrome.

Vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root. Imaging of the complete arterial tree from the head through the pelvis by MRA or CTA is necessary.

Beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications are used to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Aneurysms are amenable to early and aggressive surgical intervention (in contrast to EDS, vascular type, in which surgery is used as a last resort because of the extremely high rate of intraoperative complications and death). Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Given the safety and the increasing availability of the valve-sparing procedure:

For young children with the most severe systemic findings of LDS, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension exceeds the 99th percentile and the aortic annulus exceeds 1.8-2.0 cm, allowing the placement of a graft of sufficient size to accommodate growth. Additional factors including family history, rate of aortic root growth and aortic valve function can influence the timing of surgery.

For adolescents and adults, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension approaches 4.0 cm. This recommendation is based on both numerous examples of documented aortic dissection in adults with aortic root dimensions at or below 4.0 cm and the excellent response to prophylactic surgery. An extensive family history of larger aortic dimension without dissection could alter this practice for individual patients.

Note: This practice may not eliminate risk of dissection and death, and earlier intervention based on family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit may be indicated.

Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary to prevent damage to the spinal cord.

Clubfeet require surgical correction by an orthopedic surgeon.

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Surgical intervention for protusio acetabulae is rarely indicated. Treatment focuses on pain control.

Orthotics are only indicated for severe pes planus. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports; others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or successful.

Craniofacial. Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team. Treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis is the same as in all other disorders with these malformations.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of LDS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Optimal management of pneumothorax to prevent recurrence may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.

Counseling regarding other life-threatening manifestations including spontaneous rupture of the spleen and bowel and the risks associated with pregnancy is recommended.
