For management guidelines, see Guidelines/Consensus Statements and Figure 2.

Early diagnosis of MH, together with the administration of dantrolene sodium, is essential in the successful treatment of an acute episode of MH:

Discontinue use of potent inhalation agents and succinylcholine.

Increase minute ventilation to lower end-tidal CO2.

Get help. One resource is the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) hotline for acute cases: 800-MH-HYPER (800-644-9737). Similar hotlines exist in other countries, specifically the UK, Germany, and Brazil.

Prepare and administer dantrolene: 2.5 mg/kg initial dose. Tachycardia, hypercarbia, and muscle rigidity respond rapidly; multiple doses of dantrolene may be needed. The suggested upper limit is 10 mg/kg; however, more may be given as needed. Continue dantrolene at 1.0 mg/kg every four to eight hours for 24-48 hours, titrating to the desired effect (resolution of hyperthermia, acidosis, and myoglobinemia). Dantrolene sodium is a hydantoin molecule that binds to a specific region of the RYR-1 channel. It decreases the uncontrolled release of intracellular calcium [Paul-Pletzer et al 2002]. The toxicity profile of dantrolene, when administered acutely, is extremely benign. Calcium channel blocking agents should not be administered with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Dantrolene may aggravate previously existing muscle weakness.

Begin cooling measures. If patient is hyperthermic, administer iced solutions, ice packs to groin, axilla, and neck, nasogastric lavage with iced solution, or more aggressive measures as needed. Stop cooling measures at core body temperature of 38.5° C.

Treat cardiac arrhythmias as needed. Do not use calcium channel blockers.

Obtain blood gases, serum concentration of electrolytes and CK, blood and urine for myoglobin, and coagulation profile. Check values every six to 12 hours. The earliest sign of rhabdomyolysis is myoglobinuria/myoglobinemia. Serum CK levels may not rise for several hours. Serum CK concentration may remain elevated for days and should be monitored until it returns to normal.

Treat hyperkalemia with hyperventilation, glucose and insulin, and calcium as dictated by laboratory and cardiovascular changes.

Ensure urine output of 2.0 mL/kg/hr with mannitol, furosemide, and fluids as needed.

Evaluate need for invasive monitoring and continued mechanical ventilation.

Observe the individual in an ICU for at least 36 hours because of the 25% chance of recrudescence following initial treatment. Dantrolene should be continued for at least 36 hours following successful treatment in a dose of about 1.0 mg/kg every six hours or more depending on whether signs of MH are present.

Affected individuals who display extreme hyperthermia are at risk for disseminated intravascular coagulation. A coagulation profile should be obtained on all individuals experiencing fulminant MH.

Refer the affected individual to the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) for information and counseling. Complete the Adverse Metabolic Reaction to Anesthesia (AMRA) form for enrollment in the North American MH Registry.

Refer the individual to a MH diagnostic center for muscle biopsy and contracture testing after discussion with MH consultants associated with MHAUS.

Myoglobinuria. The presence of myoglobinuria mandates referral to a neurologist for further investigation.
