Comprehensive reviews of the management of thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia have been published by Thalassemia International Federation [Taher et al 2013, Cappellini et al 2014] and are available at the TIF web site.

Thalassemia major. Regular transfusions correct the anemia, suppress erythropoiesis, and inhibit increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron. Before starting the transfusions, it is absolutely necessary to carry out hepatitis B vaccination and perform extensive red blood cell antigen typing, including Rh, Kell, Kidd, and Duffy and serum immunoglobulin determination — the latter of which detects individuals with IgA deficiency who need special (repeatedly washed) blood unit preparation before each transfusion. The transfusion regimen is designed to obtain a pre-transfusion Hb concentration of 95-100 g/L. Transfusions are usually given every two to three weeks.

Thalassemia intermedia. Treatment of individuals with thalassemia intermedia is symptomatic and based on splenectomy and folic acid supplementation. Treatment of extramedullary erythropoietic masses is based on radiotherapy, transfusions, or, in selected cases, hydroxyurea (with a protocol similar to that used for sickle cell disease). Hydroxyurea also increases globin gamma chains and may have other undefined affects. Individuals with thalassemia intermedia may develop iron overload from increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron or from occasional transfusions; chelation therapy with deferasirox has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in persons age ten years or older with a liver iron concentration ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight or serum ferritin ≥800 ng/mL (thresholds after which the risk of serious iron-related morbidity is increased) [Taher et al 2012].

Bone marrow transplantation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) from an HLA-identical sib represents an alternative to traditional transfusion and chelation therapy. If BMT is successful, iron overload may be reduced by repeated phlebotomy, thus eliminating the need for iron chelation.

The outcome of BMT is related to the pretransplantation clinical conditions, specifically the presence of hepatomegaly, extent of liver fibrosis, and magnitude of iron accumulation. In children who lack the above risk factors, disease-free survival is over 90%. Adults with beta-thalassemia are at a higher risk for transplant-related toxicity due to an advanced phase of the disease and have a cure rate of 65% with current treatment protocol [Isgrò et al 2010].

Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) of variable severity may occur in 5%-8% of individuals.

BMT from unrelated donors has been carried out on a limited number of individuals with β-thalassemia. Provided that selection of the donor is based on stringent criteria of HLA compatibility and that individuals have limited iron overload, results are comparable to those obtained when the donor is a compatible sib [La Nasa et al 2005, Gaziev et al 2013].

Affected individuals without matched donors could also benefit from haploidentical mother-to-child transplantation, the results of which appear encouraging [Sodani et al 2011].

Cord blood transplantation. Cord blood transplantation from a related donor offers a good probability of a successful cure and is associated with a low risk for graft versus host disease (GVHD) [Pinto & Roberts 2008]. For couples who have already had a child with thalassemia and who undertake prenatal diagnosis in a subsequent pregnancy, prenatal identification of HLA compatibility between the affected child and an unaffected fetus allows collection of placental blood at delivery and the option of cord blood transplantation to cure the affected child [Orofino et al 2003]. Alternatively, in case of an affected fetus and a previous unaffected child, the couple may decide to continue the pregnancy and pursue BMT later, using the unaffected child as the donor.

Unrelated cord blood transplantation has been explored as an alternative option for affected individuals without a suitable HLA matched unrelated adult donor. However, this strategy may be limited by less than adequate cell dose and higher rates of primary graft failure. One potential strategy may be the use of two cord blood units in order to achieve the desired cell dose, as has been done in individuals with malignancy. However, this approach may be associated with a higher rate of acute GVHD, which may add to the burden of morbidity and mortality for this population.

For these reasons, unrelated cord blood transplantation appears to be a suboptimal strategy for individuals with thalassemia [Ruggeri et al 2011]. However, others have found the outcome of this approach to be more favorable. Jaing et al [2012] reported an overall survival of 88% and a thalassemia-free survival of 74% in 35 individuals with β-thalassemia.
