Vestibular schwannoma. Untreated tumors may be slow growing and not require active intervention in the short term [Masuda et al 2004, Slattery et al 2004]. Therapy remains primarily surgical.

Small vestibular tumors (<1.5 mm) that are completely intercanalicular can often be completely resected, with preservation of both hearing and facial nerve function.

Larger tumors are probably best managed expectantly, with debulking or decompression carried out only when brain stem compression, deterioration of hearing, and/or facial nerve dysfunction occur [Evans et al 2005a]. However, balancing between early surgery and preservation of facial function and later surgery when a patient is still hearing is difficult [Evans et al 2005a].

Stereotactic radiosurgery, most commonly with the gamma knife, has been offered as an alternative to surgery in select individuals with vestibular schwannoma. However, the outcomes from radiation treatment in individuals with NF2 are not as good as for individuals with sporadic unilateral vestibular schwannoma, with only approximately 60% long-term tumor control [Rowe et al 2003].

Malignant transformation is a possible, though probably not common, sequela [Baser et al 2000]; however, it should be noted that tumor development following radiation may take 15 years [Evans et al 2006]. This may involve development of a malignancy within the treated lesion or a new malignancy (e.g., glioblastoma) in the radiation field [Balasubramaniam et al 2007].

Management of individuals with vestibular tumors should include counseling for insidious problems with balance and underwater disorientation, which can result in drowning.

Other tumors. Other intracranial, cranial nerve, or spinal nerve tumors are very slow growing, and surgical intervention for a tumor producing little impairment may cause disability years before it would occur naturally.

Although ependymoma in individuals without NF2 is optimally treated with complete resection, and occasionally with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, it is unclear whether ependymoma in individuals with NF2 warrants aggressive management.

Radiation therapy of NF2-associated tumors should be carefully considered because radiation exposure may induce, accelerate, or transform tumors in an individual (especially a child) with an inactive tumor suppressor gene [Baser et al 2000, Evans et al 2006].

Hearing. Hearing preservation and augmentation are important in the management of individuals with NF2. All affected individuals and their families should be referred to an audiologist to receive training in optimization of hearing and speech production.

Lip-reading skills may be enhanced by instruction.

Sign language may often be more effectively acquired before the individual loses hearing.

Hearing aids may be helpful early in the course of the disease [Evans et al 2005a].

Auditory rehabilitation with a cochlear or brain stem implant should be discussed with those who have lost hearing [Evans et al 2005a]. Rarely, individuals who have had vascular insult to the cochlea, but otherwise are without nerve damage, may benefit from a cochlear implant.

Ocular involvement. Early recognition and management of visual impairment from other manifestations of NF2 are extremely important.
