There are no formal management guidelines for APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorders.

Given the limited number of reports of individuals with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder and the clinical variability among affected individuals, it is unknown which individuals with the APOE p.Leu167del variant will develop hyperlipidemia, splenomegaly, and/or severe thrombocytopenia. However, the authors postulate that untreated hyperlipidemia may worsen the phenotype.

Hyperlipidemia. Discussion of the management of hyperlipidemia is beyond the scope of this article. For more in-depth discussion on management, see the 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults [Stone et al 2014] (full text). It should be noted that using risk prediction models in genetic dyslipidemia may markedly underestimate an individual’s risk of developing ASCVD.

Treatment for individuals with documented ASCVD or at high risk of developing ASCVD begins with lifestyle changes (adherence to a heart-healthy diet, exercise, tobacco avoidance, maintenance of a healthy weight). Medical therapy may include a statin (generally the mainstay of therapy to reduce ASCVD risk), a fibrate, high-dose fish oil, and/or niacin. If present, diabetes mellitus should be well controlled, as uncontrolled diabetes can worsen hypertriglyceridemia.

In patients with fasting triglyceride levels:

>500 mg/dL, the first goal of treatment should be to lower triglyceride levels to prevent pancreatitis.

>1000 mg/dL, elimination of fat from the diet is essential.

<500-1000 mg/dL, the focus may shift to the avoidance of high glycemic carbohydrates. Additionally, if identified, excessive intake of sucrose- or fructose-containing food and beverages should be limited.

Although caloric restriction with the goal of weight loss can also be helpful in lowering triglyceride levels, it should not be the primary focus in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Splenomegaly. Although no interventions are known to prevent disease progression, it has been suggested that treatment of dyslipidemia may prevent development of splenomegaly [Okorodudu et al 2013].

Splenectomy should be avoided as it may worsen hyperlipidemia. Patients who underwent splenectomy were reported to have markedly worsened hypertriglyceridemia after splenectomy [Nguyen et al 2000, Faivre et al 2005, Rahalkar et al 2008, Okorodudu et al 2013].

Liver function abnormalities and thrombocytopenia should be managed by specialists in gastroenterology and hematology, respectively.

Liver function abnormalities. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Persistent nausea

Vomiting

Abdominal pain

Yellow discoloration of the skin

Thrombocytopenia. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Bruising

Bleeding

Any new petechial rash
