No therapy exists for the progressive visual loss, but early evaluation by a low-vision specialist facilitates introduction of low vision aids and mobility training. Educational planning should take the prospect of future blindness into consideration.

To manage obesity, multiple strategies are advocated, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies. Education and dietary measures to control weight gain must be initiated at an early age. No formal trials of drug therapy (appetite suppressants or lipase inhibitors) have been reported; however, such therapy may be attempted providing the individual does not have contraindications to specific drug use (i.e., renal or hepatic dysfunction).

Complications of obesity, such as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes mellitus, should be treated as in the general population.

Cognitive disability should be addressed through early intervention and special education, as indicated by evaluation. It is advisable to assess individual needs with respect to education, as many adults are capable of attaining independent living skills.

Speech therapy should be offered at the first sign of speech delay and/or impairment.

Renal transplantation has been successful, although the immunosuppressants used following transplantation can compound the weight problem.

Surgical correction of hydrocolpos, vaginal atresia, or hypospadias may be warranted.

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and sex hormone levels should be monitored to determine if hormone replacement therapy is indicated.

It is important to offer contraceptive advice to all affected females rather than assume likely infertility.

The earliest and most common intervention for polydactyly is removal of the accessory digit. Indicators are functional interference and poorly fitting footwear. Most children have their accessory digits removed within the first two years.

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities is the same as for the general population.

Dental extractions are appropriate as required for dental crowding.

Prompt treatment for acute and chronic otitis media should be considered. Insertion of grommets is commonplace.
