Pain

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates help control pain. Agents such as gabapentin should be considered.

Gentle handling may reduce pain that is worsened with movement. Splinting of affected joints may provide comfort.

When passive movement of joint contractures is painful, physiotherapy should be carried out with care; in some cases physiotherapy is not tolerated because of pain.

Consultation with a pain management specialist may be helpful. Palliative care may be an option in severe cases.

Failure to thrive

Early consideration should be given to nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feeding.

Nutrition should be tailored for the possibility for malabsorption or lymphangiectasia.

A nutritionist should follow affected individuals.

Protein-losing enteropathy

Chronic diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy with subsequent edema are treated with hydration and albumin infusions; an effective long-term treatment is lacking.

The effectiveness of dietary therapies with intestinal lymphangiectasia is not known.

Skin nodules, gingival thickening, and lesions of the mouth. Lesions that obstruct the airway or interfere with oral intake are particularly problematic; surgical excision is an option that has been used, but lesions may recur.

Dermatitis. Intertriginous, perianal, and neck areas appear to be particularly prone to dermatitis and should be treated appropriately.

Perianal masses may be excised, but may recur.

Joint contractures. Contractures are typically progressive. Treatment of contractures with physiotherapy should be performed with care because of pain.

Immune system/Infections

Infections are treated based on the site of infection and causative agent.

An immunology evaluation should be considered given the possibility of impaired cellular immune responses and immunoglobulin levels [Klebanova & Schwindt 2009].

Other. Given the chronic nature of this disorder in an individual with normal intelligence, family counseling should be considered in order to develop coping strategies for both the patient and the immediate family.
