Celiac disease. Ideally, the care of a newly diagnosed individual should be provided by a team including a gastroenterologist, primary care physician, and experienced nutritionist (see Figure 4). Local branches of national support groups can be helpful as additional resources [NIH Consensus Committee 2005] (see Figure 4).

The only treatment for individuals with celiac disease is strict adherence to a gluten-free diet that requires lifelong avoidance of wheat, rye, and barley:

Treatment with a gluten-free diet should be started only after the diagnosis has been established by intestinal biopsy.

A dietitian experienced in treating celiac disease should be involved.

In approximately 70% of affected individuals, symptoms improve within two weeks after starting a gluten-free diet.

For some patients, even a small amount of gluten (i.e., 100 mg) can damage the small intestine. Note that a slice of bread contains approximately 2.5 grams of gluten.

It can be difficult to adhere to the gluten-free diet, as gluten is found in many foods and other ingested products. Some hidden sources of gluten:

Non-starchy foods such as soy sauce and beer

Non-food items such as some medications, and cosmetics (e.g., lipstick)

Nutritional deficiencies and metabolic bone disease should be treated in the usual manner.

‘Unresponsive celiac disease’ refers celiac disease in patients who show no improvement on a gluten-free diet:

The most common reason for unresponsive celiac disease is the presence of small amounts of gluten in the diet. This gluten ingestion may be intentional, such as “cheating” at social events or using communion wafers, or unintentional, including ingestion of gluten in medications and gluten-containing foods in restaurants. Advice from a nutritionist experienced in management of the gluten-free diet is recommended to achieve the best results.

Assessment for lactose or fructose intolerance is important, as these conditions can be responsible for lack of response to the gluten-free diet [Green & Jabri 2003].

Assessment for alternative or additional diagnoses such as microscopic colitis, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, IBS, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and eating disorders is necessary in those in whom gluten contamination is not the explanation.

For individuals who are not responding to a gluten-free diet, identification of a celiac disease-susceptibility HLA haplotype can provide motivation to continue the diet, to examine the diet for hidden sources of gluten, to address the possibility of refractory sprue, or even to dismiss the previous diagnosis of celiac disease.

Refractory sprue or celiac disease. Individuals with persistent symptoms and intestinal inflammation despite adherence to a gluten-free diet may need to be treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., local-active budesonide) and immunosuppressants [Green & Jabri 2003, NIH Consensus Committee 2005].
