Hearing loss in JLNS may be treated successfully with cochlear implantation, an intervention that does not interfere with bipolar pacemakers [Green et al 2000, Chorbachi et al 2002] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). To date, the cumulative published experience includes approximately 20 individuals with JLNS who have received cochlear implantation. Of note, the diagnosis of JLNS was only verified with molecular genetic testing in four Norwegian individuals, all of whom had pathogenic variants in KCNQ1. An increase in sound-related syncopal episodes was noted after cochlear implantation in one child [Al-Aama et al 2015].

Note: Although cochlear implantation appears to be safe, special precautions are necessary during anesthesia because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008]. One affected individual died during a perioperative cardiac arrest [Broomfield et al 2010].

Cardiac issues. The main goal in management of JLNS is prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. Note that efficacy of beta-blocker treatment is only partial: 51% of treated individuals had cardiac events and 27% had cardiac arrest or sudden death. Even with additional therapies (e.g., pacemaker, implantable cardioverter/defibrillator, left sympathetic denervation), 18 (56%) of 32 individuals experienced additional symptoms, including sudden death in seven [Schwartz et al 2006].

Administration of beta-adrenergic blockers has been the traditional first-line medical therapy for cardiac events, but more aggressive, immediate treatment may be appropriate. Cardiac events in JLNS frequently occur despite beta blockade [Schwartz et al 2006]. Goldenberg et al [2006] demonstrated markedly increased mortality in individuals with JLNS treated exclusively with beta blockers in comparison to individuals with Romano-Ward syndrome. A mortality rate of 35% over five years was observed for individuals receiving beta blockers exclusively; 86% of individuals treated exclusively with beta blockers experienced a cardiac event. The interactions of beta blockers with other medical conditions (e.g., asthma, diabetes mellitus, depression) should also be considered. Propranolol and nadolol have been shown to be more effective than metoprolol in suppressing cardiac events [Chockalingam et al 2012, Winbo et al 2014]. A recent consensus statement advocates use of nadolol as the preferred beta blocker for drug therapy of individuals with long QT syndrome [Ackerman et al 2017].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) should be considered in individuals with a history of cardiac arrest or failure to respond to other treatments [Goel et al 2004]. More recent recommendations have strongly urged ICD placement for high-risk individuals, defined by the following criteria [Schwartz et al 2006]:

QTc interval >550 msec

Syncope before age five years

Male gender, age >20 years with KCNQ1 pathogenic variant

The risk for sudden cardiac death appears to be low in individuals younger than age five years, but medical therapy should be administered early in these high-risk individuals and ICD placement considered after age five years [Richter & Brugada 2006].

In certain cases, the availability of automated external defibrillators in the home, workplace, or school may be applicable, as is appropriate CPR training of family members and those who have regular contact with individuals with JLNS.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation has been effective for some individuals.

Iron deficiency anemia. The treatment of iron deficiency anemia should follow standard guidelines.
