At present, no specific therapies can correct ciliary dysfunction. The therapies described in this section are empiric and aimed at treating consequences of dysfunctional cilia and sperm flagella. Little evidence supports use of specific therapeutic modalities in PCD.

Pulmonary disease. Management of individuals with PCD should include aggressive measures to enhance clearance of mucus, prevent respiratory infections, and treat bacterial infections.

Approaches to enhance mucus clearance are similar to those used in the management of cystic fibrosis, including chest percussion and postural drainage, oscillatory vest, and breathing maneuvers to facilitate clearance of distal airways. Because cough is an effective clearance mechanism, patients should be encouraged to cough and engage in activities that promote deep breathing and cough (e.g., vigorous exercise).

Routine immunizations to protect against respiratory pathogens:

Pertussis

Haemophilus influenzae type b

Pneumococcal vaccine

Annual influenza virus vaccine

Prompt institution of antibiotic therapy for bacterial infections of the airways (bronchitis, sinusitis, and otitis media) is essential for preventing irreversible damage. Sputum culture results may be used to direct appropriate choice of antimicrobial therapy. In those individuals in whom symptoms recur within days to weeks after completing a course of antibiotics, extended use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic or even prophylactic antibiotic coverage may be considered. (Consideration of chronic antibiotic therapy must include assessing the risk of selecting for multi-resistant organisms.)

For individuals with localized bronchiectasis, lobectomy has been performed in an attempt to decrease infection of the remaining lung. This approach, however, is controversial; consultants with expertise in PCD should be involved in the decision-making process.

Lung transplantation has been performed in persons with end-stage lung disease.

Nasal congestion and sinus infections. In some persons with extensive sinus disease, sinus surgery can facilitate drainage and relieve symptoms.

Chronic/recurrent ear infection. For chronic otitis media unresponsive to antibiotic therapy, PE tube placement may be helpful; however, some individuals with PCD have had offensive otorrhea following PE tube placement [Hadfield et al 1997].

Speech therapy and hearing aids may be necessary for children with hearing loss and delayed speech.

Male infertility. A couple in which the male has PCD-related infertility has the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection). In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with obstructive azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by in vitro fertilization [Sha et al 2014].

Other options are artificial insemination by donor sperm (AIDS).

Situs abnormalities. Typically, situs abnormalities do not require intervention unless physiologic dysfunction (e.g., congenital heart disease) requiring surgical intervention is present.
