Serious infections may occur at any time in persons with CGD. Infections that are asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic may be identified at initial presentation. Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection. Imaging is important in detecting and understanding the severity of infections. CT or MRI should be followed closely until resolution of infections.

A definitive microbiologic diagnosis is essential to proper treatment of infections. Biopsies to identify the pathogen should be pursued prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy unless infections are life threatening. Often obtaining an appropriate sample for diagnosis requires fine needle aspiration or percutaneous drainage of an abscess.

Initially antibiotics and antifungals are often used empirically, with more selective use after the pathogen is identified. Newer azole drugs (voriconazole, posaconazole, isovuconazole) have expanded therapeutic options for fungal infections in CGD. Long courses of antimicrobials are often needed for adequate treatment. For example, those who do develop fungal infections on itraconazole prophylaxis develop them at an older age and may require longer duration of therapy.

The primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts. However, if invasive yeast infections occur, organism-specific antimicrobials are warranted.

Percutaneous drainage itself can be therapeutic, especially for liver or other intra-abdominal abscesses. Lymphadenitis and liver abscesses often require excisional surgery [Feld et al 2008]. Staphylococcal liver abscesses can be effectively treated without surgery using a combination of drainage of liquid pus (if present), intravenous antimicrobials, and moderate dose corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day tapered over 1-2 months) [Leiding et al 2012].

Colitis. Treatment of colitis in CGD can be difficult.

Corticosteroids are usually effective but have long-term complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, and increased risk of infection. The authors’ current practice is to initiate therapy for proven colitis with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day for one to two weeks followed by a slow taper to 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day over one to two months [Holland 2010].

Metronidazole to reduce bowel flora, salicylic acid derivatives, 6-mercaptopurine, and mesalamine are also useful in treatment of CGD colitis.

In CGD, the use of TNF-alpha inhibitors, specifically infliximab, a chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody to TNF alpha, is successful in closing fistulae but leads to increased frequency of severe infections with typical CGD pathogens or death. A report of infliximab in five persons with CGD found severe infections in all five and death in two. Of note, none of the five developed mycobacterial infections, as has been reported with use of infliximab in other conditions [Uzel et al 2010].

Successful bone marrow transplantation appears to cure CGD and the related colitis [Kang et al 2011].

Corticosteroid treatment of heightened inflammatory response. Simultaneous administration of antimicrobials and corticosteroids can help resolve the infections and extensive areas of inflammation that can occur with chronic colitis [Marciano et al 2004], granulomatous cystitis [Kontras et al 1971], pulmonary infections with Nocardia [Freeman et al 2011], and staphylococcal liver abscesses [Leiding et al 2012].

Successful treatment of mulch pneumonitis, the exuberant inflammatory response following inhalation of mulch or other organic matter, requires the simultaneous administration of antifungals and corticosteroids [Siddiqui et al 2007].

Aggressive treatment of the syndrome of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) in CGD with antimicrobials, IVIg, and steroids can lead to clinical improvement and remission [Parekh et al 2011]. Because the HLH-like syndrome in CGD represents a reaction to bacterial or fungal infection, these infections must be aggressively treated if patients receive immunosuppression for HLH. Although the merit of immunosuppression in the setting of infection-triggered HLH in CGD is unclear, treatment of the infection is essential.

Granulocyte infusions. The value of granulocyte infusions has not been evaluated in prospective controlled trials; however, multiple case reports suggest its utility in treating serious bacterial and fungal infections [von Planta et al 1997, Ozsahin et al 1998, Bielorai et al 2000, Ikincioğullari et al 2005]. The principle is that a small number of normal phagocytes complement the oxidative defect in CGD phagocytes by supplying diffusible hydrogen peroxide. Transfused granulocytes have been recovered from sites of infection and appear to have normal respiratory burst activity and to traffic normally.

Granulocyte infusions are generally well tolerated; however, adverse effects include fever, development of leukoagglutinins, and rarely, pulmonary leukostasis. Alloimmunization is a major concern, as many patients with histories of severe infections may also be considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Heim et al 2011]. The possibility of CMV transmission is also a cause for caution.

Males with X-Linked CGD

For males with X-linked CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome early consideration should be given to autologous blood banking (see also Establishing the Diagnosis, Special Consideration in a Male with Suspected CGD and Other Medical Issues). Persons with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome do not express the erythrocyte blood group Kell antigen (i.e., they are Kell negative). Should they require transfusion of blood products, Kell-positive blood products must be avoided in order to prevent a transfusion reaction. Kell-negative blood products are rarely available.
