Cutaneous/Cranial

Consultation with a pediatric dermatologist or plastic surgeon provides individualized management. The goals of non-operative therapy are to prevent infection and promote healing.

Wounds without calvarial involvement. The most preferred dressing currently is a silver-coated, low-adherent primary wound dressing (e.g., Acticoat®), plus a barrier of a flexible polyamide net coated with soft silicone (e.g., Mepitel®) if there is any bone defect. Plastic wrap (e.g., Saran®) can be used to prevent desiccation. Once the wound begins to granulate, the frequency of dressing changes can be decreased. Non-infected, partial thickness skin wounds may be adequately dressed with a hydrocolloid (e.g., DuoDerm®).

Other less preferred, less costly dressings are:

Sterile saline soaked gauze / compresses (wet-to-wet), which should be changed every four hours. Although this labor-intensive option is effective, it is not frequently used anymore.

Silver sulfadiazine dressings changed twice daily work well in older children, but these cannot be used in infants younger than age two months (corrected for prematurity) because of the risk of accompanying electrolyte disturbance.

Wounds with calvarial defects: acute care. As soon as possible a plastic surgeon should be consulted for any large and/or deep lesion and imaging performed (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis, Neurologic). Operative management of large lesions involving the calvarium requires involvement of a neurosurgeon.

It is critically important to avoid drying of the wound and eschar separation, which can lead to catastrophic, terminal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus or from a dilated vein.

One option is a dermal regeneration plate (a porous matrix of bovine tendon collagen and glycosaminoglycan) and a semipermeable silicone layer (which provides a framework for cell migration) which is applied in the operating room to a meticulously debrided wound and then monitored for infection [Khashab et al 2009].

In one child with a CSF leak, a biocellulose membrane provided a barrier and supported eventual healing [Frantz et al 2015].

It has been suggested that debridement over the midline be avoided (if possible) to decrease the risk of fatal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus [Udayakumaran et al 2013].

A surgical procedure may be necessary for more severe defects (e.g., large areas of aplasia cutis congenita on the scalp or skull abnormalities) or wounds complicated by hemorrhage, infection, or CSF leakage.

Although some infants have received skin grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Cohen et al 2014], including allogenic grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Udayakumaran et al 2013], difficulties in infants can include limited donor sites and possible interference with growth of the calvarium as well as the usual risks of graft loss and donor-site morbidity. A reason for the high complication rate specific to AOS may be the presence of an anomalous vascular supply.

Use of abdominal muscle fascia to cover exposed dura has been reported [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012].

Wounds with calvarial defects: late calvarial reconstruction. Although many skull defects (especially small ones) show spontaneous closure over a period of months, some remain at least partially open and require reconstruction by a neurosurgeon. As some lesions can also involve the dura, it is important to consider the role of the dura in promoting osteogenesis.

Cranioplasty, if needed, is usually considered around age three to four years [Beekmans & Wiebe 2001]. Because cranioplasty requires good quality skin coverage over the bone graft, scalp reconstruction must be done at the same time or earlier.

Bone grafting in the neonatal period using unaffected skull, with coverage of the sampled site with vascularized peri-osteum, has been reported [Steinbok 2000].

Use of a split rib graft with a latissimus dorsi muscle flap has also been reported.

After healing is complete, scar revision with tissue expansion for cosmesis can be discussed. When the defect is severe the hair-bearing scalp may not be able to completely restore hair to the entire scalp even with tissue expansion.

Limb

Limb malformations may warrant consultation with specialists in orthopedics, plastic surgery, and/or rehabilitation medicine. X-rays of limbs are often performed immediately after birth but are most informative, in terms of delineating the extent of involvement, after age one year.

Many AOS limb anomalies are not severe enough to require surgical or prosthetic intervention.

Occupational therapy and/or physical therapy is used as needed to assist with limb functioning, such as to improve walking and running stability in those with abnormal toes.

Analysis in a gait laboratory may help identify those who would benefit from prosthetic rehabilitation.

Distraction lengthening is problematic at the phalangeal level because of limited covering soft tissue, skeletal stock, and vascularity, but could be an option for metacarpals or the forearm bones in certain circumstances [Sivakumar & Smith 2015].

‘On-top’ plasty is another, quite complex, surgical strategy to achieve prehension when necessary; a digital tip can be transposed onto a proximal phalanx and neurovascular pedicle.

Cardiovascular

Many congenital heart malformations and certain vascular malformations can be ameliorated with a range of standard surgical procedures.

Treatment of pulmonary hypertension with a variety of standard therapies is often found to be ineffective.

Neurologic

If developmental delays or disabilities are suspected, a full assessment with recommendations for supportive therapies should be obtained.

Routine pediatric care should include periodic neurologic examination for signs of spasticity, particularly if neonatal brain imaging showed evidence of periventricular calcifications.

Early physiotherapy can maximize motor function and range of motion.

The risk for epilepsy is increased, particularly when neuroimaging and/or neurologic examination are abnormal. Management of seizures is per routine.

Ocular

Early prophylactic laser photocoagulation may help preserve vision of those with retinal vasculopathy [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012]. Such treatment can decrease the progression from ischemia to neovascularization, gliosis, and retinal detachment.

Retinal detachments should be treated promptly with appropriate interventions, such as bilateral lensectomies, pars plana vitrectomies, or silicone oil tamponade.
