Generalized Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

The acute and potentially lethal symptoms of generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia are prevented or corrected by a galactose/lactose-restricted diet. This means switching infants from breast milk or a milk-based formula to a formula with only trace levels of galactose or lactose, such as soy formula. Of note, some infants with classic galactosemia are prescribed elemental formula, which has even lower galactose content than soy formula. Elemental formula should not be prescribed for infants with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia because the GALE enzyme is required for the endogenous biosynthesis of UDP-galactose; that is, persons with epimerase deficiency galactosemia may require trace environmental sources of galactose. However, the galactose intake needed for optimum outcome remains unknown.

For older children with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia, dietary restriction of galactose/lactose involves continued restriction of dairy products.

Note: Some, but not all, physicians recommend that individuals with classic galactosemia also abstain from non-dairy foods that contain more than trace levels of galactose/lactose (e.g., some fruits and vegetables, organ meats); this more rigorous dietary restriction may not be advisable for persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia.

In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia restriction of dietary galactose/lactose appears to correct or prevent the acute signs and symptoms of the disorder: hepatic dysfunction, renal dysfunction, and mild cataracts. Presumably, as in classic galactosemia, dietary treatment would not correct profound tissue damage resulting from prolonged galactose exposure (e.g., hepatic cirrhosis or mature cataracts). Mature cataracts that do not resolve with dietary restriction of galactose/lactose may require surgical removal.

Peripheral Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia do not require any dietary restriction.

Intermediate Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia are typically treated with dietary galactose/lactose restriction, at least in infancy. They may be an (as-yet unknown) increased risk for long-term complications including learning impairment and/or cataracts. Continued breastfeeding or exposure to a milk-based formula containing high levels of galactose/lactose may therefore be inadvisable for these infants; however, insufficient data exist to make firm recommendations.
