Neonatal/acute decompensation. Birth, infections, trauma, surgery, postpartum recovery, or other forms of stress and hormonal changes can result in a catabolic response that leads, among other things, to protein breakdown with release of propiogenic amino acids that cannot be metabolized in PA. The goal of acute management is to reverse this process through promotion of anabolism and removal of toxic intermediates. The treatment of individuals with acutely decompensated PA is a medical emergency and requires a transfer to a center with biochemical genetics expertise and the ability to support urgent hemodialysis, especially if hyperammonemia is present.

In-patient management

Assess and manage ventilation and circulation as necessary.

Treat precipitating factors (fever, infection, dehydration, pain, vomiting, and other sources of stress).

Determine the need for sepsis workup and antibiotics.

Reverse catabolism by giving intravenous glucose and lipids.

The volume, glucose content and electrolyte composition of intravenous fluids is determined by age, target glucose infusion rate, cardiovascular status, renal condition, and co-administration of other medications.

Intravenous D10 ½ normal saline typically between 100% and 150% of the maintenance requirements is a common starting fluid. Dextrose solutions exceeding the concentration of 12.5% require a central line placement. The target glucose infusion rates varies by age [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Additional calories can be provided using parenteral lipid emulsion.

The use of intravenous insulin drip may be needed to maintain euglycemia and promote anabolism.

Manage protein intake to reduce propiogenic precursors; avoidance of protein transiently for <24-36 hours may be required.

Transition to enteral feedings should be commenced as soon as they are tolerated (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Dietary management).

If transition to enteral feedings within 48 hours is not possible, total parenteral nutrition is required.

Parenteral amino acid solutions are prescribed based on the recommended daily intake of age-appropriate energy, protein, isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine and adjusted using the daily and weekly growth data and plasma amino acid concentrations.

Remove toxic compounds.

Pharmacologic detoxification:

Nitrogen scavenger medications (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, sodium phenylbutyrate), such as those used in urea cycle disorders to help control ammonia levels during acute decompensations, should be used with caution in the treatment of hyperammonemia associated with PA as they can accentuate frequently observed low plasma glutamine [Al-Hassnan et al 2003, Filipowicz et al 2006]. For a discussion regarding the use of sodium benzoate versus sodium phenylacetate and sodium phenylbutyrate in propionic acidemia see Baumgartner et al [2014].

Oral N-carbamoylglutamate (carglumic acid; 100 mg/kg divided every 6 hours in individuals <20 kg and 2.2 gm/m2 in individuals >20 kg) can aid in the detoxification of ammonia during neonatal and acute decompensations [Filippi et al 2010, Schwahn et al 2010, Chapman et al 2012].

Extracorporeal detoxification is required for persistent acidosis and hyperammonemia (plasma ammonia level >250-300 μmol/L) not responding to fluid and drug treatment. Methods include (depending on age and clinical situation) continuous veno-venous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or hemodialysis [Chapman et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

Carnitine supplementation (100 mg/kg/day IV divided in 3 doses) may enhance the detoxification of propionic acid by conjugating into propionylcarnitine, which is excreted by the kidneys. Alternatively, it may relieve intracellular coenzyme A accretion and provide a benefit through this mechanism. Consult hospital pharmacy for the recommended maximum daily dose in older patients.

Manage pancreatitis using standard practices.

Home management of metabolic status. The detection and management of metabolic decompensations at home are a critical part of the chronic management of PA. Patients and care providers should notify their medical team about new symptoms and discuss the appropriateness of home management. Strategies to achieve home management should be tailored for the conditions of each patient and family and may include the following:

At-home detection and monitoring of urine ketones

Diet modification under the direction of the metabolic team

If fever is present due to an infection, treatment may include paracetamol and ibuprofen [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Use of anti-emetics such as ondansetron (see precautionary considerations in Agents/Circumstances to Avoid)

Other

Any injury, illness, hospitalization, or surgical procedure should involve consultation with the metabolic team.

The diagnosis and management of pancreatitis is the same as for pancreatitis of other causes.

Neutropenia and other cytopenias usually improve with metabolic control of PA.

Management of arrhythmias is similar to that from other causes.

Cardiomyopathy may improve after liver transplantation in some patients [Romano et al 2010].

Seizures are a frequent complication of PA, necessitating an antiepileptic drug. The use of valproic acid in organic acidemias is often avoided; however, several authors described its use in patients with PA [Haberlandt et al 2009, Schreiber et al 2012].

Dermatologic manifestations (e.g., persistent dermatitis or eczema) warrant a nutritional reassessment to rule out dietary deficiency of essential amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.
