Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: allergy, audiology, cardiology, cardiac surgery, child development / psychology, dental, endocrine, ENT, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, general surgery, immunology, clinical genetics, neurology, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, psychiatry, pulmonary, rheumatology, speech, and urology.

Low serum calcium concentration warrants calcium supplementation in a standard manner and, when possible, referral to an endocrinologist/nephrologist because of the increased risk of renal calculi in individuals on long-term calcium supplementation.

Feeding difficulties should be evaluated by a gastroenterologist to assess for possible structural abnormalities such as intestinal malrotation/nonrotation, Hirschsprung disease, and late-onset diaphragmatic hernia [McDonald-McGinn et al 2004].

Strategies for addressing feeding difficulties include: modification of spoon placement when eating; treatment for gastroesophageal reflux with acid blockade, prokinetic agents, postural therapy; and medication to treat gastrointestinal dysmotility and to facilitate bowel evacuation [Dinulos & Graf 1998, Eicher et al 2000].

Early intervention (occupational therapy, physical therapy) and speech therapy/the introduction of sign language should be instituted by age one year or at presentation in childhood because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay. Later, educational and behavioral therapy are often warranted.

Growth hormone deficiency, if present, should be treated as in the general population.

Immune deficiency generally requires no specific intervention except treating infections aggressively. Rarely, prophylactic antibiotics, IVIG therapy, or thymic transplantation are required.

Early diagnosis and early intervention for psychiatric illnesses improve long-term prognosis in individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder [Clarke & O’Callaghan 2003] and other disorders including autism, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder/attention deficit disorder (ADHD/ADD) [Vorstman et al 2006, Bassett et al 2011].
