KCNQ2-BFNE. Seizures in individuals with BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam and topiramate, are often used (off-label and despite limited data) in neonates with refractory seizures [Tulloch et al 2012]. Refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ2-related BFNE.

KCNQ2-NEE. Children with KCNQ2-related neonatal epileptic encephalopathy generally present with tonic seizures accompanied by motor and autonomic features, similar to seizures in KCNQ2-BFNE. However, individuals with KCNQ2-NEE clearly differ from those with KCNQ2-BFNE as to seizure response. Although seizure response to any of the AEDs has been described in isolated patients, many patients at onset show multiple daily seizures resistant to multiple common old- and new-generation AEDs, alone or in combination. Seizures then tend to gradually decrease by age nine months to four years [Weckhuysen et al 2012].

A favorable response to drugs acting on voltage-gated sodium channels has been suggested in several studies [Kato et al 2013, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Numis et al 2014, Pisano et al 2015]. It has been suggested that early effective treatment reduces cognitive disability [Pisano et al 2015]; however, it remains a matter of debate whether early control of seizures translates to better neuropsychological outcome.

VGB or ACTH therapy can be tried for treatment of infantile spasms that can occur during the course of the disease [Dedek et al 2003, Borgatti et al 2004, Serino et al 2013].

Management should further focus on the optimization of the patient’s functional and communication skills. A multidisciplinary team approach including physiotherapists, speech therapists, and behavioral therapists is best suited to addressing the individual’s needs. Augmentative communication techniques can be valuable for many patients.
