Currently, no effective therapy is proven to abort or shorten an HNA attack.

Treatment of acute episodes of pain and weakness with corticosteroids has been proposed based on retrospective analysis of cases [van Alfen et al 2009, van Eijk et al 2009]. These reports summarize retrospective, anecdotal evidence that corticosteroids can have a favorable effect on pain and recovery. Additional immunomodulatory treatments with such agents as corticosteroids and immune globulin may be considered, but no prospective trials have been performed [van Alfen et al 2009, Johnson et al 2011].

Pain management is the primary goal of therapy:

In the acute stage, a combination of a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as ketorolac and a narcotic such as controlled-release morphine are used.

In the second phase of chronic pain resulting from damaged, hypersensitive nerves, co-analgesics such as gabapentin, carbamazepine, and amitryptiline may be used.

In the third chronic phase, persistent pain in the neck and shoulder region usually points to strain of the paretic or compensating muscles or to a complication in the glenohumeral joint, such as rotator cuff pathology. As the weakness has to recover by itself, therapy focuses on arm support in a sling, rest, physical therapy, range of motion stretching, and modification of activities. This rehabilitation and prevention of further injury is best managed by a physiatrist.

For persistent paresis, physical therapy is recommended to maintain exercise tolerance and prevent joint or ligament contractures. Care must be taken to avoid post-exercise pain in the affected area, as this is often a sign of strain. In this case, exercise should be temporarily deferred, or at least be without extra added weights and with fewer repetitions per set. The patient must find his or her personal level of exercise tolerance; in practice, this is often much lower than estimated (or desired) by the patient or therapist.

For severe paresis of the serratus anterior muscle persisting more than one year, corrective surgery can be considered to increase scapular stability, for example by a split pectoralis major muscle transfer.

Patients with phrenic nerve palsy need consultation with a respiratory specialist and can benefit from noninvasive nocturnal positive pressure ventilation.

For a clinical overview of neurologic and rehabilitative management, see van Alfen [2007].

Cleft palate is best managed by a local craniofacial team.
