Management is most effectively accomplished through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Eye

The ocular manifestations should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome.

Most often, eye problems can be adequately controlled with eyeglasses alone.

Lens dislocation can require surgical aphakia (removal of lens) if the lens is freely mobile or the margin of the lens obstructs vision. An artificial lens can be implanted once growth is complete. While this procedure is currently considered quite safe when performed in specialized centers, major complications, including retinal detachment, can occur.

Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Skeletal

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; in rare circumstances, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Protusio acetabulae can be associated with pain or functional limitations. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated.

Pes planus is often associated with inward rotation at the ankle, contributing to difficulty with ambulation, leg fatigue, and muscle cramps. Orthotics are indicated only in severe cases. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports, while others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or fully successful.

Dental crowding may require orthodontia or use of a palatal expander.

Use of hormone supplementation to limit adult height is rarely requested or considered. Complications can include the psychosocial burden of accelerated puberty, an accelerated rate of growth prior to final closure of the growth plate, and perhaps the undesirable consequences of the increased blood pressure associated with puberty on progression of aortic dilatation. This treatment should only be considered when an extreme height is anticipated. Marfan syndrome-specific growth curves now allow accurate prediction of adult height [Erkula et al 2002].

Cardiovascular

Cardiovascular manifestations should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with Marfan syndrome.

Surgical repair of the aorta is indicated once: (1) the maximal measurement approaches 5.0 cm in adults or older children, (2) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (3) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. More aggressive therapy may be indicated in individuals with a family history of early aortic dissection. Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Surgical guidelines for young children with Marfan syndrome are based upon far less clinical experience than for adults and older children, and need to be tailored to the clinical situation at hand. Aortic root surgery should be considered once: (1) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (2) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. While there is no agreed upon absolute size threshold for the aortic root, many centers use the adult guideline of 5.0 cm given the extreme rarity of aortic dissection in young children. Every effort is made to allow the aortic annulus to reach a size of at least 2.0 cm, allowing placement of an aortic graft of sufficient size to accommodate body growth. Severe and progressive mitral valve regurgitation with attendant ventricular dysfunction is the leading indication for cardiovascular surgery in children with Marfan syndrome. In this circumstance, caution is warranted when considering concomitant aortic root surgery, as the increased length and complexity of the procedure can put extra strain on the myocardium and delay or compromise postoperative recovery.

When congestive heart failure is present, afterload-reducing agents (in combination with a beta-blocker) can improve cardiovascular function, but surgical intervention may be indicated in refractory cases. Most often the mitral valve can be repaired, rather than replaced.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize this risk.

Pneumothorax can be a recurrent problem. Optimal management may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.
