Management guidelines have been published. US recommendations include Chinsky JM et al [in press]; European recommendations include de Laet et al [2013].

Acute management of liver failure. Children may require respiratory support, appropriate fluid management, and blood products for correction of bleeding diathesis.

Nitisinone (Orfadin®). 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoro-methylbenzyol) 1,3 cyclohexanedione (NTBC) blocks parahydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase (p-HPPD), the second step in the tyrosine degradation pathway, and prevents the accumulation of FAA and its conversion to succinylacetone (Figure 1).

Nitisinone should be prescribed as soon as the diagnosis of tyrosinemia type I is confirmed.

Nitisinone is generally prescribed at 1.0 mg/kg/day; individual requirements may vary. Dosage should be adjusted to maintain blood nitisinone levels between 40 and 60 µmol/L, which theoretically blocks more than 99% of p-HPPD activity. Rarely, an individual may require higher blood levels of nitisinone (70 µmol/L) to suppress succinylacetone excretion. As long as blood concentration of nitisinone is within the therapeutic range, urine succinylacetone does not need to be measured.

Nitisinone is typically given in two divided doses; however, because of the long half-life (50-60 hours), affected individuals who are older than one year and stable may maintain adequate therapy with 1x/day dosing [Schlune et al 2012].

Rare side effects of nitisinone have included: transient low platelet count and transient low neutrophil count that resolved without intervention; and photophobia that resolved with stricter dietary control and subsequent lowering of blood tyrosine concentrations.

Low-tyrosine diet. Nitisinone increases blood concentration of tyrosine, necessitating a low-tyrosine diet to prevent tyrosine crystals from forming in the cornea.

Dietary management should be started immediately upon diagnosis and should provide a nutritionally complete diet with controlled intakes of phenylalanine and tyrosine using a vegetarian diet with low-protein foods and a medical formula such as Tyrex® (Ross) or Tyros-1® (Mead Johnson).

Phenylalanine and tyrosine requirements are interdependent and vary from individual to individual and within the same individual depending on growth rate, adequacy of energy and protein intakes, and state of health. With appropriate dietary management, plasma tyrosine concentration should be 300-600 µmol/L, regardless of age; plasma phenylalanine concentration should be 20-80 µmol/L (0.3-1.3 mg/dL). If the blood concentration of phenylalanine is too low (<20 µmol/L), additional protein should be added to the diet from milk or foods.

Liver transplantation. Prior to the availability of nitisinone for the treatment of tyrosinemia type I, the only definitive therapy was liver transplantation.

Liver transplantation should be reserved for those children who (1) have severe liver failure at clinical presentation and fail to respond to nitisinone therapy or (2) have documented evidence of malignant changes in hepatic tissue [Bartlett et al 2014].

Transplant recipients require long-term immunosuppression. Mortality associated with liver transplantation in young children is approximately 10%.

Transplant recipients may also benefit from low-dose (0.1mg/kg/day) nitisinone therapy to prevent continued renal tubular and glomerular dysfunction resulting from persistence of succinylacetone in the plasma and urine [Bartlett et al 2013].
