For the general approach to managing DCM, see Dilated Cardiomyopathy Overview, Management.

The Pasotti et al [2008] report (see Clinical Description) provides the most longitudinal data on LMNA-related DCM: 94 individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant were followed for a median of 57 months (range: 36-107 months). In the report of Brodt et al, the progression from first observed conduction system disease to the onset of ventricular dysfunction in a subset of 64 individuals with LMNA variants was a median of seven years [Brodt et al 2013]. Additional reports of large prospective longitudinal natural history studies of LMNA-related DCM are not yet available.

The Heart Failure Society of America and Heart Rhythm Society (in conjunction with the European Heart Rhythm Association) have commissioned guideline documents for the management of genetic cardiomyopathies that included specific mention of LMNA-related DCM [Hershberger et al 2009, Ackerman et al 2011]. Elements of the guidelines include the following:

Because of the complexity of treatment interventions in LMNA-related DCM in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, referral to centers with special expertise in cardiovascular genetic medicine should be considered.

Consider therapy based on cardiac phenotype (i.e., DCM or arrhythmia).

With an established arrhythmia or known risk of arrhythmia, consider ICD implantation before the ejection fraction falls below 35%. Note that this recommendation was developed in the Heart Failure Society guidelines in large part because of the risk for lethal arrhythmias in persons with an LMNA pathogenic variant who have systolic function well above a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%, the usual measure of systolic dysfunction below which ICDs are indicated in most US guidelines.

The management of LMNA-related DCM is focused on treatment of conduction system disease, arrhythmia, and DCM.

Cardiac conduction system disease and arrhythmias

Chronic atrial fibrillation unresponsive to cardioversion is treated with anticoagulants and agents for ventricular rate control.

Other symptomatic supraventricular arrhythmias are treated with pharmacologic agents, and at times are augmented with electrophysiologic intervention (e.g., atrial or atrioventricular node ablations).

Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias or asymptomatic but significant heart block is treated with an implantable electronic pacemaker. However, when a device is to be implanted, use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) rather than an electronic pacemaker has been advocated and should be strongly considered, as the risk of mortality from sudden cardiac death usually accompanies supraventricular arrhythmias and conduction system disease. Sudden cardiac death presumably results from lethal tachyarrhythmias despite the presence of a pacemaker to treat bradyarrhythmias [van Berlo et al 2005, Meune et al 2006], and for this reason use of an ICD has been advocated for LMNA-related cardiomyopathy with significant conduction system disease and/or arrhythmia regardless of the left ventricular ejection fraction [Hershberger et al 2009].

Symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and resuscitated sudden cardiac death are treated with an ICD and drug therapy as needed.

When DCM is present and the left ventricular ejection fraction is less than 35%, an ICD should be implanted following the usual guidelines [Yancy et al 2013].

LMNA-related DCM

Treatment of symptomatic DCM, including heart failure, is pharmacologic with ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, diuretics, and other conventional approaches, as summarized in Yancy et al [2013] (full text).

With progressive deterioration in left ventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction <30%) while still in sinus rhythm, some experts recommend full anticoagulation to prevent the development of left ventricular mural thrombus and embolic events including stroke.

Cardiac transplantation or other advanced therapies should be considered with progressive DCM, advancing heart failure, and otherwise refractory disease in persons receiving comprehensive cardiovascular care from experts in the field [Yancy et al 2013].
