No definitive treatments exist for the congenital muscular dystrophies; however, multidisciplinary medical care improves quality of life and longevity. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMD subtype, and rate of progression.

Respiratory therapy and use of respiratory aids including assisted cough and hyperinsufflation devices, Percussionaire®, noninvasive ventilatory support, or mechanical ventilation via tracheostomy are appropriate for those with respiratory insufficiency [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises help promote mobility and prevent contractures. Mechanical assistive devices including canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs can be used as needed to help ambulation and mobility. Posture in vertical, sitting, and supine positions has to be evaluated and assisted if necessary as improved posture may positively affect chest expansion.

Surgical intervention may be needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and scoliosis. Pros and cons of surgery for hip dislocation or joint contractures need to be considered given that any functional benefit may be insignificant compared to the high risk of pain and rapid relapse. Proactive trunk bracing (plexidur Garchois brace) is used in some countries to reduce the degree of deformity and to slow the progression of scoliosis in order to delay consideration of surgical intervention until puberty [Quijano-Roy et al 2010].

Speech therapy may be indicated.

Close attention to oral hygiene is indicated.

Assistance in education (school technical aide) and social and emotional support and stimulation can improve the sense of social involvement and productivity and can reduce the sense of social isolation common in those with CMD [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Steroid treatment using dosages based upon guidelines used in the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy has been reported in the dystroglycanopathies. In those who respond, the use of steroids appears to support prolonged ambulation [Godfrey et al 2006].
