(See recent comprehensive reviews including Sweeney & Avner [2011], Telega et al [2013], Guay-Woodford et al [2014], Sweeney & Avner [2014], and Sweeney et al [2016] for detailed management strategies.)

Initial management of affected infants centers on stabilization of respiratory function.

Respiratory

Mechanical ventilation may be necessary to treat pulmonary hypoplasia (characterized by inability to oxygenate despite jet or oscillating ventilation with 100% oxygen) or hypoventilation from massively enlarged kidneys (characterized by increased pCO2 despite adequate oxygenation). It may also be required in the first 48-72 hours postnatally to determine whether pulmonary hypoplasia or reversible pulmonary disease is present.

When massively enlarged kidneys prevent diaphragmatic excursion and/or cause severe feeding intolerance, some have advocated unilateral or bilateral nephrectomy [Shukla et al 2004].

Experience suggests that unilateral nephrectomy may be of limited value, since the contralateral kidney often shows marked enlargement following unilateral nephrectomy [Author, unpublished observations]

Bilateral nephrectomy with placement of a peritoneal dialysis catheter followed by a short period of hemodialysis often allows the peritoneum to heal in preparation for chronic peritoneal dialysis [Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney et al 2016]. The timing of these procedures, as well as potential coordination with a preemptive living donor transplantation, will be dictated by factors such as the age, size, and clinical status of the patient as well as living donor availability.

Renal

Neonates with oliguria or anuria may require peritoneal dialysis within the first days of life.

Hyponatremia is common and should be treated depending on the individual's volume status.

Early recognition and treatment of dehydration is critical. Supplemental feedings or fluid therapy via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes may be required.

Hypertension generally responds well to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor inhibitors (ARBs), which are the treatments of choice. In many cases, hypertension may be severe enough to require multiple antihypertensive medications.

Affected children with significant chronic kidney disease should be treated with all modalities of modern pediatric end-stage renal disease (ESRD) therapy, including dialysis and kidney transplantation.

Anemia in children with Stage III or higher chronic kidney disease may require treatment with iron supplementation and erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESAs).

Liver. Treatment of biliary dysfunction focuses on: (1) malabsorption of nutrients and fat-soluble vitamins; and (2) the risk for ascending cholangitis.

Administration of synthetic bile acids

The presence of poor serum levels of fat-soluble vitamins (K, D, E, A) or poor weight gain despite adequate caloric supplementation may indicate the need for bile acid supplementation.

Clinical suspicion of bile acid deficiency may be verified by measurement of serum bile acids.

Administration of synthetic bile acids is indicated if there is evidence of significant intrahepatic ductal dilation (Caroli syndrome), which can be appreciated by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).

Bacterial cholangitis, often an underdiagnosed complication in those with hepatic involvement, may present as recurrent bacteremia with enteric pathogens without typical clinical features of cholangitis. Persistent fevers, particularly with right upper-quadrant pain, should be evaluated and treated aggressively.

Alkaline phosphatase and γGTP may be elevated during episodes of acute ascending cholangitis and may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis [Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016].

Esophageal varices should be treated with endoscopic banding or sclerotherapy as indicated.

Portosystemic shunting may be necessary to treat progressive portal hypertension; however, Tsimaratos et al [2000] reported recurrent hepatic encephalopathy and death following portocaval shunting in two individuals with ARPKD who had ESRD.

In severe instances of intractable portal hypertension, or severe dual renal and hepatobiliary disease, hepatic or dual renal-hepatic transplantation has become a viable option [Telega et al 2013, Chandar et al 2015].

Dual-organ transplantation. Successful simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation in individuals with ARPKD has been reported in a small case series [Harps et al 2011, Chapal et al 2012, Brinkert et al 2013, Telega et al 2013].

Previously, only a small percent of individuals with ARPKD, particularly those diagnosed later in life, have required liver transplantation. However, with improved survival and advances in renal replacement therapy, it is likely that the number of individuals with ARPKD requiring liver transplantation may increase.

An algorithm for evaluating the risk benefit of dual organ transplant in individuals with ARPKD who have both severe kidney and liver disease has been proposed to assist clinicians in the decision-making process [Telega et al 2013]. See Table 2 (pdf) and Figure 1.

Feeding and growth

Feeding intolerance and growth failure, even in the absence of renal insufficiency, can be significant, especially in young infants. Aggressive nutritional support, which may include supplemental feedings via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes, is often required to optimize weight gain and growth [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Hartung & Guay-Woodford 2014, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Children with growth failure may benefit from treatment with growth hormone [Lilova et al 2003]. The optimal age for starting growth hormone therapy depends on the growth velocity of the child; studies suggest that treatment is beneficial in children with chronic kidney disease who are age two years or younger [Seikaly et al 2007, Schaeffer 2016].
