Recommendations for treatment were agreed upon at a 2014 consensus conference (full text).

Androgens improve (at least transiently) the red cell and platelet counts in approximately 50% of individuals. Androgen therapy can be considered when the hemoglobin drops below 8 g/dL or the platelet count falls below 30,000/mm3 ('severe' – see Table 2). Although only 10%-20% of individuals receiving continuous low-dose androgen therapy are long-term responders, this option can be particularly useful for individuals who do not have access to or are not ready for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), or to individuals for whom of a suitable donor is not available.

Oxymetholone, given orally at a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day, may be increased up to 5 mg/kg/day.

Doses may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose with careful monitoring of the blood counts.

Other synthetic androgens used in FA include stanazolol in Asia, and oxandrolone and danazol in North America.

Side effects of androgen administration include virilization and liver toxicity such as elevated liver enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis (vascular lesion with multiple blood-filled cysts), and hepatic tumors. Individuals taking androgens should be monitored for liver tumors and undergo regular liver function tests (LFT) for abnormalities. Blood tests for LFTs should be performed every three to six months; liver ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 months. If no response is seen after three to four months, androgens should be discontinued [Scheckenbach et al 2012, Rose et al 2014].

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves the neutrophil count in some individuals. G-CSF dose should be titrated to the lowest possible dose and frequency to keep ANC above 1,000/mm3. Note: (1) A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed prior to the initiation of G-CSF and monitored every six months throughout treatment, given the theoretic risk of stimulating the growth of a leukemic clone. (2) G-CSF should be administered in consultation with an FA expert.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations, including aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and acute leukemia. Ideally, HSCT is performed prior to onset of MDS/AML and before multiple transfusions [MacMillan & Wagner 2010, Mehta et al 2010]. Individuals with FA are sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation, need special transplant regimens, and should be cared for and transplanted at centers with the most experience in HSCT in FA.

A multi-institutional study reported a one-year probability of overall survival of 80% in 45 individuals with FA transplanted for marrow failure and/or MDS, using alternative donors (including mismatched related and unrelated donors) and chemotherapy-only preparative regimen. Survival for individuals younger than age ten years transplanted for marrow failure was even better, at 91.3% (±5.9%) [Mehta et al 2017].

Fludarabine reduced the incidence of graft failure and allowed for removal of radiation from the preparative regimens in a matched sib donor setting [MacMillan et al 2015].

MDS/AML treatment remains challenging. Options include chemotherapy, HSCT with or without prior induction chemotherapy, and investigational trials. Chemotherapy should be undertaken in coordination with centers experienced with FA, as it can cause severe, prolonged, or irreversible myelosuppression. Plans for HSCT should be in place prior to starting chemotherapy. Published reports of chemotherapy regimens for AML in individuals with FA are sparse and limited by the unclear benefit to the overall outcome due to the lack of longitudinal follow up [Mehta et al 2007, Talbot et al 2014, Beier et al 2015].

Solid tumors. Prompt, aggressive workup for any symptoms suggestive of a malignancy is indicated. Early detection and surgical removal remains the mainstay of therapy. Treatment is challenging secondary to the increased toxicity associated with chemotherapy and radiation in FA. Data is limited on use of chemotherapy at standard doses or reduced doses and schedules in individuals with FA, and there are reports of severe or fatal toxicities and poor treatment outcomes [Masserot et al 2008, Hosoya et al 2010, Tan et al 2011, Spanier et al 2012]. Individuals diagnosed with a genital tract cancer should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist immediately, and care should be coordinated with FA experts.
