Treatment is best provided by a clinical geneticist and a nutritionist experienced in the treatment of metabolic disease.

Care of Hyperammonemic Coma

Care should be provided by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a tertiary care center experienced in the management of individuals with OTC deficiency. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following.

Rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia

Level should be 200 μmol/L or lower even if a diagnosis has not yet been established because of the severely toxic effect of an elevated ammonia level on the brain.

The fastest method for lowering the ammonia level is hemodialysis [Tuchman 1992, McBryde et al 2004]:

A neonate should not be hemodialysed longer than four hours and should then be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

An older individual can be dialysed longer and should also be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization.

Depending on the height of the ammonia level (≤1500 μmol/L), one can also start with high flow hemofiltration methods to achieve a similarly speedy reduction of the ammonia level and then switch to regular hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

Note: Peritoneal dialysis is ineffective for management of acute hyperammonemia and is not recommended.

Ammonia scavenger therapy

Treatment allows an alternative pathway for the excretion of excess nitrogen (see Table 2).

Nitrogen scavenger therapy is available as an intravenous infusion of a mixture of sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate for acute management and as an oral preparation of phenylbutyrate or sodium benzoate for long-term maintenance therapy.

Citrulline is supplemented at 170 mg/kg/day or 3.8g/m2/day (enterally).

Table 2. 

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Patient Weight

Components of Infusion Solution

Loading 1 and Maintenance Dose 2, 3

Sodium phenylacetate & sodium benzoate 4

Arginine HCl injection, 10%

Sodium phenylacetate

Sodium benzoate

Arginine HCl 5

<25 kg

Undiluted: 2.5 mL (contains 250 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

2.0 mL at 100 mg/mL

250 mg/kg

250 mg/kg

200 mg/kg

≥25 kg

Undiluted: 55 mL (contains 5,500 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

40 mL at 100 mg/mL

5,500 mg/m2

5,500 mg/m2

4,000 mg/m2

Batshaw et al [2001]

1. 

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

2. 

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

3. 

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

4. 

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

5. 

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Batshaw et al [2001]

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Reversal of catabolism

Provide calories from glucose and fat, and resume protein intake (in the form of natural protein and an essential amino acid mix) no later than 24 hours after protein intake was discontinued

Note: Persons on hemodialysis or hemofiltration in particular need adequate nutrition to overcome catabolism because nutrients are removed by these procedures. Discontinuation of protein intake should not exceed 24 hours because deficiency of essential amino acids results in muscle breakdown and uncontrolled nitrogen release. Daily quantitative plasma amino acid analysis should guide nutritional therapy, the goal of which is to keep essential amino acid levels in the normal range.

Use of a high glucose infusion rate supported by continuous insulin infusion to maintain high set point normoglycemia (140 mg/dL) as needed. For a newborn in crisis the goal is to deliver at least 100 kcal/kg/day, mostly from glucose and fat.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage

Affected individuals who are intubated and sedated may not show clinical signs of seizures, which are prevalent in acute hyperammonemia. EEG surveillance is thus highly recommended to allow electroencephalographic detection and subsequent treatment of seizures.

Note: Phenobarbital is removed by dialysis and valproic acid is contraindicated in urea cycle disorders.

The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007] but has yet to be proven efficacious. A pilot study showed feasibility and safety (see Therapies Under Investigation).

No other interventions (besides lowering the ammonia level) have proven efficacy for neuroprotection in hyperammonemic coma due to a urea cycle disorder or other conditions.

Long-Term Treatment

Long-term treatment (including restriction of protein intake, use of nitrogen scavengers, and in some cases liver transplantation) is aimed at promoting growth and development and preventing hyperammonemic episodes.

Protein intake

should be restricted to the required dietary allowance (RDA) for protein or the minimum amount necessary to allow growth and prevent catabolism depending on the severity of the disease. Use of an essential amino acid mixture is generally necessary to maintain normal essential amino acid levels in those on significant protein restriction, even persons with partial OTC deficiency. The diet should also provide vitamins, minerals, and trace elements, either in a calorie-rich, protein-free formula or in the form of supplements.

Although protein restriction is the mainstay of therapy, when protein intake is too low, catabolism can cause chronic hyperammonemia just as high protein intake does. Careful monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations is necessary to detect essential amino acid deficiencies. High glutamine concentrations are interpreted as evidence of poor metabolic control and chronic hyperammonemia.

Nitrogen scavengers provide alternative routes for nitrogen disposal and allow more protein intake [Batshaw et al 2001, Berry & Steiner 2001].

Although it removes only half as much nitrogen as phenylbutyrate, oral sodium benzoate is the ammonia scavenger of choice in European countries and Australia rather than phenylbutyrate because it is felt to have fewer side effects.

Phenylbutyrate causes menstrual dysfunction and body odor, and appears to deplete branched chain amino acids; sodium benzoate causes hypokalemia due to increased renal losses of potassium [Scaglia et al 2004, Häberle et al 2012].

Recommendations for ammonia scavenger therapy:

Long-term ammonia scavenger treatment may consist of 450-600 mg/kg/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 170 mg/kg/day of L-citrulline in children <25 kg, and 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 3.8 g/m2/day of L-citrulline in individuals weighing ≥25 kg. Treatment should be accompanied by an appropriate low-protein diet [Batshaw et al 2001].

Note: (1) Citrulline offers the advantage over arginine of incorporating aspartate into the pathway thus pulling one additional nitrogen molecule into the urea cycle. (2) Sodium benzoate is being used instead of sodium phenylbutyrate in conjunction with L-citrulline. The recommended dose is ≤250 mg/kg/d in children <25 kg and a maximum of 12 g/d [Häberle et al 2012].

Glycerol phenylbutyrate, which is significantly more palatable than sodium phenylbutyrate, is another treatment option. It has the same mechanism of action as sodium phenylbutyrate.

Liver transplantation. No matter how mild OTC deficiency appears to be, stressors can at any age precipitate a hyperammonemic crisis that becomes life threatening. The fear of such an event, along with the restrictions on daily living imposed by the dietary therapy, prompt many families to consider liver transplantation even if the disease has been manageable up to that point with diet and medication.

In severe, neonatal-onset urea cycle disorders, liver transplantation remains the most effective means of preventing further hyperammonemic crises and neurodevelopmental deterioration [Leonard & McKiernan 2004]. It is typically performed by age six months.

Females and males with partial OTC deficiency can, after diagnosis, be maintained on a low-protein diet and oral ammonia scavenger treatment for life; the need for liver transplant depends on the individual and is typically considered when an affected individual is unstable and has frequent hyperammonemic episodes.

Living related donor livers are often considered for partial liver transplantation (LT) in individuals with a urea cycle disorder. The suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor has been discussed [Wong 2012]. According to Wakiya et al [2012], enzyme activity measurement in a liver biopsy sample is useful in determining the suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor. However, this approach is problematic for several reasons:

A liver biopsy sample may not adequately represent the enzyme activity in the liver of a heterozygous female. It can thus not be known whether a transplanted lobe contains enough enzyme activity to prevent symptoms in the recipient.

After partial hepatectomy the liver of the donor mother will regenerate. Since the X-chromosome inactivation pattern in the regenerated liver in the donor cannot be predicted, it is also impossible to predict whether the overall enzyme activity in the donor mother will remain adequate to prevent symptoms in her.

Likewise, the lobe that is transplanted into the recipient child will undergo changes after transplantation; thus, the enzyme activity in the donated lobe cannot be accurately determined at the time of transplantation, since additional post-transplantation changes could make the final enzyme activity in the recipient even more unpredictable.

Note: The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity to bridge the time to liver transplantation in unstable individuals with neonatal-onset disease is currently under investigation (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Instruction in small classroom settings to minimize distraction and extra support to manage executive function deficits are often required and necessary to maximize success in school.

Monotherapy or combination therapy with non-stimulant or stimulant medication is often necessary for the treatment of ADHD (at least during times of learning) [Gyato et al 2004, Krivitzky et al 2009]. However, these medications negatively affect appetite and their use warrants even closer monitoring of intake and body weight to avoid a catabolic state that could lead to hyperammonemia.

Seizure disorders. Valproic acid is contraindicated for treatment of seizures in urea cycle disorders because it can cause a hyperammonemic crisis.

Learning disability/intellectual disability. Brain damage from an initial hyperammonemic coma, frequent hyperammonemic episodes with moderate to severe hyperammonemia, and chronic hyperammonemia can lead to learning disabilities and intellectual disability. Appropriate support services are necessary to optimize intellectual outcome in these individuals.

Also see Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.
