Feeding problems. Maintain adequate nutrition and avoid aspiration. For infants, thickened formula and different-shaped nipples are useful in managing orophyaryngeal incoordination. Aversion to feeding and failure to thrive are managed frequently by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement.

Gastroesophageal reflux. Upright positioning with feeds, prokinetic agents, H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and gastrostomy with or without fundoplication are appropriate.

Vomiting crises are treated with intravenous or rectal diazepam (0.2 mg/kg q3h) and rectal chloral hydrate (30 mg/kg q6h), and IV administration of fluids to prevent dehydration.

Other treatments used include [Palma et al 2014]:

Alpha2 adrenergic agonist clonidine (transdermal clonidine patch): 0.1-0.3 mg/24h provides stable blood levels and is preferable to oral dosages. Clonidine, which augments baroreflex sensitivity and parasympathetic modulation in familial dysautonomia, stabilizes the cardiovascular system and may attenuate feeding-induced crises [Marthol et al 2003]. Although no controlled trials have been conducted, clonidine is frequently used in autonomic crisis. Slow tapering is recommended when discontinuing clonidine treatment [Palma et al 2014].

In some patients admitted to an ICU, dexmedetomidine (a selective agonist of alpha2 adrenoreceptors in the brain and spinal cord that inhibit sympathetic outflow) was effective.

Carbidopa (a reversible dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor) 200 mg three times daily was assessed in a recent double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that provided level II-b evidence that treatment with carbidopa can reduce the frequency and severity of hypertensive vomiting [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Lung disease. Chronic lung disease is treated with daily chest physiotherapy (nebulization, bronchodilators, cough augmentation, incentive spirometry, and postural drainage). Giarraffa et al [2005] determined that the use of high-frequency chest-wall oscillation improved all measured health outcomes significantly, including pneumonias, hospitalizations, antibiotic courses, antibiotic days, doctor visits, absenteeism, and oxygen saturation.

Early diagnosis of pneumonia and infectious agents is important due to the common involvement of gastric flora (secondary to aspirations).

Individuals with FD are prone to viral respiratory infections and, in some cases, concomitant bacterial infections. Treatment with oseltamivir is indicated for influenza virus infections [Palma et al 2014].

Orthostatic hypotension. Therapeutic measures include hydration, elastic stockings, and leg exercises to increase muscle tone and reduce pooling of blood in the veins of the legs.

Counter-maneuvers (e.g., squatting, bending forward, and abdominal compression) improve orthostatic blood pressure in persons with FD mainly by increasing cardiac output [Tutaj et al 2006]. Squatting had the greatest effect. However, the suitability and effectiveness of a specific counter-maneuver depend on the orthopedic and/or neurologic complications identified in each individual.

To determine whether fludrocortisone is effective in treating postural hypotension and whether it has an effect on survival and secondary long-term FD problems, Axelrod et al [2005] compared persons treated with fludrocortisone with untreated persons and found that cumulative survival was significantly higher during the first decade in treated versus untreated individuals. In subsequent decades, the addition of midodrine improved cumulative survival. Of note, treatment of orthostatic hypotension with high doses of fludrocortisone (>0.2 mg/day) was shown to accelerate the progression of renal damage in persons with FD [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Hypertension. Attention to factors precipitating hypertension rather than use of antihypertensive agents is appropriate because blood pressure is labile.

Sleeping with the head of the bed raised (20°-40°) helps to reduce orthostatic hypotension by lowering supine hypertension, reducing nocturnal pressure-diuresis, and raising intravascular volume in the morning.

The guidelines for hypertension treatment in patients with FD and chronic kidney disease are the same as for the general population.

Kidney and bladder. Chronic renal failure, resulting from ischemic glomerulosclerosis, is common.

Adequate control of blood pressure is an important factor in delaying the appearance of kidney disease.

Renal tubular acidosis, which occurs frequently in FD, often requires treatment with bicarbonate.

Hyperkalemia, which is also common, is treated with low potassium diet.

Bradyarrhythmia. Speculating that fatal bradyarrhythmia is an etiologic factor in sudden death associated with FD, Gold-von Simson et al [2005] studied 20 persons with FD with a history of syncope and cardiac arrest and concluded that a pacemaker may protect from fatal bradyarrhythmia and may decrease the incidence of syncope.

If sleep-disordered breathing is confirmed, treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) must be initiated.

Eyes. Decreased corneal sensation and absence of tearing predispose to corneal ulcerations, which can be managed with artificial tear solutions containing methylcellulose administered three to six times daily, maintenance of normal body hydration, and moisture chamber spectacle attachments. Soft contact lenses can promote corneal healing. Tarsorrhaphy is reserved for treatment of corneal injury that is unresponsive to these measures. Corneal transplantation has had limited success.

Chronic blepharitis is common and requires treatment with combined topical antibiotic/corticosteroid ointment.

Strabismus is almost always present (93%), and early surgical correction may help.

Spine. Spinal fusion may be necessary.

Other

Many adults use walkers or wheelchairs when outside the home.

Sialorrhea is a common. Surgical and anti-cholinergic drugs were used in the past. Recently the use of botulinium toxin injected to major salivary glands has been suggested [Daniel & Cardona 2014].
