Management focuses on supportive therapy to minimize fractures and maximize function, minimize disability, foster independence, and maintain overall health [Marini & Gerber 1997]. Ideally, OI is managed by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in the medical management of OI, orthopedics, rehabilitation medicine, pediatric dentistry, and otology/otolaryngology.

Supportive therapy is individualized depending on the severity, the degree of impairment, and the age of the affected individual. Considerable support from medical personnel is generally required by parents caring for infants with perinatally lethal OI.

Physical medicine treatment

Parents and other caregivers should be instructed in safe handling techniques. These are mostly common sense practices in order to relieve stress on a single point. For example: lift an affected infant by bracing the torso, neck and lower body; avoid any situation where increased pressure is placed on a single point on any long bone; when assisting an affected child in standing up, do not pull excessively on an extended arm but bend down and brace a greater surface area (such as placing a hand behind the back and pulling gently from the front (using the arm) while applying pressure from the rear); avoid sudden acceleration/deceleration movements; and avoid throwing a child in the air. Older children should not ride on amusement park rides. Caregivers should avoid recreating the circumstances of a fracture, as it is likely to happen again.

The use of bracing to try to stabilize progressively deforming limbs depends in part on the subtype of OI. Progressively deforming OI has proven to be progressive despite external or internal bracing. The use of internal rods or braces to support and stabilize deforming limbs is more successful in the milder subtypes of OI and is guided by the expertise of the managing orthopedist.

Orthotics to support ankle instability are used in toddlers with delayed walking secondary to joint hypermobility and in other affected individuals who suffer recurrent subluxations of their ankle joints.

Physical activity serves a number of purposes. It provides gravitational stressors required for bone growth and remodeling. The muscles supporting joints are strengthened by activity and as an overall benefit, improved joint stability aides in overall well-being as pain levels are reduced and mobility is increased. Physical activity can be self-directed or coordinated through the services of a physical therapist. Each affected individual’s needs are unique and thus both physical and occupational therapy should be initiated for increased stability of bone, improved mobility, prevention of contractures, prevention of head and spinal deformity, aerobic fitness, and muscle strengthening

Mobility devices, such as scooters and chairs for children, and modified automobiles for adults should be considered.

Some individuals with OI experience chronic daily pain associated with both fractures and non-specific myofascial pain associated with the generalized connective tissue disorder. Pain management plays an important role in the management of OI. Some affected individuals do well with minimal analgesics, but many benefit from a multidisciplinary pain management service. Analgesics can be used to control pain from fractures.

Orthopedic treatment. Fractures are treated as they would be in unaffected children and adults with attention to the following:

The period of immobility in children with OI should be shortened as much as is practical.

Casts should be small and lightweight.

Physical therapy should begin as soon as the cast is removed to promote mobility and enhance muscle strength and bone mass.

At this time, intramedullary rodding remains a mainstay of orthopedic care to provide anatomic positioning of limbs that permits more normal function.

Progressive spinal deformities are particularly difficult to treat because of the poor quality of bone in severely affected children. Progressive scoliosis in severe OI does not respond to conservative management and response to surgical intervention may be limited.

Pharmacologic treatment. Bisphosphonates, analogs of pyrophosphate that decrease bone resorption, are being evaluated in both uncontrolled and controlled trials to assess the extent to which they can increase bone mass and bone strength and improve function in children with OI. These studies are still ongoing. Bisphosphonates have been used most extensively in severely affected children with OI; they may be useful in adults with OI as well [Adami et al 2003].

The role of treatment with bisphosphonates in changing the natural history of OI is incompletely understood. The Cochrane Collaboration is an international network which assembles reviews on various management strategies based on randomized controlled clinical trials within its database in order to improve the practice of evidence-based medicine. As of the Cochrane Collaboration’s most recent update of the OI review, bisphosphonate therapy did not appear to reduce fracture incidence but it did impact bone density and adult height [Dwan et al 2014] (full text).

An open-label trial of cyclical intravenous pamidronate (bisphosphonate) was reported by Glorieux et al [1998], and the effects of relatively long-term use in adults by Aström & Soderhall [2002] and Zeitlin et al [2003]. Falk et al [2003] replicated the study of Glorieux et al [1998] in children older than age 22 months, but did report one child with fracture non-union following treatment with pamidronate. No randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of pamidronate has been published. Bisphosphonate treatment has produced improvements in bone histomorphometry, increased bone mineral density (BMD), decreased some biochemical markers of bone resorption, and possibly reduced fracture risk. In addition, some investigators have reported decreased bone pain in young, but not older, children following treatment.

Pamidronate use is invasive and inconvenient, typically requiring intravenous infusions every three months four hours a day for three days and has real and potential complications. Recently, pamidronate has been offered even to very young children with OI, but complications including transient asymptomatic hypocalcemia [Plotkin et al 2000] and symptomatic hypocalcemia [Chien et al 2002] have been noted. The long-term consequences of lowering bone turnover in children with OI are unknown, but may include delayed bone union after fracture or osteotomy.

A randomized controlled clinical trial using the oral bisphosphonate alendronate was recently completed and the results published. Ward and colleagues found that treatment with oral alendronate for two years in children with OI significantly decreased bone turnover and increased spine areal BMD but was not associated with improved fracture outcomes [Ward et al 2011]. In a second study with a different oral bisphosphonate, Bishop and colleagues found that oral risedronate increased areal BMD and reduced first and recurrent clinical fractures in children with OI [Bishop et al 2010]. There have not been additional large placebo-controlled trials of IV bisphosphonates, and it is unlikely that additional large randomized placebo controlled studies comparing bisphosphonates with placebo to determine the impact of these agents in altering the natural history of OI will be conducted.

Zoledronic acid, a newer bisphosphonate with a longer half life, greater potency, and more convenient dosing, is being studied in children with OI. A study comparing pamidronate to zoledronic acid was completed; to date, the results have not been published.

Basilar impression. Criteria for surgical intervention are not well defined. If surgery is undertaken, it should be done in a center experienced in the procedures used.

Dental treatment. The goals are the maintenance of both primary and permanent dentition, functional bite or occlusion, optimal gingival health, and overall appearance. Pediatric dentists are the most knowledgeable about DI in children. Some consensus exists that early dental restorative coverage of the primary molars and (if possible) aesthetic coverage of the upper anterior teeth is optimal. Plastic polymers are sometimes used to coat teeth. As anxiety can be an issue with children, pre-medication for anxiolysis (e.g., nitrous oxide analgesia or midazolam) can be used for treatment in a clinic setting.

If warranted, orthodontic treatment can be initiated, but care must be taken in the use of orthodontic appliances because of the brittleness of the teeth.

Dental restorations in adults may best be done by a general dentist knowledgeable about OI or a specialist in prosthetic dentistry.

Hearing loss. Surgical repair of the middle-ear bones and creation of a prosthetic incus can improve unaided hearing.

Later hearing loss appears to have a significant sensorineural component that does not respond to middle ear surgery. Cochlear implantation has been used in a small number of individuals; outcome data are limited.

Management of lethal OI. It is appropriate to offer parents the option of allowing the infant to expire without attempting interventions such as assisted ventilation.

Other therapies. Early trials of anabolic steroids, sodium fluoride, testosterone, vitamins C and D, flavinoids, and calcitonin showed minimal or no improvement in bone formation, or too small a sample size was utilized for meaningful conclusions [reviewed in Byers & Steiner 1992].
