Bleeding disorder. Management by a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is highly recommended. In the US, such teams are often identified through the federally funded hemophilia treatment center network.

Severe bleeding manifestations, including intracranial hemorrhage (with or without hematoma evacuation) have been successfully managed with intravenous antifibrinolytics. Response to both epsilon-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid have been documented.

If PAI-1 activity needs to be increased prior to achieving the therapeutic steady state level of antifibrinolytics, infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) (10-15 mL/kg) can be used. Duration of use of FFP is individualized based on clinical course and response to therapy. Note: The use of FFP does not appear to be effective in pregnancy for the prevention of bleeding in women with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Iwaki et al 2012]. Fresh-frozen plasma to replace PAI-1 during pregnancy may be difficult due to the PAI-1 level achieved with plasma, the volume required, and the need for repeated infusion, all of which may be associated with risk of volume overload and/or infusion reactions [Gupta et al 2014].

Heavy menstrual bleeding can often be effectively managed with antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppression therapy (oral contraceptives).

Occasionally, patients with complete PAI-1 deficiency experience excessive menstrual bleeding or bleeding following a procedure or trauma that requires infusion of packed red blood cells to manage the acute blood loss.

Education regarding bleeding manifestations and when to seek treatment includes the following:

For females, anticipatory counseling regarding onset of menses and potential complications

Prompt reporting of injuries and planned procedures to allow early initiation of treatment to prevent significant bleeding

Cardiac fibrosis. There is currently no specific treatment for cardiac fibrosis associated with complete PAI-1 deficiency; treatment is symptomatic.
