Management of affected individuals targets the three cardinal features and is directed at optimizing psychosocial development, establishing optimal oral function, and preventing hyperthermia.

Hypotrichosis. Wigs or special hair care formulas and techniques to manage sparse, dry hair may be useful. One report describes a child with HED and alopecia who was treated with topical minoxidil to the scalp and had resultant hair growth [Lee et al 2013].

Hypohidrosis. During hot weather, affected individuals must have access to an adequate supply of water and a cool environment, which may mean air conditioning, a wet T-shirt, and/or a spray bottle of water. Some individuals may benefit from "cooling vests."

Affected individuals learn to control their exposure to heat and to minimize its consequences, but special situations may arise in which intervention by physicians and families is helpful. For example, a physician may have to prescribe an air conditioner before a school district complies, or parents may have to advocate for children who need to carry liquids into areas where they are prohibited.

Hypodontia

Dental treatment, ranging from simple restorations to dentures, must begin at an early age. Bonding of conical shaped teeth in young affected individuals improves aesthetics and chewing ability.

Orthodontics may be necessary.

Dental implants in the anterior portion of the mandibular arch have proven successful only in children age seven years and older [Kramer et al 2007, Stanford et al 2008].

Children with HED typically need to have their dental prostheses replaced every 2.5 years.

Dental implants in adults can support aesthetic and functional dentition.

Hyposalivation is present in some individuals, predisposing them to dental caries and the need for therapeutics directed at maintaining oral lubrication and caries control.

Dietary counseling may be helpful for those individuals who have trouble chewing and swallowing despite adequate dental care.

Other

Regular visits with an ENT physician may be necessary for management of the nasal and aural concretions. Commonly, nasal and aural concretions must be removed with suction devices or forceps and recommendations made about humidification of the ambient air to prevent their formation [Mehta et al 2007].

Skin care products are useful for management of eczema and rashes and for dry skin associated with certain outdoor exposures like swimming.

Lubrication eye drops can be helpful for dry eyes.
