The following treatments for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and atypical NAD are palliative:

Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures

Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with atypical INAD who have significant dystonia (see Dystonia Overview)

Deep brain stimulation has been successfully utilized in one individual with atypical NAD who had intractable dystonia [Cif et al 2014].

Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation that is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions

Measures such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia

Treatments for PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism are also palliative but differ somewhat:

Treatment with dopaminergic agents is likely to be beneficial for the motor symptoms of parkinsonism and dystonia and may initially produce a dramatic response. In individuals treated to date, this response diminished over time, and affected individuals often developed prominent early dyskinesias, complicating medical management. Despite the dyskinesias, treatment with dopaminergic agents may still be indicated, as affected individuals typically experience benefit for a period of time and the dyskinesias are expected to decline after discontinuation of treatment. In one case report, an individual age 32 years with dystonia-parkinsonism developed episodes of non-painful, fixed upward gaze with neck extension that started shortly after levodopa administration and persisted until the drug wore off [Virmani et al 2014]. The use of deep brain stimulation for PLA2G6-associated dystonia-parkinsonism has not been reported.

Treatment by a psychiatrist for neuropsychiatric symptoms is indicated.

Evaluation by physical therapy may guide the management of postural instability and gait difficulties.

Occupational therapy may offer tools to assist with activities of daily living.

Interventions such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy may be needed to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
