The American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD) has published practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis [Bacon et al 2011] (full text). The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) published Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of hemochromatosis [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Clinical 

Therapeutic phlebotomy is indicated in the presence of symptoms of iron overload or evidence of end-organ damage (e.g., advanced cirrhosis, cardiac failure, skin pigment changes, or diabetes):

Periodic phlebotomy is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective treatment.

Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

Each mL of packed red blood cells contains 1 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is removal of the excess iron by weekly phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) until the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or lower. Twice-weekly phlebotomy may be occasionally useful to accelerate iron depletion.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the hematocrit is 75% of the baseline hematocrit.

At this point, if the serum ferritin concentration is ≥50 ng/mL despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, the interval at which phlebotomy is performed needs to be spaced further apart. Once the serum ferritin concentration is ≤100 ng/mL, serum ferritin concentration should be quantified in all affected individuals after each additional one or two treatments [Barton et al 1998].

The serum ferritin concentration is the most reliable and inexpensive way to monitor therapeutic phlebotomy.

Maintenance therapy is aimed at maintaining serum ferritin concentration <50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation <50%. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women. Subsequent phlebotomies to prevent reaccumulation of iron can be carried out approximately every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. However, this is uncommon in individuals with HFE-HH.

Therapeutic phlebotomy improves fibrosis except in cases of cirrhosis [Powell et al 2006].

Orthotopic liver transplantation is the only treatment for end-stage liver disease from decompensated cirrhosis. However, the post-transplant survival among untreated individuals with HFE-HH is poor [Crawford et al 2004, Kowdley et al 2005]. Although one study suggested that outcomes may have improved, this report did not enroll persons with documented HFE-HH but rather used a database [Yu & Ioannou 2007].

Biochemical 

Both the EASL and AASLD guidelines recommend therapeutic phlebotomy for persons with biochemical HFE-HH (i.e., those who have increased body iron stores in the absence of clinical evidence of iron overload). See European Association for the Study of the Liver [2010] (full text) and Bacon et al [2011] (full text). The exact serum ferritin concentration at which therapeutic phlebotomy should be initiated is not clear, the European Association for Study of Liver suggests performing phlebotomy once serum ferritin concentration is higher than 500 ng/mL.

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

These individuals do not have iron overload and thus do not need phlebotomy.
