Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required.

An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss.

The ultimate goal in the evaluation and treatment of a child with hereditary hearing loss and deafness is mainstream schooling. Research shows that diagnosis by age three months and habilitation by six months makes this goal possible for children with mild-moderate hearing loss. Cochlear implantation in children with severe-to-profound deafness who are part of mainstream education leads to social functioning and educational attainment that is indistinguishable from normal-hearing peers [Loy et al 2010, Langereis & Vermeulen 2015].

Recent research has focused on cochlear implant performance based on the gene involved. Due to the genetic heterogeneity of deafness, large sample sizes are difficult to obtain for performance on a per-gene basis. However, the data are clear that individuals with GJB2-related hearing loss (see Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss and Deafness, DFNB1) have excellent cochlear implant outcomes that are significantly better than those of individuals with environmental causes of deafness [Yoshida et al 2013, Abdurehim et al 2017].

In adults, cochlear implant performance may be compromised when the genetic defect affects the auditory nerve itself; however, this hypothesis requires further research [Shearer et al 2017].

DFNX3 is characterized by a mixed conductive-sensorineural hearing loss, the conductive component of which is caused by stapedial fixation. In contrast to other types of conductive hearing loss, surgical correction of DFNX3-related hearing loss can compromise hearing. An abnormal communication between the cerebrospinal fluid and perilymph can lead to fluid leakage ("perilymphatic gusher") at surgery and complete loss of hearing upon fenestration or removal of the stapes footplate.
