Practice parameters, including information on surgery, have been outlined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) [Provenzale et al 2016] (full text), the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] (full text), the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons [Church et al 2003b], the American Society of Clinical Oncology [Stoffel et al 2015] (full text), and the Society of Surgical Oncology [Guillem et al 2006] (full text).

Colonic polyps. For individuals with FAP, colectomy is recommended after adenomas emerge. Colectomy may be delayed depending on adenoma size, presence of advanced histology (villous architecture, high-grade dysplasia), and number of adenomatous polyps. Absolute indications for colectomy include documented or suspected colorectal cancer or significant symptoms (obstruction, bleeding – although these are uncommon in the absence of cancer). Relative indications for colectomy include presence of multiple adenomas larger than 6 mm that cannot be reasonably managed by endoscopy, a significant increase in adenoma number between surveillance examinations, presence of adenomas with high-grade dysplasia or inability to adequately survey the colon (e.g., due to innumerous diminutive adenomas or limited access/compliance with colonoscopy).

For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient (see Surveillance).

Types of colectomy include the following:

Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA) which can be performed laparoscopically, laparoscopically-assisted, or open. The IPAA can be stapled, leaving 1-2 cm of anal transition epithelium and low rectal mucosa; or it can be hand-sewn after a complete anal mucosectomy.

Total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA). This is a single-stage procedure.

Total proctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy

The choice of procedure depends on the clinical circumstances.

An IPAA is generally performed in FAP where the rectal polyp burden is high or as a second procedure after IRA when rectal disease burden cannot be managed endoscopically. The advantage of this procedure is nearly eliminating the risk of rectal cancer and relatively good preservation of bowel function. There may be an increased risk of bladder/sexual dysfunction and functional results can be variable.

A study of individuals with FAP and ileal pouches found that 57% had adenomatous polyps in the ileal pouch. No apparent relationship between the development of pouch adenomas and the severity of polyps in the colon or duodenum was found [Groves et al 2005]. Cancer in the surgical transition zone has been reported [Ooi et al 2003] but is rare.

An IRA is generally considered when the rectal polyp burden is low and deemed to be endoscopically manageable (usually in the setting of attenuated FAP). It is a technically straightforward procedure with low complication rates. It is usually associated with good functional outcome and minimizes risk of sexual or urinary dysfunction. This procedure should not be performed if there is severe rectal disease or the individual cannot reliably undergo endoscopic surveillance of the remaining rectum post-operatively.

A total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy is almost never required unless a proctocolectomy is necessary (due to rectal polyp/cancer burden) and a contraindication to IPAA is present (e.g., a mesenteric desmoid preventing a pouch from reaching pelvic floor, low rectal cancer invading pelvic floor, or individual preference due to poor sphincter control).

Small-bowel polyps. Endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas is recommended if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms [Wallace & Phillips 1998, Saurin et al 1999, Kadmon et al 2001].

Surgical options include a pancreas-sparing duodenectomy which is a good option when the papilla is not involved and there is no suspicion for cancer. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) is a surgical option associated with significantly higher morbidity; however, it must be considered if the duodenal papilla is involved or there is confirmed or strongly suspected cancer.

Osteomas may be removed for cosmetic reasons.

Desmoid tumors. Available treatments include surgical excision (associated with high rates of recurrence), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-estrogens, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and radiation [Griffioen et al 1998, Clark et al 1999, Smith et al 2000a, Tonelli et al 2003, Gega et al 2006]. A review of desmoid treatments can be found in Guillem et al [2006].

Adrenal tumors.

Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

Chemoprevention. There are currently no FDA-approved chemopreventive agents for FAP.

NSAIDs. Non-placebo controlled trials and observational studies on sulindac were initially promising, showing remarkable reduction in polyp size and number.. However, these preliminary studies were limited in their design (non-placebo controlled, limited number of affected individuals, some individuals with only surveyable rectum). Several controlled trials subsequently confirmed a decrease in polyp burden during sulindac therapy [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a, Nugent et al 1993]. Rapid reappearance or increase in polyp number was observed, however, after sulindac was stopped [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a]. A subsequent study designed to evaluate primary prevention of polyps in indivduals with APC pathogenic variants showed a non-statistically significant trend towards benefit compared to placebo [Giardiello et al 2002].

The FDA initially approved celecoxib for FAP based on evidence showing decrease in polyp burden and size in the colon (as well as modest decrease in the duodenum) [Steinbach et al 2000, Phillips et al 2002]. However, due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular safety concerns, rofecoxib was taken off the market altogether and FDA approval for celecoxib for FAP was withdrawn.

Aspirin has been shown to be of little or no benefit in FAP [Burn et al 2011, Ishikawa et al 2013].

Interest in combination of NSAIDs with other drugs was raised when reports of sulindac plus difluoromethylornithine (celecoxib) showed marked reduction in sporadic metachronous adenomas [Meyskens et al 2008]. In a randomized placebo-controlled study of 92 participants with FAP, sulindac plus erlotinib (an EGF receptor inhibitor) resulted in decreased duodenal polyp burden compared to placebo after six months of use [Samadder et al 2016]. Adverse events were common in the treatment group (87% experienced an acne-like rash), though serious adverse events were rare (2 total participants) [Samadder et al 2016]. When celecoxib was compared to celecoxib plus difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in FAP, there was no significant difference in polyp burden within a defined endoscopic field (however, when more comprehensive video assessment was used, there was a decrease in polyp burden in the combination therapy group) [Lynch et al 2016].

A number of chemoprevention trials are currently under way (see Therapies Under Investigation). The FDA has stated that changes in adenoma number and size are insufficient for regulatory approval, with evidence of clinical benefit required. Suitable examples of clinical benefit cited include decreasing the risk of colorectal cancer or reducing the need for surgery. Trials currently under way are designed to address these end points.

Note: NSAID use before colectomy remains experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).
