HbH disease

Inappropriate iron therapy

Oxidant drugs including sulphonamides; some antimalarials because of the risk of hemolytic crisis
To avoid additional light damage to the retina, it is recommended that individuals wear appropriate protective (dark) glasses in bright light.
Particularly in childhood, care must be taken to limit risk for injury to the spinal cord at the craniocervical junction. This should include proscription of activities including collision sports (e.g., American football, ice hockey, rugby), use of a trampoline, diving from diving boards, vaulting in gymnastics, and hanging upside down from knees or feet on playground equipment.

Protocols have been published regarding positioning that should be avoided in order to decrease the likelihood of development of a fixed, angular kyphosis [Pauli et al 1997].

There is no increased risk for bone fragility or joint degeneration, and no circumstances to avoid related to these.
Iron supplements. Individuals with aceruloplasminemia erroneously diagnosed as having iron deficiency anemia and treated with iron supplements had accelerated iron accumulation.
Affected individuals should avoid medications known to prolong QT intervals. See CredibleMeds® for a complete and updated list.

Salbutamol inhalers, which may be used in the treatment of primary hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, should be avoided because of the potential for exacerbation of cardiac arrhythmias.

Thiazide and other potassium-wasting diuretics may provoke drug-induced hypokalemia and could aggravate the QT interval.
For those with CIPO, high-fat foods (>30% of total calories) and consumption of lactose and fructose may worsen abdominal bloating and discomfort [Gabbard & Lacy 2013].

No drugs are known to exacerbate the smooth muscle functional defect in ACTG2-related disorders.
The use of adenine arabinoside (a substrate for ADA) as an antiviral agent or for chemotherapy of malignancies should be avoided.

Pentostatin, a potent ADA inhibitor used to treat some lymphoid malignancies, would be ineffective in persons who lack ADA, and would interfere with PEG-ADA.
Care must be taken during contact sports to avoid blunt trauma to the eye and head. Affected individuals should not participate in activities like boxing and other martial arts.
All patients have reported that anxiety and stress worsen disease manifestations.

Less commonly reported triggers include intercurrent illness, prolonged inactivity, fatigue, and excitement.
Prolonged exposure to sunlight should be avoided to prevent sunburn of hypopigmented areas and to prevent increasing the contrast between the patchy areas of hyper- and hypopigmentation seen in AEC syndrome. Reduced sun exposure can minimize freckling of skin in individuals with ADULT syndrome.
Unnecessary physiologic stress is to be avoided, if possible, and any surgical procedures should be carefully planned. If physiologic stress is unavoidable (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, trauma), the dosage of steroids should be increased two- to threefold following local guidance for sickness/emergencies.
Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking should be avoided.

Knowledge about the safety of many drugs and other over-the-counter preparations in acute porphyrias is incomplete; however, evidence-based guidelines for assessment of drug porphyrogenicity have been published [Thunell et al 2007, Hift et al 2011].

Searchable drug safety databases are available at the following Web sites:

The Drug Database for Acute Porphyria

The American Porphyria Foundation

Porphyria South Africa

Safe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

Welsh Medicines Information Centre - Porphyria Information Service

Unsafe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

British National Formulary (subscription required)
Contact sports should be avoided by all individuals, especially those with chronic liver disease, splenomegaly, and vascular involvement.

Individuals with liver disease should avoid alcohol consumption.
There is currently no evidence that individuals with ALK-related neuroblastoma tumor susceptibility have increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation therapy; thus, medical and surgical management of tumors should be the same as for the general population.
Avoidance of physical stress to the spine and large joints, including heavy manual labor or high-impact sports, may reduce the progression of severe arthritis.
Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided because of the risk of precipitating and/or accelerating liver disease [Bicknese et al 1992, Saneto et al 2010].

As with some other mitochondrial diseases, physical stressors such as infection, fever, dehydration, and anorexia can result in a sudden deterioration and should be avoided as much as possible.
Smoking (both active and passive) is a risk factor for lung disease in individuals with AATD.

Occupational exposure (including exposure to environmental pollutants used in agriculture, mineral dust, gas, and fumes) is an independent risk factor for lung function impairment in individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype.
Splenectomy to control autoimmune cytopenias and/or massive splenomagaly is discouraged because it typically does not lead to permanent remission of autoimmunity and may be associated with an increased risk for infections. The two recent cohort studies reveal clear-cut consequences of splenectomy. In the French cohort, nine (30%) of 30 affected individuals who underwent splenectomy suffered 17 cases of severe invasive bacterial infection with four deaths after splenectomy; in the NIH cohort, 27 (41%) of 66 affected individuals suffered one or more episodes of sepsis with seven deaths. Of note: Anti-microbial prophylaxis and appropriate vaccinations did not prevent the majority of episodes of sepsis, although poor compliance was found to be a risk factor in the French cohort [Neven et al 2011, Price et al 2014].

The use of over-the-counter medications such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be discussed with a physician as some of these medications can interfere with platelet function.
Patients and caregivers should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modifications for the home and at work.
Any substance contraindicated in persons with renal or cardiac failure should be avoided.

Therapy directed at one system may have adverse effects on other systems; for example, the use of glitazone therapy in diabetes mellitus is contraindicated in the presence of cardiac failure.
Sudden changes in environment and over-sedation should be avoided.
Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants.

Vigabatrin and tigabine (anticonvulsants that increase brain GABA levels) are contraindicated in individuals with Angelman syndrome. For unknown reasons, carbamazapine, vigabatrine, and tigabine can cause development of other seizure types or non-convulsive status epilepticus. This paradoxic seizure development is not limited to individuals with Angelman syndrome [Pelc et al 2008a]
It has been suggested that intraocular surgery may increase the likelihood of (or exacerbate existing) keratopathy [Edén et al 2010], and repeated intraocular surgery does predispose to the rare but severe aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Patients should therefore be counseled about these risks before undertaking such surgery.
Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided as very high levels of CK have been measured after strenuous exercise [Milone et al 2012, Penttilä et al 2012].

The use of statins, which can induce muscle pain and worsen muscle weakness, requires extra monitoring of clinical status especially at the beginning of treatment.
Avoid the following:

Splenectomy as it worsens the hypertriglyceridemia

For those with splenomegaly: contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture
Azathioprine should be avoided by individuals taking XDH inhibitors.
Valproic acid is to be avoided as it exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle defects and other inborn errors of metabolism [Scaglia & Lee 2006].
Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Large boluses of protein or amino acids

Less than recommended intake of protein

Prolonged fasting or starvation

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases

Valproic acid

Intravenous steroids

Hepatotoxic drugs in those with hepatic involvement
Avoid the following:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Scuba diving because of pressure differences and the need for positive pressure ventilation

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Use of tobacco, which increases cardiovascular risk and the likelihood of premature skin aging

Sun tanning, which increases the likelihood of premature skin aging
Individuals with ARVC are discouraged from participating in vigorous athletic activity including competitive athletics because of the strain caused on the right heart [Corrado et al 2015].
Individuals with AVED should avoid:

Smoking because it considerably lowers TRAP and reduces plasma vitamin E concentrations [Sharpe et al 1996];

Occupations requiring quick responses or good balance.
The following should be avoided:

Alcohol consumption, which in individuals with liver disease has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage

Iron-containing preparations
Avoid the following:

Arc welding

Asbestos

Smoking

Unnecessary and prolonged sun exposure
Avoid the following:

The use of rectal thermometers in those with neutropenia

The use of succinylcholine, as non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers could have a prolonged effect [Schlame 2013]

The use of human growth hormone is usually discouraged, as the majority of affected males will attain normal stature by adulthood.

Although the use of sevoflurane has been reported without adverse effects, the muscular involvement in Barth syndrome may increase the risk for malignant hyperthermia compared to the general population [Schlame 2013].
Any substances contraindicated in persons with renal impairment should be avoided.
Use of radiotherapy can lead to the development of thousands of BCCs in the radiation field [Strong 1977, Evans et al 1991a] and therefore should be avoided if there are alternative treatments, especially in childhood. If the treating team believes that no other treatment modality is possible, radiotherapy should be used through as few skin ports as possible.

Diagnostic x-rays should be used sparingly.

Individuals with NBCCS should be advised to avoid direct sun exposure as much as possible. Excessive sun exposure increases the likelihood of developing BCCs.
In patients with known gain-of-function pathogenic variants in KCNQ2, the use of the potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine may be contraindicated.
Neuroleptic medications should be used cautiously, since they may exacerbate extrapyramidal symptoms [Cummings et al 1983]. A poor response to neuroleptics was noted in a family with PFBC and mainly psychotic manifestations [Callender 1995]. Extrapyramidal symptoms may also be elicited or worsened by other drugs (e.g., some antiepileptics, medications to treat vertigo or dizziness).
Stress and trauma should be avoided as they can precipitate acute attacks.
Sun exposure is to be avoided because of predisposition to skin cancer.

Testing of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.
The following should be avoided:

Cigarette smoking

High ambient pressures, which may precipitate spontaneous pneumothorax

Radiation exposure
Raw eggs should be avoided because they contain avidin, an egg-white protein that binds biotin, thus decreasing its bioavailability. (Thoroughly cooked eggs present no problem because heating inactivates avidin, rendering it incapable of binding biotin.)
Sun exposure to the face, particularly in infancy and early childhood, should be avoided.
Individuals with renal abnormalities should use appropriate caution when taking medications (i.e., antibiotics and analgesics) that can impair renal function or require normal renal physiology for clearance.
No data specific to individuals with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants are available.
The following can unmask the Brugada syndrome ECG [Antzelevitch et al 2002]:

Febrile state

Vagotonic agents

α-adrenergic agonists [Miyazaki et al 1996]

β-adrenergic antagonists

Tricyclic antidepressants

First-generation antihistamines (dimenhydrinate)

Cocaine toxicity

The following should be avoided [Antzelevitch et al 2003]:

Class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs including flecainide and propafenone

Class 1A agents including procainamide and disopyramide
Excessive dietary fat intake should be avoided.
Cessation of smoking helps prevent neovascularization of the retina [Clemons et al 2005].
Acetazolamide should be avoided, as it inhibits carbonic anhydrase activity.
Avoid the following:

Contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma

Stressful emotional and physical situations (e.g., extreme temperatures)
Angiography and anticoagulants are contraindicated in CADASIL as they may provoke cerebrovascular accidents [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001].

Smoking increases the risk of stroke in individuals with CADASIL and should be avoided [Singhal et al 2004].

Thrombolytic therapy (intravenous thrombolysis) is contraindicated because of the presumed increased risk for cerebral hemorrhage in view of the fact that patients with CADASIL have microbleeds on MRI [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001, Dichgans et al 2002].
Physical stress such as febrile illness, gastroenteritis with dehydration, surgery accompanied by general anesthesia, and major trauma can precipitate an adrenal crisis in individuals with classic CAH. Increased doses of glucocorticoids are recommended in these situations.
Smoking and a high-salt diet, which may hasten the progression of arteriosclerosis, should be avoided.
Individuals with DIS should avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace or during recreation.
Potentially exacerbating circumstances:

Prolonged fasting (longer than overnight without dextrose-containing intravenous fluids)

Dietary protein intake below the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for age or more than that prescribed by a metabolic specialist

Methionine restriction. Methionine-free formulas given to infants with methylmalonic acidemia should be avoided as the decreased methionine intake may worsen hypomethioninemia in patients with decreased methionine production.

Nitrous oxide, an anesthetic that is potentially toxic as it depletes the body stores of vitamin B12 and inhibits methionine synthase activity [Abels et al 1990, Drummond & Matthews 1994]
To avoid head trauma, helmets and protective devices should be worn when participating in high-risk sports and activities.
General anesthesia in patients with CCFDN may cause complications such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004]. Although such complications have not been unequivocally documented, Masters et al [2017] recommend cautious use of general anesthesia until more information on related risks is available.

Prolonged exercise was reported to provoke myalgia in one patient with CCFDN [Merlini et al 2002].
Limited evidence suggests an increased risk of hemorrhage with certain analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, naproxen) and aspirin. Individuals with headaches and other pain should avoid these medications if suitable substitutes are available.

Other medications that increase risk of hemorrhage (e.g., heparin, sodium warfarin [Coumadin®]) should be avoided or, when such medications are necessary for treatment of life-threatening thrombosis, should be closely monitored by the affected individual’s medical team [Schneble et al 2012, Flemming et al 2013, Erdur et al 2014].

The use of narcotic pain medications is also discouraged in chronic pain conditions because of the potential for addiction and because of their association with rebound headaches.

Radiation to the central nervous system is associated with de novo lesion formation in FCCM [Larson et al 1998, Nimjee et al 2006, Golden et al 2015]. The pathology of these lesions appears to be histologically different from the cavernomas found prior to radiation [Cha et al 2015].
Although it is unknown how CCD is associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility or which pathogenic variants in RYR1 are absolutely related to MH susceptibility, it is prudent for individuals with CCD to avoid inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details.

Individuals suspected of having MH susceptibility are advised to avoid extremes of heat, but this does not mean restriction of athletic activity.
Activities with a high impact on joints (e.g., jogging) should be avoided.

Obesity, which places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints, should be avoided.
Avoid any preparation containing iron.
Acetaminophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.
Acetominophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.
No known agents exacerbate the severity of CdLS; however, caution should be exercised to avoid exacerbation of existing comorbidities including gastroesophageal reflux, self-injurious behavior, pica, and less commonly, thrombocytopenia and immunologic features.
Individuals with CDSP should avoid fasting longer than age-appropriate periods.
Use of sib or related donors for HSCT without prior assessment of the pathogenic germline variant in these individuals.
Bisphosphonates. Bone pain and uptake of 99mTc methylene diphosphonate by scintigraphy increased with pamidronate in a woman age 27 years with CED [Inaoka et al 2001]. Clodronate infusion caused increased bone pain in one individual with CED and no improvement in another individual reported by Castro et al [2005].

Excess phosphate. Treatment with cellulose phosphate led to worsening hypocalcemia and proximal myopathy in another individual.
Gluten in the diet (see Treatment of Manifestations and Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients undergoing surgeries, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage [Wahlin et al 2008]
Over-exposure to heat. Individuals with CFC syndrome report heat intolerance.
Extended immobilization following surgery can exacerbate muscle weakness and thus should be avoided [North 2004].
Exposures. Activities that expose the affected person to decayed organic matter (e.g., mulching, gardening, leaf raking, house demolition) are to be avoided as inhalation of fungal spores can result in fulminant pneumonitis leading to hypoxia and respiratory failure [Siddiqui et al 2007]. Therefore, the following should be avoided:

Exposure to mulch

Potting of plants or gardening

Raking leaves or mowing lawns

Swimming in stagnant water, brackish water, or ponds

BCG vaccination should be avoided (live viral vaccines are likely safe).

Transfusion considerations. Persons with CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome lack red blood cell Kell antigens and thus should not receive blood transfusions that are Kell antigen positive.
Avoid the following:

Seizure-provoking circumstances (e.g., sleep deprivation, alcohol intake)

Anticonvulsants that may worsen involuntary movements (e.g., carbamazepine, lamotrigine)
The following should be noted:

Baclofen used to treat spasticity can sometimes worsen muscle weakness.

Some drugs used to treat the behavioral manifestations of FTD may worsen dysarthria, dysphagia, and/or respiratory weakness.
Because clinical photosensitivity may result in injuries due to the consequences of induced seizures, the following are recommended:

Avoid flickering lights that may provoke seizures.

Advise patients and families that exposure to intensely flickering lights may provoke seizures including eyelid myoclonias, absence seizures, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Of note, most televisions do not transmit in the frequency range that is particularly provocative.
All nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen) are to be avoided as they can exacerbate the bleeding tendency.
Routine immunizations with inactivated vaccines are considered safe in persons with CHH. However, immunization with live vaccines should be carefully considered in those with CHH and evidence of abnormal immunologic function, and should be avoided in those with CHH and SCID [Rider et al 2009].
UV exposure from sunlight reflected from water and snow should be avoided.
Affected individuals should avoid heat exposure and prolonged physical activity in a hot climate.
Low-protein/high-caloric (high-carbohydrate) diet. Although a low-protein/high-caloric diet helps prevent hyperammonemia in urea cycle enzyme deficiencies, it is harmful for individuals with all forms of citrin deficiency (i.e., NICCD, FTTDCD, or CTLN2) [Saheki et al 2004, Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006]. A high-carbohydrate diet may increase NADH production, disturb urea synthesis, and stimulate the citrate-malate shuttle, resulting in hyperammonemia, fatty liver, and hypertriglyceridemia [Saheki & Kobayashi 2002, Imamura et al 2003, Saheki et al 2006, Saheki et al 2007].

Infusion of sugars including glycerol, fructose, and glucose. Severe brain edema treated with glycerol-containing osmotic agents has resulted in continued deterioration and is contraindicated in those with CTLN2 [Yazaki et al 2005]. Degradation of large amounts of glycerol and fructose generates NADH in liver cytosol, which may disturb liver function [Saheki et al 2004, Yazaki et al 2005, Takahashi et al 2006].

Infusion of high-concentration glucose may also exacerbate hyperammonemia [Tamakawa et al 1994, Takahashi et al 2006].

Note: Mannitol infusion appears to be safer [Yazaki et al 2005].

Alcohol. Drinking alcohol can trigger the onset of CTLN2 because alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) generates NADH in the cytosol of the liver.

Medications. Acetaminophen and rabeprozole may trigger CTLN2 [Shiohama et al 1993, Imamura et al 2003].
ADOII

Activities with high fracture risk should be avoided.

Orthopedic surgery should only be performed when absolutely necessary and the surgeon should be aware of potential complications and difficulties in handling osteopetrotic bone.
Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria (including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors) should be avoided.
Individuals with CLS who experience SIDAs should be protected as much as possible from being startled and/or from falls.
A number of drugs are known to affect neuromuscular transmission and therefore exacerbate symptoms of myasthenia gravis (e.g., ciprofloxacin, chloroquine, procaine, lithium, phenytoin, beta-blockers, procainamide, and quinidine). These drugs are not absolutely contraindicated and may be used with caution in CMS. See Medications and Myasthenia Gravis (Table 2) for a more complete.
The following should be avoided:

Obesity because of its negative effect on gait and balance

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with HMSN (CMT) ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Chemotherapy for cancer that includes vincristine may be especially damaging to peripheral nerves and severely worsen CMT [Graf et al 1996, Nishikawa et al 2008].
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
No specific data are available for TRPV4-associated neuromuscular or skeletal disorders.

In general, obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult for individuals with neuropathy, skeletal dysplasia, or both.

For neuromuscular disorders. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

For skeletal dysplasias

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints
Avoid neurotoxic agents (chemotherapy that may cause peripheral nerve injury).
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risk from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risks ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Excessive sun exposure should be avoided.
Caution should be used regarding medications with the potential to decrease the neutrophil count.
The following should be avoided:

Smoking because it increases the global risk of stroke

Hypertension because it increases the risk of stroke

Sustained head pressure during birth or postnatal physical activities that may cause head trauma [Gould et al 2006]

Anticoagulant use [Gould et al 2006]
Prolonged fasting should be avoided, especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness.

Potentially hepatotoxic agents such as valproate and salicylate should not be given, even though adverse effects of pharmacologic agents have not been reported in individuals with CPT1A deficiency.
Extended fasting and prolonged exercise are to be avoided.

Reports of medication-induced side effects in individuals with CPT II deficiency are rare. Relying mostly on case reports, the following agents should be avoided:

Valproic acid [Kottlors et al 2001]

General anesthesia

Ibuprofen

Diazepam in high doses [Bonnefont et al 1999]
Reduced visual acuity and difficulties seeing at night may preclude driving a car or restrict the class of driving license.
Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases
Avoid the following:

Dehydration, which compromises remaining renal function

Sun exposure, which can exacerbate photophobia
Caution in the use of statins has been suggested [Federico & Dotti 2001].
Competitive sports and other strenuous exercise are always contraindicated. All individuals showing exercise-induced arrhythmias should avoid physical activity, with the exception of light training for those individuals showing good suppression of arrhythmias on exercise stress testing while on therapy. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006]. The risk for arrhythmias during sports in individuals who have pathogenic variants in genes associated with CPVT but no clinical phenotype (no exercise-induced arrhythmias) is not known; thus it may be safest for these individuals to refrain from intense physical activities.

Digitalis favors the onset of cardiac arrhythmias due to delayed afterdepolarization (DAD) and triggered activity; therefore, digitalis should be avoided in all individuals with CPVT.
Untreated individuals with DBH deficiency should avoid hot environments, strenuous exercise, standing still, and dehydration.
Individuals with DMD/BMD should avoid botulinum toxin injections.

Although it is recommended that triggering agents like succinylcholine and inhalational anesthetics be avoided in patients with DMD or BMD because of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia or malignant hyperthermia-like reactions (rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, hyperkalemia), it should be noted that an extensive literature search did not find an increased risk of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in people with DMD or BMD when compared with the general population [Gurnaney et al 2009].
Drugs (e.g., beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, others) that exacerbate heart block, if present, should be avoided in LMNA-related DCM unless an electronic pacemaker is in place.
Live viral vaccines should be avoided if agammaglobulinemia is present.
Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, persons with documented hearing loss should be counseled appropriately.
Some medications used to treat behavioral problems (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine) may lead to excessive weight gain. When possible, use medications that are not associated with weight gain.
Exposure to potential renal toxins (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and intravenous contrast agents) should be avoided, especially if renal function is below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD stage 3B).
Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, individuals with LAMM syndrome and a residual cochlea should be counseled appropriately.

Because of the high risk for disorientation when submerged in water, swimming needs to be undertaken with caution.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid the following:

Known environmental factors for hearing loss (e.g., loud noises)

Ototoxic medications
The rate of progression of high-frequency hearing loss can be reduced by encouraging individuals with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss to avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace and during recreation.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important is avoidance of repeated exposure to loud noises.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important among these for persons with DFNB1 and mild-to-moderate hearing loss is avoidance of repeated overexposure to loud noises.
Individuals with TS-NSAN. Avoid excessive body temperatures when possible. Follow-up studies have not demonstrated the success of preventative measures as an effective long-term treatment.
Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in persons with DBA because its side effects include neutropenia [Vlachos et al 2008].

Individuals with DBA, especially those on corticosteroid treatment, should take reasonable precautions to avoid infections, as steroid-dependent individuals are more prone to complications resulting from immune system dysfunction.
Obesity places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints and thus should be avoided.
Blood transfusions

Transfusions of red cells or platelets should be avoided or minimized for those who are candidates for HCT.

To minimize the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors if HCT is being considered.

All blood products should be leukodepleted and irradiated.

Radiation. It is prudent to minimize exposure to therapeutic radiation since data on radiation side effects are limited.

Androgens and growth factors. The combination of androgens and G-CSF was associated with splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and rupture in two individuals; thus, the combination should be avoided [Giri et al 2007].

Cancer prevention. Given the increased susceptibility of individuals with DC to developing leukemias and other malignancies, individuals with DC are advised to avoid toxic agents that have been implicated in tumorigenesis, including smoking.
Avoid the following:

Fasting

Catabolic stressors

Liver-toxic medications
In general, rapid-acting insulin preparations (lispro and aspart) as well as short-acting (regular) insulin preparations should be avoided (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events in young children.
General factors that predispose to late-onset diabetes (e.g., excessive weight gain) or risk factors for cardiovascular disorders should be avoided.
Avoid sharp objects and hot water, which may damage skin.
Discontinuation of levodopa treatment usually results in return of symptoms.

Exacerbation of symptoms after taking oral contraceptives has been reported in some women with GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 1998a, Postuma et al 2003, Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].
General anesthesia can increase the risk of intra- and postoperative seizures [Takayama et al 2002].
Drugs affecting renal clearance or the inner ear should be avoided in individuals with impaired renal function and/or hearing impairment.

Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias.
It is unclear if there are any agents or circumstances that individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia should avoid.

Some healthcare providers recommend avoiding all sources of milk and dairy products until age one year as a precaution against possible galactose toxicity; other healthcare providers argue that this precaution is not warranted. See Treatment of Manifestations.
Seizure triggers (e.g., sleep deprivation, stress, and failure to follow medication regimen) should be avoided.
The extremities affected by dystonia should not be placed in a brace or cast, unless medically necessary, as this can worsen the dystonia.
Known triggers of attacks should be avoided; physical exertion, emotional stress, and changes in environmental temperature are the most common triggers.

Marked generalized myokymia has been reported during induction of anesthesia [Kinali et al 2004].
Phenytoin has been reported to exacerbate symptoms.
Most persons with EB-PA cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.
Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are committed to participation in such activities should be encouraged to devise ways of protecting the skin.

Most persons with DEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.
Most persons with JEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®. Silicone-based products provide a good substitute for tape.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

Activities that, in general, traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.
Excessive heat may exacerbate blistering and infection in EBS.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear can cause trauma and should be avoided.

Avoiding activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) can reduce skin damage, but affected individuals who are determined to find ways to participate in these endeavors should be encouraged.

Many individuals with EBS cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.
The following should be avoided:

Obesity, which increases stress on joints

Exercise that causes repetitive strain on affected joints
Sports involving joint overload are to be avoided.
Although malignant hyperthermia susceptibility has not been described in EDMD, it is appropriate to anticipate a possible malignant hyperthermia reaction and to avoid triggering agents such as depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) and volatile anesthetic drugs (halothane, isoflurane). Other anesthetic precautions have to be considered [Aldwinckle & Carr 2002].

Body weight should be monitored, as affected individuals may be predisposed to obesity.
The following should be avoided:

Sports with heavy joint strain (contact sports, fighting sports, football, running)

Acetylsalicylate (aspirin)
Joint hyperextension may not need to be avoided. In a randomized controlled trial of physical therapy among 26 children and adolescents with joint hypermobility and knee pain, those allowed to exercise into hyperextension had similar improvement in pain score and better improvement in psychosocial score compared to those restricted to neutral joint position [Pacey et al 2013].

Resistance exercise can exacerbate joint instability and pain. In general, it is preferable to increase the number of repetitions of exercise rather than to increase the resistance.

High-impact activity increases the risk for acute subluxation/dislocation, chronic pain, and osteoarthritis. Some sports, such as tackle football, are therefore contraindicated. However, most sports and activities are acceptable with appropriate precautions.

Chiropractic adjustment is not strictly contraindicated, but must be performed cautiously to avoid iatrogenic subluxations or dislocations.
Trauma. Because of inherent tissue fragility, it is prudent for individuals with vEDS to avoid collision sports (e.g., football), heavy lifting, and weight training. Of note, no evidence suggests that moderate recreational exercise is detrimental.

Arteriography. Conventional arterial angiography (with contrast injection) should be discouraged because it has been associated with added de novo complications [Zilocchi et al 2007]. Arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter; furthermore, injection pressure may lead to arterial aneurysms. Arteriography is currently best used as part of a planned interventional procedure, such as coil embolization or stenting of bleeding arteries.

Routine colonoscopy. There are several reports of colonoscopy-associated bowel perforation in individuals with vEDS. Virtual colonoscopy, which also involves insufflation, may have similar complications. Routine colonoscopy for cancer screening is discouraged in the absence of concerning symptoms or a strong family history of colorectal cancer. Individuals with vEDS who have a family history of colon cancer are encouraged to utilize genetic testing for colon cancer risk assessment (provided the genetic etiology of colon cancer has been established in an affected family member).

Elective surgery. Because tissue fragility results in a higher risk of surgical complications, elective surgery for individuals with vEDS is discouraged unless the benefit is expected to be substantial. In general, avoidance of surgery in favor of more conservative management is advised.
In children with significant joint hyperextensibility, sports which impact the joints such as gymnastics or long-distance running should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Cigarette smoking, which can worsen emphysema

Sun tanning, which can damage skin
Any preparations containing iron should be avoided (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Contact sports are not advisable in those with splenomegaly; of note, acute or excessive splenomegaly is a greater risk than chronic mild splenomegaly.
Phenytoin should be avoided, as it has been found to have aggravating side effects on the associated neurologic symptoms, and may even accelerate cerebellar degeneration [Eldridge et al 1983].

Sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin) and GABAergic drugs (tiagabine, vigabatrin) as well as gabapentin and pregabalin should in general be avoided as they may aggravate myoclonus and myoclonic seizures [Medina et al 2005].
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs that may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of alcohol and drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]
Symptoms are triggered by warmth and standing and, in some individuals, by alcohol and spicy foods including chili peppers or garlic.

In some individuals, exercise can trigger symptoms. However, for many individuals, the benefits of mild exercise outweigh the disadvantages. Swimming is a preferred exercise because the extremities remain cool.
Blood transfusions. Blood products should be cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe and irradiated. To reduce the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors. Once an individual requires transfusions, he/she should be referred for transplantation.

Toxic agents to avoid include smoking, second-hand smoke, and alcohol, which have been implicated in tumorigenesis.

Unsafe sex practices increase the risk for HPV-associated malignancy.

Radiographic studies for the purpose of surveillance should be minimized in the absence of clinical indications. However, baseline skeletal surveys may be considered, in order to document bony anomalies that may lead to problems with age, such as anomalies of the wrist, hip, and vertebrae.
The obstructive lung disease, which has been documented in older hemizygous males and heterozygous females, is more severe in smokers; therefore, affected individuals should be discouraged from smoking.

Amiodarone has been reported to induce cellular and biochemical changes resulting in a phenocopy in particular of the keratopathy of Fabry disease [Whitley et al 1983]. Given potential effects on cellular levels of α-Gal A enzyme activity, it has been contraindicated in persons with Fabry disease. However, little evidence of a detrimental effect in this specific group exists and the relative benefit in individuals with cardiac arrhythmia should be considered.
Women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT.

Asymptomatic women who are heterozygous for factor V Leiden should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT use and should be encouraged to consider alternative forms of contraception and control of menopausal symptoms.

Asymptomatic heterozygous women electing to use oral contraceptives should avoid third-generation formulations because of their higher thrombotic risk.

Homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen containing contraception and HRT.

For heterozygous women who require short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms, low-dose transdermal preparations may have a lower thrombotic risk [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007].
Surgery and desmoid risk. There is evidence that the risk for desmoid tumors is increased by abdominal surgery and may be higher in surgical procedures that require two stages to complete. Individuals at high risk for desmoids (women; those with APC pathogenic variants in codons 1395-1493; those with a family history of desmoids) may consider delaying surgery longer than might otherwise be recommended or undergoing an operation that is likely to be definitive for colorectal cancer risk (e.g., total colectomy with ileostomy) in order to minimize the likelihood of the need for a second operation.

Surgery and fecundity. There is a lower rate of fecundity in women after a total colectomy with ileo-anal anastamosis than after an ileorectal anastamosis. This issue should be included as part of the discussion of surgical options with women with FAP [Olsen et al 2003].
Smoking is contraindicated; however, the limited life span of affected individuals makes this recommendation mostly theoretic.
Symptoms tend to be worse in hot or humid weather; patients should try to avoid being outdoors in such conditions as much as possible.

Other situations that can exacerbate disease manifestations include a full bladder; frequent visits to the lavatory are recommended [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Since long car rides, coming out of a movie theater, or fatigue can also worsen symptoms, such situations should be avoided to the extent that this is possible [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Episodic hypertension can occur in response to emotional stress or visceral pain, and therefore patients should also try to avoid these [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Environmental situations associated with hypobaric hypoxia (e.g., aircraft flight or ascent to high altitude) pose a potential risk to patients with daytime hypercapnia [Palma et al 2014].
In general, vasoconstricting agents should be avoided because of the risk of stroke.

Cerebral angiography is hazardous as it may precipitate a severe attack [Chabriat et al 2000].
Cisplatin. One report suggests that cisplatin worsens symptoms of FMF [Toubi et al 2003].

Cyclosporin A appears to adversely affect renal transplant graft survival in individuals with FMF [Shabtai et al 2002]. It has also been reported to trigger FMF attacks, which responded well to colchicine in a previously asymptomatic individual with myelodysplastic syndrome who was heterozygous for the MEFV pathogenic variant p.Met694Ile [Sasaki et al 2009].
Because some individuals with severe skin manifestations may have hypohidrosis (and thus be at increased risk for heat intolerance), care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat.
If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM. Although folic acid is very stable and inexpensive, and is the most common pharmacologic source of folate, it is not a physiologic folate. Folic acid binds very tightly to folate receptors, which transport the physiologic folate, 5-methylTHF, into cells by an endocytic mechanism [Kamen & Smith 2004]. Thus, folic acid may interfere with the interaction between 5-methylTHF and folate receptors required for 5-methylTHF transport across the choroid plexus into the cerebrospinal fluid [Grapp et al 2013, Zhao et al 2017].
Folic acid should be avoided in individuals with poorly controlled seizures [Hagerman 2002].
Alcohol can exacerbate ataxia and should be consumed in moderation. Illicit drugs may well affect neuronal well-being and may exacerbate FRDA and thus should be avoided. Environments that place an ambulant individual at risk for falls (e.g., rough surfaces) should be avoided.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with FRDA comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Limited epidemiologic studies suggest that head injury may be a risk factor for FTD in general, although this finding requires confirmation [Rosso et al 2003].
A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in FTD patients treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.
The ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Although there have been no clinical studies, it seems prudent to avoid the use of warfarin if possible because matrix Gla protein (MGP), a potent anti-mineralization factor, needs to be activated by a vitamin K-dependent enzyme, and warfarin interferes with the vitamin K cycle. Warfarin has also been shown to accelerate ectopic mineralization in Abcc6 knockout mice [Li et al 2013].
The following should be avoided:

Breast milk, proprietary infant formulas containing lactose, cow’s milk, dairy products, and casein or whey-containing foods

Lactose- or galactose-containing drug preparations

Medicines that contain lactose (tablets, capsules, sweetened elixirs), especially during infancy
Persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia should be on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, certainly as infants and perhaps for life.

Persons with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia may be placed on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, either transiently or long-term. Assessment of hemolysate gal-1P and/or urinary galactitol following a galactose challenge (e.g., 2 weeks on a normal diet) may help determine if an individual should remain on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet for longer periods of time.
Individuals with thrombocytopenia should avoid antiplatelet agents including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., ibuprofen).

Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should be advised to avoid contact sports or activities with a high risk of trauma.

Individuals with significant neutropenia should avoid crowds and close contact with persons who have a communicable disease to minimize risk of infection.

Individuals with significant splenomegaly should avoid contact sports, which involve increased risk for traumatic splenic rupture.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia.
Several antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) which are effective for most forms of epilepsy can make seizures due to heterozygous SCN1A pathogenic variants worse:

Carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and vigabatrin, which can induce or increase myoclonic seizures [Horn et al 1986, Guerrini et al 1998, Ceulemans et al 2004a]

Phenytoin, which may worsen seizures and can induce choreoathetosis [Saito et al 2001]

Rufinamide, which has a pharmacologic mechanism similar to carbamazepine and phenytoin and may exacerbate seizures as well

Acetaminophen, which is hepatotoxic in overdose. Given the possibility of interaction with anticonvulsant medications, especially valproate and topiramate [Nicolai et al 2008], acetaminophen should be avoided. Any of the NSAIDs are effective as antipyretics, and represent much lower risk.

Activities in which a sudden loss of consciousness could lead to injury or death should be avoided (e.g., bathing, swimming, driving, or working/playing at heights).
Alpha-2 agonists should be avoided in children in the treatment of elevated IOP because of the risk for apnea and bradycardia.
The following should be avoided:

Barbiturates. Generally, children with infantile-onset seizures are treated with phenobarbital, the most commonly used antiepileptic drug in this age group. In vitro studies indicate that barbiturates aggravate the Glut1 transport defect in erythrocytes of individuals with Glut1-DS [Klepper et al 1999a]. On occasion, parents have reported that phenobarbital did not improve their child’s seizure control or may have worsened their child's clinical condition.

Methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine), which are known to inhibit transport of glucose by Glut1 [Ho et al 2001b], also have been reported to worsen the clinical state of individuals with Glut1-DS [Brockmann et al 2001]. Thus, it is advisable for affected individuals to avoid coffee and other caffeinated beverages.

Valproic acid. The following studies suggest that valproic acid effects in vitro are mixed and the clinical consequences of valproic acid usage in patients with Glut1-DS cannot be predicted.

Valproic acid inhibited Glut1 transport activity in normal and Glut1-deficient erythrocytes by 20%-30%. In primary astrocytes as well as in normal and Glut1-deficient fibroblasts, sodium valproate inhibited glucose transport by 20%-40%, accompanied by an up to 60% down-regulation of GLUT1 mRNA expression [Wong et al 2005].

A study using cultured astrocytes from the Glut1-DS mouse model showed an upregulation of Glut1 activity at lower valproic acid concentrations presumably from the valproic acid associated inhibition of histone deacetylase activity [Kim et al 2013].
Because psychotropic medications have been associated with worsening neurologic disease in adults with Tay-Sachs disease (which is caused by deficiency of the second enzyme in the β-galactosidase pathway) [Shapiro et al 2006], use of these medications in individuals with a GLB1-related disorder should be avoided whenever possible [Shapiro et al 2006].

For persons with MPS IVB, excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the ability to ambulate independently. Thus, it is important that nutrition optimize growth while maintaining a lean habitus.
Carbonated drinks and alcohol consumption may exacerbate hypocalcemia. Caffeine intake may contribute to or worsen anxiety.
Exposure to high temperatures and extended periods in the sun should be avoided because individuals with 22q13.3 deletion have reduced perspiration and tend to overheat easily.
In individuals with epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS), phenytoin, barbiturates and carbamazepine should be avoided as they are rarely effective, may worsen the EEG, and have negative effects on neuropsychological outcomes [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].
Maintain a low-sucrose, low-fructose diet.

Limit galactose and lactose intake to one serving per day.

Due to potential negative effects of sex hormones on hepatic adenomas, combined oral contraception must be avoided in women with GSDI, especially those with adenomas [Sechi et al 2013, Austin et al 2013].
Use of standard drugs for treatment of cardiac manifestations may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease. The use of digoxin, ionotropes, diuretics, and afterload-reducing agents may worsen left ventricular outflow obstruction, although they may be indicated in later stages of the disease.

Hypotension and volume depletion should be avoided.

Exposure to infectious agents is to be avoided.
Avoid the following:

High sugar intake as excess sugar is stored as glycogen, which cannot be broken down

Steroid-based drugs as they interfere with glucose metabolism and utilization. Long-term steroid usage itself can cause muscle weakness.

Growth hormone replacement therapy as it interferes with glucose metabolism, worsens ketosis, and may theoretically cause liver adenomas to grow

Use the following with caution:

Hormonal contraceptives in women as they can cause hepatic adenoma formation

Statins for control of hyperlipidemia. Use of statins requires CK monitoring because of the potential of exacerbating the muscle disease of GSD IIIa.

Beta blockers as they can induce hypoglycemia
Exercises that involve heavy static contractions or induce severe myalgia should be avoided [Quinlivan et al 2011, Lucia et al 2012].

Exercises that should be avoided in patients with GSDV [Lucia et al 2008] are the following:

Static muscle contractions (e.g., handgrip exercises)

Static muscle contractions or heavy loads on low muscle mass (e.g., weightlifting)

Dynamic exercises at a high-intensity level (e.g., competitive ball games)

Exercises with a high involvement of eccentric (lengthening) muscle contractions (e.g., jumps)

Very intense dynamic aerobic exercise (e.g., running, strenuous swimming, or cycling) except in individuals who are very fit and well habituated

General anesthetics. Risk of acute muscle damage is reported with certain general anesthetics (usually muscle relaxants and inhaled anesthetics), although in practice, problems appear to be rare. One report showed hyperthermia, pulmonary edema, and rhabdomyolysis [Lobato et al 1999]; however, GSDV does not appear to cause severe perioperative problems in routine anesthetic care. Nonetheless, measures for preventing muscle ischemia and rhabdomyolysis should be taken in individuals with GSDV [Bollig 2013].

Lipid-lowering drugs. A study in which 136 individuals with myopathy induced by one of the three lipid-lowering drugs atorvastatin, cerivastatin, and simvastatin were tested for the two more frequent PYGM pathogenic variants (p.Arg50Ter, p.Gly205Ser) revealed 20-fold more PYGM heterozygotes than expected for the general population [Vladutiu et al 2006]. These findings provide preliminary evidence that PYGM heterozygotes may be predisposed to statin-induced myopathy; however, because only two pathogenic variants were assessed, some individuals in this study who were presumed to be carriers could actually be compound heterozygotes. Thus, clinicians should be cautious when recommending statins to individuals who have GSDV or are carriers for a PYGM pathogenic variant.
Avoid the following:

Excessive amounts of simple sugars to prevent excessive hepatic glycogen deposition

Glucagon administration as a rescue therapy for hypoglycemia because blood glucose concentrations will not increase

Growth hormone for short stature because it usually exacerbates ketosis and often is not efficacious

When hepatomegaly is present, contact sports (or use appropriate cautions)
Liver PhK deficiency. Affected Individuals with should avoid the following:

Large amounts of simple sugars as they will increase liver storage of glycogen.

Prolonged fasting

High impact contact sports if significant (moderate to massive) hepatomegaly is present. The final decision is based on clinician judgment.

Drugs known to cause hypoglycemia such as insulin and insulin secretagogues (the sulfonylureas); though there are no reports in the literature of drugs precipitating hypoglycemia in children with liver PhK deficiency

Alcohol, as this may predispose to hypoglycemia.

Hypoglycemic events in adults with liver PhK deficiency are relatively uncommon; however, caution should be used with drugs causing potential hypoglycemia, particularly in persons with impaired liver function.

Muscle PhK deficiency. Affected individuals should avoid the following:

Vigorous exercise

Medications that can cause rhabdomyolysis (e.g., succinylcholine)
Avoid the following:

Extreme caloric deprivation (i.e., total fasting, gastric bypass surgery)

Female reproductive hormones. Birth-control pills are risky and not recommended. For recommendations regarding contraception, see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Selection of appropriate contraception for females.

Medications. Some drugs are clearly unsafe for CPOX heterozygotes. It is important to note, however, that many drugs are safe, lest providers regard individuals with acute porphyria as “untreatable.” Compilations of safe and unsafe drugs are available online and are updated as new information becomes available. See www.porphyriafoundation.com and www.porphyria-europe.com.

In theory, the most dangerous medications are inducers of CYPs, such as barbiturates and the related compound, phenytoin.
Any agents that increase ataxia should be used with caution.

Individuals with HDL2, like others with neurodegenerative disorders, are vulnerable to delirium from medical illnesses and medicines, especially polypharmacy.
The following should be avoided:

Use of first-generation neuroleptics, which increase seizure risk and risk of additional parkinsonian signs

Treatment agents for multiple sclerosis, as these medications are of no benefit and have major side effects
Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is excluded; or, if present, the infant should be treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin, should be avoided unless there is strong medical indication, such as in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Avoid the following:

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury
The following should be avoided:

Circumcision of infant males with a family history of hemophilia B unless hemophilia B is excluded; OR if circumcision is performed on an infant with hemophilia B, the infant should be treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin unless there is strong medical indication (e.g., in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease). Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Older, intermediate purity plasma-derived “prothrombin complex” concentrates should be used cautiously (if at all) in hemophilia B because of their thrombogenic potential.
Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron, mineral supplements, excess vitamin C, and uncooked seafood

Alcohol consumption in those with hepatic involvement
Persons of all ages should avoid exposure to sunlight.

Older individuals should avoid the known precipitating factors (e.g., alcohol, oral estrogen, smoking, and drugs that induce the cytochrome P450s).
The following agents/illnesses known to accelerate hepatic fibrosis could have the same effect in CHF and should be avoided or aggressively managed:

Alcohol

Obesity

Diabetes mellitus

Malnutrition

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Immunosuppression (e.g., after renal transplantation)

Hepatotoxic medicines should be avoided.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in those with varices because of the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and poor clotting as a result of impaired platelet function.

Behavior that could increase the risk of viral hepatitis should be avoided.

Contact sports, or activities that are likely to result in splenic injury, are to be avoided once the spleen is significantly enlarged.
Great care should be taken to avoid enteral or parenteral exposure to fructose, sorbitol, sucrose, sucralose, and polysorbate as administration of these substances to individuals with HFI can be fatal.

The following resources can be valuable in determining medical and dietary safety.

Dietary guidance –including prohibited foods- is outlined in Table 3.

An extensive list of tolerated and non-tolerated sugars in HFI can be found online, a site curated by the Boston University HFI laboratory.

Although there is no single consolidated list of medications that contain these or related sugars, an advanced search on www.medicines.org.uk using the search term “fructose OR sorbitol OR sucrose OR sucralose” yielded 1776 results. Many such medications are oral suspensions or chewable flavored tabs designed for pediatric use. Also listed were injectable medications like immunoglobulin solutions (e.g., trastuzumab, filgrastim, some intravenous immunoglobulin solutions), vaccines (e.g., certain influenza, meningococcal), and iron supplements, as well as enema solutions and rinsing aids. For many preparations, it may not be apparent that fructose or similar compounds are present.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should clear use of medications on a case-by-case basis. Of particular note, a 24% sucrose solution (routinely administered to hospitalized neonates for minor procedures) should

not be given to neonates known to have HFI.

The fructose tolerance testing (‘fructose challenge’) to diagnose HFI can be hazardous and should not be used.
Avoid the following:

Excessive sun exposure, which may exacerbate the rash

Exposure to heat because of heat intolerance secondary to hypohidrosis
Children should avoid being in the midst of large crowds with much taller and larger peers because of the increased risk of injury. Physical activity should be self-limited.
Avoid the following:

Excess dietary protein intake

Non-prescribed protein supplements such as those used to increase size of skeletal muscle during exercise regimens

Prolonged fasting during an illness or weight loss

Use of intravenous steroids

Valproic acid, which exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle disorders

Exposure to communicable diseases
Individuals with significant epistaxis are advised to avoid vigorous nose blowing, lifting of heavy objects, straining during bowel movements, and finger manipulation in the nose. Some individuals with HHT experience increased epistaxis after drinking alcohol.

Most otolaryngologists with experience treating individuals with HHT advise against electric and chemical cautery and transcatheter embolotherapy for treatment of recurrent nosebleeds in most situations.

Anticoagulants including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen that interfere with normal clotting should be avoided unless required for treatment of other medical conditions. In one study, lower dose agents, particularly anti-platelet agents, were not associated with hemorrhage in a high proportion of affected individuals. The findings support the use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents, with caution, if there is a very strong indication for their use [Devlin et al 2013].

Scuba diving should be avoided unless contrast echocardiography performed within the last five years was negative for evidence of a right to left shunt.

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].
Prolonged fasting of any sort should be avoided. Emergency treatment options for hypoglycemia must be available at all times in case of an unexpected hypoglycemic episode.
The following should be avoided:

Live vaccinations

Exposure to infections
Foods very high in manganese (cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame and sunflower seeds) should be avoided.
Although immunizations have been known to precede and possibly trigger attacks, it is still recommended that they be given on the usual recommended schedule because the risk of immunization precipitating an attack is probably low [based on expert opinion].

Patients with persistent weakness and especially scapular instability should be cautioned to avoid overexerting the affected limb.
Cigarette smoking increases the risk for colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome [Watson et al 2004, Pande et al 2010].
Risk factors for pressure palsies (and thus activities to avoid) include prolonged sitting with legs crossed, occupations requiring repetitive movements of the wrist, prolonged leaning on elbows, and rapid weight loss [Cruz-Martinez et al 2000, Marriott et al 2002].

Vincristine, commonly used in the chemotherapy of lymphoma, has been reported to exacerbate HNPP [Kalfakis et al 2002].
Oral contraceptives, which may tend to increase coagulability and represent risk for thromboembolism, should be avoided in females with homocystinuria.

Surgery should also be avoided if possible because the increase in plasma homocysteine concentrations during surgery and especially post-surgery elevates the risk for a thromboembolic event. If surgery is required, intravenous fluids containing 5% dextrose in 0.5 N saline at 1.5 times maintenance should be administered before, during, and after surgery until fluids can be taken orally. If fluids at 1.5 times maintenance represent a cardiovascular risk as a result of fluid overload, basic fluid maintenance may be administered with careful clinical observation.
Biphosphonates are relatively contraindicated in hypophosphatasia. Although adverse outcomes have not been identified in children with the severe infantile type [Deeb et al 2000], theoretic concern has long been raised based on the structure of bisphosphonates. The phosphate motifs in bisphosphonates have a similar conformation to inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), the natural substrate of TNSALP; thus, treatment with bisphosphonates is thought to be analogous to "adding fuel to the fire." In adults with hypophosphatasia and osteomalacia treated with bisphosphonates, lateral subtrochanteric femoral pseudofractures have been described [Whyte 2009]. As the prevalence of adult hypophosphatasia is not known and many undiagnosed adult patients undoubtedly are treated with bisphosphonates, the frequency of this unusual complication is not known.

Excess vitamin D can exacerbate hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria in children with infantile hypophosphatasia who have hypercalcemia.

Teriparatide (recombinant human parathyroid hormone fragment, amino acids 1-34) at high doses induces osteosarcoma in rats, and may increase the risk of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (a pediatric growth plate tumor) in humans. It is contraindicated in children with hypophosphatasia.
Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and/or pulmonary hypertension. People with such disorders require individual assessment by a cardiologist.
Factors such as the following can trigger paralytic attacks and thus should be avoided when possible:

Unusually strenuous effort

Excess of carbohydrate-rich meals

Sweets

Alcohol

Prolonged immobility

Oral or intravenous corticosteroids, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be used with care in individuals with HOKPP

Glucose infusionm, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be replaced by another type of infusion
Bleeding. All aspirin-containing products as well as activities that could involve the risk of a bleeding episode should be avoided.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Cigarette smoking decreases pulmonary function and may worsen progression of pulmonary fibrosis.
The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Radiation exposure

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck, which increases the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma
Avoid ill-fitting shoes or other sources of trauma to the feet or hands (e.g., use protective gloves when handling hot items when cooking).
Avoid the following:

Hot or cold environments; hot or cold foods; hot showers or baths

Jumping or high-impact activities and sports
Opiates are contraindicated as this is a chronic disorder.
Exposure to medications or chemicals that cause neuropathy should be avoided if possible.
L-dopa-containing compounds may increase chorea.

Alcohol and smoking are discouraged.
Discontinue cyclosporine or tacrolimus when aHUS develops following challenge with the medication.

Fresh frozen plasma should be avoided (i.e., plasma therapy is contraindicated) in persons with aHUS induced by Streptococcus pneumoniae because plasma from an adult contains antibodies against the Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, which may exacerbate the disease. It is preferable to transfuse washed red blood cells or platelets. There is no evidence that plasmapheresis is of value [Copelovitch & Kaplan 2008].

Avoid potential precipitants of aHUS, including the following known triggers of aHUS:

Pregnancy

Medications. Some chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., mitomycin C, cisplatin, daunorubimicin, cytosine arabinoside), immunotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporin and tacrolimus), antiplatelet agents (e.g., ticlopidine and clopidogrel), oral contraceptives, and anti-inflammatory agents
Affected individuals are advised to use moderation in all physical activities. Physical activity guidelines have been established to detail reasonable exercise restrictions for people with familial HCM [Maron et al 2004, Gersh et al 2011]:

Avoid competitive endurance training and participation in recreational activities that require an intensity level similar to competitive athletics.

Avoid burst activities, like sprinting, as well as intense isometric exercise, such as heavy weight lifting.

Avoid exercise in extreme environmental conditions and maintain adequate hydration.

To avoid exacerbation of obstructive physiology and worsening of symptoms, patients with outflow tract obstruction should be particularly careful in alcohol consumption; use Jacuzzis, steam rooms, saunas with caution; and avoid the following:

Dehydration/hypovolemia (therefore, diuretics must be used with caution)

Medications that decrease afterload (e.g., ACE inhibitors; angiotensin receptor blockers and other direct vasodilators including dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers)

Medications for erectile dysfunction (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil)

Cautious use of stimulant medications may be considered in children diagnosed with HCM only after other treatment methods have been explored. Children with HCM undergoing treatment with stimulants should be carefully monitored by a pediatric cardiologist [Vetter et al 2008].
The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) should be avoided, especially in persons who are dehydrated. The use of NSAIDs in a febrile child with ADTKD-REN precipitated acute renal failure [Bleyer et al 2010b]. The use of other analgesics/antipyretics should be considered.

It would appear that the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor may not be beneficial in the treatment of chronic kidney failure and could aggravate the underlying relative renin deficit.

Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Exertion under extreme conditions (e.g., physical exertion when it is hot) should be avoided.
See Prevention of Primary Manifestations and Prevention of Secondary Complications.
The following should be avoided:

Smoking

High intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fat

Excessive intake of cholesterol

Sedentary lifestyle

Obesity

Hypertension

Diabetes mellitus
It may be prudent to use medications/drugs with potential myotoxicity (for example: colchicine) with caution.
Individuals and their families should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modification in the home and at work.
Avoid individuals who are ill with an infectious disease and adhere to strict precautions regarding hand washing.

Only one episode of ANE following an immunization has been reported: cellular pertussis was given to a child age six months representing a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) in whom RANBP2 molecular genetic testing was not performed [Aydin et al 2010]. Because the likely causative component was the cellular pertussis, the acellular DTaP is preferred.

In mice, intranasal inoculation of certain influenza subtypes can result in CNS invasion [Shinya et al 2000]. Although this is unlikely with the live attenuated influenza virus, it may be preferable to choose an injectable form instead.
Immune activation, for example by immunizations or severe infections, has been reported to cause worsening or exacerbation of disease symptoms [Powell et al 1982]. This does not indicate an absolute contraindication for vaccination in IPEX syndrome but does suggest that there may be benefit to giving vaccines individually instead of combining several vaccines on a single day.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol consumption, which has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage in individuals with liver damage

Iron-containing preparations and supplemental vitamin C

Handling or eating uncooked shellfish or marine fish, because of susceptibility to fatal septicemia from the marine bacterium V vulnificus
The following should be avoided:

Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes; see www.crediblemeds.org for a complete and updated list (registration required).

Triggers for intense or sudden emotion; activities that are known to precipitate syncopal events in individuals with long QT syndrome, including:

Competitive sports

Amusement park rides

Frightening movies

Jumping into cold water

A cardiologist should make recommendations for activity restrictions based on the effectiveness of medical intervention.
Individuals with renal impairment should avoid nephrotoxic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Individuals with liver impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medications.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.
Individuals with a tendency to fall should avoid slippery or rough walking surfaces.
Avoid sun exposure by using SFP>30 and sun-protective clothing.
Medications to avoid:

Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria, including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors

Dichloroacetate (DCA) as a lactate-lowering agent, as DCA has been proven to cause peripheral neuropathy [Kaufmann et al 2006]
Because disease manifestations may be exacerbated with fever and infection, care should be taken to avoid whenever possible exposure to those with infections.
As in other forms of progressive myoclonus epilepsies, the use of phenytoin should be avoided.

Anecdotal reports describe possible exacerbation of myoclonus with the following:

Carbamazepine [Nanba & Maegaki 1999]

Oxcarbazepine [Kaddurah & Holmes 2006]

Lamotrigine [Cerminara et al 2004, Crespel et al 2005]
Those with thrombocytopenia should avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Melegh & Trombitas 1997, Anderson et al 2002].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the PDH complex.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006].

A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk for peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.In those with residual vision, dilating drops and medications that may dilate the pupils (i.e., antihistamines, decongestants, tricyclic antidepressants) should be used in consultation with an ophthalmologist because of the narrow anterior chamber and risk for angle closure glaucoma.
For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, treatment with growth hormone must be undertaken with great caution, if at all, to avoid exacerbating a cardiac condition.
In a number of leukodystrophies anecdotal evidence suggests episodic worsening of manifestations with mild head injuries and infection. While this has been clearly documented only for childhood ataxia with central nervous system hypomyelination/vanishing white matter, it appears prudent to avoid these triggers when possible.
Weight should be controlled to avoid obesity.
Strenuous and eccentric muscle exercise should be discouraged as it exacerbates muscle necrosis and could precipitate the onset of weakness or accelerate muscle wasting. Although individuals with minimal muscle weakness and functional limitation may be able to perform strenuous exercise, in some cases this may result in rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria [Lahoria & Milone 2016] which may lead to severe complications such as acute renal failure and compartment syndrome.

Body weight should be controlled to avoid obesity as well as excessive weight loss (atrophy of muscles can be accelerated by loss of muscle proteins).

Physical trauma, bone fractures, and prolonged immobility can induce disuse atrophy and thus should be avoided.

Although no association of the disease with malignant hyperthermia is reported, the use of succinylcholine and halogenated anesthetic agents should be avoided when possible (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

While the specific mechanism whereby cholesterol-lowering agents (e.g., statins) may produce muscle damage causing pain or weakness is unknown, such drugs should be avoided when possible.
Individuals harboring established LHON-causing mtDNA variants should be strongly advised not to smoke and to moderate their alcohol intake, avoiding binge-drinking episodes. Although based largely on anecdotal evidence, avoidance of other environmental factors that have been implicated in precipitating visual loss in LHON (e.g., head trauma, industrial toxins, drugs with mitochondrial toxic effects) would seem reasonable.
Skin irritants and overheating should be avoided.
There is some evidence that TP53 pathogenic variants confer an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation [Hisada et al 1998, Varley 2003, Wang et al 2003, Cohen et al 2005]. Thus, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants should avoid or minimize exposure to diagnostic and therapeutic radiation whenever possible [Varley 2003, Evans et al 2006]. Radiation-induced second malignancies have been reported among individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants [Hisada et al 1998, Limacher et al 2001, Cohen et al 2005]. Detailed studies to more formally assess this risk are in development.

Individuals with LFS are also encouraged to avoid or minimize exposures to known or suspected carcinogens, including sun exposure, tobacco use, occupational exposures, and excessive alcohol use, because the effects of carcinogenic exposures and germline TP53 pathogenic variants may be cumulative. For example, individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who smoke cigarettes have been shown to be at significantly increased risk of developing lung cancer than individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who do not smoke [Hwang et al 2003].
Probenecid and other uricosuric drugs designed to reduce the serum concentration of uric acid are contraindicated because they augment the delivery of uric acid into the urinary system and raise the risk for acute anuria from deposition of uric acid crystals in the renal collecting system.

Periods of relative dehydration are to be avoided because they could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system and increase the risk for renal stones or urate nephropathy with resulting oliguria/anuria.
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against a resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)
Corneal contact lenses. Because of the associated risks of corneal keloid formation and the inherent difficulties that the person with Lowe syndrome has in managing personal contact lens care, conventional eye glasses seem safer than corneal contact lenses.

Artificial lens implants. Although some infants have had primary intraocular lens implantation at the time of cataract surgery, the associated risk of glaucoma appears higher in those infants with artificial lens implants. Therefore, artificial lens implants should be used with extreme caution, with intraocular pressure carefully monitored (under anesthesia if required) on a continual basis.
Large boluses of protein or amino acids should be avoided.

It is not clear whether prolonged fasting may trigger hyperammonemic crises.
Avoidance of agents known to increase endogenous triglyceride concentration such as alcohol, oral estrogens, diuretics, isotretinoin, glucocorticoids, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and beta-adrenergic blocking agents is recommended.

Fish oil supplements are contraindicated as they contribute to chylomicron levels.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism in LRRK2-related PD, as in PD in general.
Avoid the following:

Positive pressure ventilation unless needed to treat life-threatening conditions

Isometric exercise and contact sports or activities that increase the risk for blunt abdominal trauma and/or joint injury or pain

People with respiratory infections

Sunbathing or tanning in order to preserve any residual skin elasticity

Smoking, which can result in rapid, severe loss of lung function in persons with LTBP4-related cutis laxa
If Madelung deformity is associated with discomfort, physical activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and sports that strain the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought [Fagg 1988].
Individuals with any degree of hearing loss. Avoid exposure to ototoxic drugs.

Individuals with cervical spine anomalies. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

Individuals with a single kidney. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

For subsequent pregnancies of a woman who has had a child with CFM

Avoid vasoactive medications (pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, ibuprofen, and aspirin);

Manage diabetes mellitus to maintain good control and avoid hyperglycemia.
Prolonged bed rest should be avoided because it can result in joint contractures and disuse atrophy.
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise. Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants. Caffeine can aggravate a tendency for arrhythmia.

Agents that cause vasoconstriction, including triptans

LASIK correction of visual deficits

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)
Hypoglycemia must be avoided by frequent feedings to avoid catabolism, if necessary by intravenous administration of glucose.

Infant formulas containing medium-chain triglycerides as the primary source of fat are contraindicated in MCAD deficiency.

Alcohol consumption, in particular acute alcohol intoxication (e.g., binge drinking), often elicits a metabolic decompensation in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Lang 2009].
Contact sports and other high-risk activities should be avoided in patients with significant skeletal involvement.

Prophylactic optic nerve decompression increases vision loss in patients with craniofacial FD and is contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Amit et al 2011].

Surgical removal of ovarian cysts should be performed with caution and only in limited circumstances.

Radiation therapy is not indicated for treatment of FD, and radiation exposure to FD lesions should be limited due to potential risk for malignant transformation [Ruggieri et al 1994].

While a strong association between gsp mutations (i.e., activating GNAS mutations at residues Arg201 and Gln227) and malignancies in FD/MAS is lacking, it is prudent to minimize additional risk factors (e.g., radiation exposure) and encourage vigilance and monitoring.
Avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially when dehydrated, as NSAIDs can further impair kidney function in individuals with CKD. Avoid all nephrotoxic drugs or use with caution depending on the clinical indication.
Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Drugs known to be nephrotoxic should be avoided. NSAIDs are appropriate for short-term administration for treatment of gout or similar painful conditions. However, patients should avoid chronic daily use.
Blood transfusions with Kx antigens should be avoided in males and females with the McLeod blood group phenotype. Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Treatment with neuroleptics, in particular clozapine, should be carefully monitored.
Avoid the following:

Succinylcholine in induction of anesthesia because of risk of hyperkalemia and cardiac conduction abnormalities

Statin, cholesterol lowering medication, because of the risk of muscle damage
About 10% of the individuals with the 15q13.3 microdeletion develop schizophrenia. The use of cannabis has been reported as a risk factor for development of schizophrenia. Although no studies have been performed on the possible additional risk of the use of cannabis by persons with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, discouraging the use of cannabis may be considered.
Individuals with HNF1B-associated renal disease, including the 17q12 recurrent deletion, who develop ESRD and require renal transplantation are at increased risk for developing new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT); therefore, use of an immunosuppressive regimen that avoids tacrolimus and reduces corticosteroid exposure may be beneficial for those who do not have preexisting diabetes [Zuber et al 2009, Faguer et al 2011, Clissold et al 2015].
As all individuals to date have had involvement of PTCH1 resulting in Gorlin syndrome, affected individuals are at increased risk for malignant tumor formation with ionizing and ultraviolet radiation exposure, and for spontaneous development of basal cell carcinomas both from the numerous existing basal cell nevi and in apparently unaffected skin (see Gorlin Syndrome). Radiographs and computed tomography should be used sparingly, and the benefit versus risk to the individual’s health should be carefully considered.

Liberal use of topical sunblock and avoidance of excessive exposure to sunlight are warranted.
Avoid the following:

Phenytoin [Eldridge et al 1983]

Carbamezapine, oxycarbazepine [National Organization for Rare Disorders 1990]
Medications known to impair mitochondrial function (e.g., valproic acid) should be avoided.
Individuals with MELAS should avoid mitochondrial toxins such as: aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures [Lin & Thajeb 2007].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Anecdotal reports of effectiveness have not been substantiated by a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, which in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves and concluded that individuals with MELAS (who are already at increased risk for peripheral neuropathies) should avoid DCA [Kaufmann et al 2006a].
Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide and veralipride) and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers) have a high potential to cause an adverse reaction in individuals with pheochromocytoma.

Other medications including monoamine oxidase inhibitors, sympathomimetics (e.g., ephedrine), and certain peptide and corticosteroid hormones may also cause complications; tricyclic antidepressants are inconsistent in causing adverse reactions [Eisenhofer et al 2007].
Individuals with MERRF should avoid mitochondrial toxins including aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures.
The following should be avoided:

Tobacco and alcohol use

Medications known to impair mitochondrial function
Individuals who are MH susceptible should avoid potent inhalation anesthetics and succinylcholine.

Calcium channel blockers should not be given together with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result.

Serotonin antagonist (5HT3-anatagonist) antiemetics should be used cautiously, as sudden death has been reported in a child with multiminicore disease caused by a pathogenic variant in RYR1 (p.Arg3983His) after receiving a therapeutic dose of ondansetron [Gener et al 2010].

Individuals with MH are generally advised to avoid extremes of heat but not to restrict athletic activity or lifestyle unless they have experienced overt rhabdomyolysis or heat stroke.

In individuals with MH undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, aggressive rewarming should be avoided, as it may be associated with development of clinical signs of MH [Metterlein et al 2011b].
Valproic acid. One individual with MIC-CAP syndrome died from complications of pancreatitis after starting valproic acid for seizures [Carter et al 2011]. However, several other individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome have been treated with valproic acid without adverse effects. Therefore, it is unclear whether or not an association exists between MIC-CAP syndrome and adverse outcomes with valproic acid therapy. The benefits of use of valproic acid for seizure management in some patients may outweigh the potential risk for serious complications.
The following should be avoided:

Wounds to the swollen limbs, because of their reduced resistance to infection

Long periods of immobility with the legs in a dependent position (e.g., on a long airplane flight)

Medications, particularly calcium channel-blocking drugs, that can cause increased leg swelling in some individuals
Complex bimanual movements or sustained/repetitive hand activity should be limited in order to reduce the occurrence of pain or discomfort in the upper limbs.
Control weight to avoid obesity; avoid use of steroids [Walter et al 2013].
In the newborn with severe HMC, care with anesthesia in the neonatal period is appropriate, as HMC can cause diaphragmatic compression.
Vigorous stretching exercises are not recommended because they are ineffective, painful, and may damage the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons.
Chloroquine may be contraindicated, based on published research in patient cultured skin fibroblasts [Goldin et al 1999].
Minor head trauma may lead to temporary motor deterioration or (rarely) to coma. For this reason contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma should be avoided.
While environmental factors are thought to influence the onset and severity of MLD symptoms, no specific exacerbating agents are known. Initial symptoms are often noted following a febrile illness or other stress, but it is unclear if a high fever actually accelerates progression.

Excessive alcohol and drug use are often associated with later-onset MLD, but it is unclear if this is caused by the disease or is simply an attempt at self-medication in the face of increasing cognitive difficulties [Alvarez-Leal et al 2001].

Exacerbation of symptoms has been noted following anesthesia because affected individuals may have altered responses to sedatives and anesthetics [Mattioli et al 2007, Birkholz et al 2009, Cappuccio et al 2013].
The following should be avoided:

Fasting. During acute illness, intake of adequate calories is necessary to arrest/prevent decompensation.

Stress

Increased dietary protein

Supplementation with the individual propiogenic amino acids valine and isoleucine, as they directly increase the toxic metabolite load in patients with disordered propionate oxidation [Nyhan et al 1973, Hauser et al 2011, Manoli et al 2016b]
Risk for malignant hyperthermia. Depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine) and inhalational agents (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, desflurane) can cause malignant hyperthermia and therefore need to be avoided during surgical procedures/childbirth, as RYR1 pathogenic variants are associated with both malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and MmD.
Avoid drugs that interfere with mitochondrial function; these include valproate, phenytoin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, and certain antipsychotic medications [Shoffner 2008].

Medications primarily metabolized in the liver should be used with caution [Finkenstedt et al 2013].
Avoid physical trauma to reduce the risk of fractures.
Because excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the duration of independent ambulation, it is important to optimize nutrition for growth while maintaining a lean habitus.

Due to small ventricular diameter and stroke volume, beta blockers should be avoided in the treatment of tachycardia.
Prolonged fasting can lead to hypoglycemia and should be avoided.
The risk of penetrating injury to the brain is small but may cause anxiety. Education of parents, teachers, and the affected child to avoid risky behaviors suffices in most circumstances.

Contact sports should be avoided if a midline bony defect persists.
Aminoglycosides and noise exposure should be avoided, particularly in individuals with normal hearing who have the m.1555A>G

MT-RNR1 pathogenic variant.
Bleeding tendency

Agents. Drugs that inhibit platelet function or blood coagulation:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially aspirin, which are strong inhibitors of platelet aggregation

Other substances that interfere with platelet function including some antibiotics; cardiovascular, psychotropic, and oncologic drugs; drugs that affect platelet cAMP; some anesthetics; antihistamines; and radiographic contrast agentsNote: (1) Drugs that impair platelet function should be prescribed only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits. (2) Physicians should try to avoid prescribing any other drugs that increase the risk of bleeding in individuals with MYH9RD. (3) Individuals with MYH9RD can develop thromboembolic events [Girolami et al 2011]. The use of antithrombotic agents (such as heparin) must be carefully balanced against the risks according to the overall clinical picture of each affected individual.

Circumstances. In individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, avoidance of activities at high risk of trauma (e.g., contact sports)

Hearing loss

Agents. Ototoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicylates in large quantities, loop diuretics, some drugs used in chemotherapy regimens). These should be used only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits.

Circumstances. Exposure to hazardous noise. If noise exposure cannot be avoided, use ear devices (e.g., earplugs, headphones) to attenuate intense sound.

Nephropathy

Agents that can damage renal function, including radiocontrast, antibiotics, NSAIDs, diuretics, and oncologic drugs. The balance between benefit and risk of such agents should be carefully considered, especially in individuals with established kidney involvement or with MYH9 pathogenic variants associated with high risk for kidney damage.

Cataract

Agents. Glucocorticoids and radiation therapy, which predispose to development of cataracts

Elevation of liver enzymes

Agents. In affected individuals with liver enzyme elevation, assessment of risks versus benefits before use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs
Patients should be aggressively counseled not to smoke.

Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive concept in this disorder to communicate to all health care providers involved in their care (see Prevention of Secondary Findings).
Avoid sustained fatiguing physical exertion.
In general, anesthesia should be used with caution [Bandschapp & Laizzo 2013]. Particular care must be taken with the use of depolarizing muscle relaxants during anesthesia because they may cause adverse anesthesia-related events. Because life-threatening muscle spasms and secondary ventilation difficulties occurred following a preoperative injection of suxamethonium, Farbu et al [2003] recommended that suxamethonium be avoided in individuals with myotonia congenita.

Note: Non-depolarizing muscle relaxants appear to act normally in individuals with myotonia congenita but do not counteract a myotonic response caused by suxamethonium [Farbu et al 2003].

In rare cases, injections of adrenaline or selective beta-adrenergic agonists in high doses may aggravate myotonia.

The beta-antagonist propranolol has likewise been reported to worsen myotonia [Blessing & Walsh 1977]. Accordingly, beta-agonists and beta-antagonists should be used with caution and particular care should be taken with the use of intravenous fenoterol or ritodrine.

Colchicine may cause a myopathy with myotonia in individuals with renal insufficiency [Rutkove et al 1996] and may thus also, in theory, aggravate the myotonia of individuals with myotonia congenita.
Statins used to lower cholesterol may sometimes cause muscle pain and weakness.

Mathieu et al [1997] noted that “[n]umerous cases of perioperative complications in patients with DM have been reported. Hazards have been associated with the use of thiopentone, suxamethonium, neostigmine, and halothane. A retrospective study of perioperative complications was conducted for 219 patients who had their first surgery under general anesthesia at the Chicoutimi Hospital. The overall frequency of complications was 8.2% (18 of 219). Most complications (16 of 18) were pulmonary, including five patients with acute ventilatory failure necessitating ventilatory support, four patients with atelectasis, and three patients with pneumonia. Using multivariate analysis, [the authors] found that the risk of perioperative pulmonary complications (PPC) was significantly higher after an upper abdominal surgery and for patients with a severe muscular disability, as assessed by the presence of proximal limb weakness. The likelihood of PPC was not related to any specific anesthetic drug. Because of the increased risk of PPC, careful monitoring during the early postoperative period, protection of the upper airways, chest physiotherapy, and incentive spirometry are mandatory in all symptomatic patients with DM, particularly those with a severe muscular disability or those who have undergone an upper abdominal surgery.”

Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed appropriate anesthetic care for patients with DM1 and DM2.

Malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia including the use of vecuronium [Nishi et al 2004] has been reported in DM1 but is very uncommon [Kirzinger et al 2010]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Aggressive doxorunbicin-based chemotherapy for lymphoma in a person with DM1 produced sudden atrial fibrillations [Montella et al 2005].
Increased weakness has been associated with the use of certain cholesterol-lowering medications. In these cases, some strength can return if statin-type cholesterol-lowering medications are eliminated.

Note: Not all individuals with DM2 have an adverse response to statin medications, and thus diagnosis of DM2 is not an absolute contraindication to use of these drugs.
Chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided because of their detrimental effect on kidney function.
Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Anderson et al 2002].

Anesthesia can potentially aggravate respiratory symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure, so careful consideration should be given to its use and to monitoring of the individual prior to, during, and after anesthetic procedures [Parikh et al 2015].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.

Anecdotal reports have suggested that DCA may cause some short-term clinical improvement in mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome [Fujii et al 2002].

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006].

A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome or NARP to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk of peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.
Carbamazepine (CZP) and phenytoin may increase seizure activity and myoclonus in NCL and result in clinical deterioration.

Lamotrigine may exacerbate seizures and myoclonus especially in CLN2 disease.

In a series of 60 individuals with JNCL, valproic acid (VPA) was withdrawn in 20% and clonazepam (CZP) in 16% because of side effects [Aberg et al 2000].

Fifty percent of individuals receiving VPA had sleep disturbances or excessive sedation.

CZP stimulates salivation and respiratory secretions, increasing the risk for pneumonia in bedridden individuals, many of whom have gastroesophageal reflux. CZP is a sedative and can cause behavior disturbances.
Water intake must not be restricted.
Malignant hyperthermia is a risk in congenital myopathies such as central core disease and in some muscular dystrophies. NM has not been definitively associated with malignant hyperthermia to date, although bradycardia and slight hyperthermia have been reported during cardiac surgery. It is advisable to avoid neuromuscular blocking agents when possible, especially given the reports of core-rod myopathies linking to genes for ryanodine receptor pathogenic variants [Monnier et al 2000, Scacheri et al 2000].

Prolonged periods of immobilization should be avoided after illness or surgery, as immobility may markedly exacerbate muscle weakness [Ryan et al 2001].
Nephrotoxic agents, e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), aminoglycosides, and radiocontrast studies should be avoided.

Individuals with liver function impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medication.
Iron supplements are not recommended for affected individuals and those at risk. This recommendation is empiric [Chinnery et al 2007] Iron replacement therapy with careful monitoring may be required if affected individuals develop coincidental iron deficiency anemia.
No limitations are necessary for most individuals with NF1. Limitations may be required if certain particular features such as tibial dysplasia or dysplastic scoliosis are present; in these instances the limitation is determined by the feature, not by the presence of NF1 itself.

Radiotherapy of individuals with NF1 appears to be associated with a high risk of developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors within the field of treatment [Evans et al 2002, Sharif et al 2006].
Radiotherapy should be avoided in children with NF2 [Evans et al 2006].
Because the cells from individuals with NBS are as radiosensitive in vitro as those from individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia (another chromosome instability syndrome), conventional doses of radiation used in radiotherapy could be lethal in individuals with NBS. Family members should be made aware of this risk so that they can discuss appropriate treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed.

Similarly, unnecessary exposure to ionizing radiation should be avoided; instead of radiograph or CT scan, MR imaging and ultrasound examination are strongly recommended.
Valproate is contraindicated in glycine encephalopathy as an antiepileptic drug (AED). It raises blood and CSF glycine concentrations and may increase seizure frequency. It has resulted in severe lethargy, coma, severe seizures, and chorea particularly in mildly affected patients [Hall & Ringel 2004; Author, personal observation].
No agents or circumstances are known to trigger or exacerbate NKX2-1-related disorders.
Aspirin therapy should be avoided because it may exacerbate a bleeding diathesis.
Given the increased risk of hearing loss, exposure to loud noises should be avoided.
Individuals who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports.
Drugs that cause excessive salivation or that may exacerbate seizures directly by interacting with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided.

Alcohol as well as many drugs exacerbate ataxia and should be avoided.
Other than the avoidance of prolonged solar exposure because of the enhanced damage to the skin and increasing cumulative risk of cutaneous neoplasms, no special precautions are needed.
Prolonged unprotected sun exposure should be avoided.
Avoid prolonged exposure of the skin to the sun.
Contact sports should be avoided.
Ideally, children with CCHS should not go swimming. If they do, they should be carefully supervised, regardless of the presence or absence of a tracheostomy. Children with CCHS should not compete in underwater swimming contests as they cannot perceive the asphyxia that occurs with drowning and breath-holding and, therefore, are likely to swim longer and farther than children without CCHS, thereby increasing the risk of drowning. Furthermore, breath-holding contests can lead to asphyxia and/or death.

Alcohol (respiratory depression), recreational drugs (varied effects), and prescribed as well as non-prescribed medications/sedatives/anesthetics that could induce respiratory depression should be avoided [Chen et al 2006].
Individuals with an OPA1 pathogenic variant are advised:

Not to smoke;

To moderate their alcohol intake;

To use sunglasses to limit UV exposure;

Note: While limiting UV exposure is a good practice, no evidence for its effectiveness exists.

To avoid medications (antibiotics, antivirals) that interfere with mitochondrial metabolism.
Avoid the following:

Valproate

Haloperidol

Fasting

Stress, especially physical stress; potentially also psychological stress

Systemic corticosteroids because they cause catabolism, which can trigger a hyperammonemic crisis

Note: If systemic corticosteroids need to be administered as a life-saving therapy (e.g., during a severe asthma attack or an anaphylactic reaction), a metabolic specialist should be consulted; at the same time, preemptive measures (e.g., increased calorie intake) should be instituted to prevent catabolism.
The following should be avoided:

Medications that affect coagulation including aspirin, ibuprofen, and some herbal remedies

High-risk activities such as contact sports
Consultation with a specialist in nephrology before using medications known to impact renal function is appropriate.
Penetrance of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes may be increased in those who live in high altitudes or are chronically exposed to hypoxic conditions [Pacheco-Ojeda et al 1988, Astrom et al 2003]. Avoidance of habitation at high altitudes and activities that promote long-term exposure to hypoxia should be considered.

Activities such as cigarette smoking that predispose to chronic lung disease should be discouraged in persons who have a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX.
Avoidance of cow's milk and related products reduces exposure to phytanic acid.
Although hyperthermic episodes have been documented in individuals with PCH2, no special risk appears to be associated with generalized anesthesia.
Some report that higher temperatures and higher humidity worsen the condition.
Cough suppressants should not be used because cough is critical for clearing secretions.

Exposure to respiratory pathogens, tobacco smoke, and other pollutants and irritants that may damage airway mucosa and stimulate mucus secretion should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Fasting

The ketogenic diet, which aggravates life-threatening metabolic acidosis
Overuse of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Secondary Complications) is to be avoided.
Based on anecdotal reports that increased intracranial pressure in individuals with dilation of the vestibular aqueduct (DVA) can trigger a decline in hearing, some physicians recommend avoiding activities like weightlifting and contact sports.
For individuals with hearing loss:

Avoid ototoxic medication such as aminoglycosides if alternatives are available.

Avoid exposure to loud noise, which may contribute to deterioration in hearing.
Use of central respiratory depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, alcohol, narcotics) should be minimized.
Agents that increase risk of glaucoma (e.g., corticosteroids) are to be avoided.
Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for developing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

(IPF) and was shown to be an independent risk factor in families with FPF [Steele et al 2005].
Avoid:

Dehydration;

Any activity that would potentially increase blood viscosity.
Susceptibility to sensorineural hearing loss in ATP8B1 deficiency may argue against use of aminoglycoside antibiotics or other potentially ototoxic agents.
Avoid the following:

Intravascular volume depletion. The importance of maintaining dilute urine cannot be overemphasized.

Foods high in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, and starfruit in particular)

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D, as both may promote stone formation

Loop diuretics to maintain dilute urine, as they can lead to hypercalciuria and increase the production of calcium oxalate stones

One infant with PH1 developed hepatitis after exposure to the anesthetic sevoflurane; this was felt to be an idiosyncratic reaction [Reich et al 2004]
The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Excessive ascorbate (i.e., vitamin C; >1000 mg/day)

Foods rich in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, spinach, and starfruit in particular)
The following should be avoided:

Intravascular volume contraction (Note: Liberal use of intravenous fluids is indicated whenever oral fluid intake is inadequate.)

Delays in treatment of acute stone episodes

Nephrotoxic agents

Marked dietary oxalate excess

High-dose ascorbic acid
Untreated individuals with PHAII should avoid excessive intake of foods high in salt and potassium as these may exacerbate hypertension and hyperkalemia.
As noted in Prevention of Secondary Complications, some stimulants (commonly used for attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders) may exacerbate seizures.
Because of the propensity for rapid tissue regrowth and the propensity to form keloid tissue, it is recommended that cutaneous lesions be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms (e.g., pain, deformity) are significant.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.
No agents that increase the risk for polyp development or for cancers have been described.
Anecdotal reports of three sibs with atypical PKAN treated with alpha-tocopherol and idebenone indicated worsening of symptoms, with subsequent improvement once these compounds were stopped [JP Harpey, personal communication].
The following should be avoided:

Long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesics and NSAIDs

Caffeine in large amounts because it interferes with the breakdown of cAMP and hence may promote renal cyst growth

Use of estrogens and possibly progestogens in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease [Alvaro et al 2006, Glaser et al 2008]

Smoking
Aspartame, an artificial sweetener in widespread use, contains phenylalanine. Persons with PKU should either avoid products containing aspartame or calculate intake of Phe and adapt diet components accordingly.
No specific agents or exposures are known to accelerate the long-term disease course.

Elevated body temperature, as with fever, may cause neurologic signs and symptoms to transiently worsen, as occurs in individuals with multiple sclerosis (Uthoff phenomenon).
Alcohol, coffee, tea, excitement, stress, fatigue, and chocolate are all known to precipitate attacks and thus should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol

Obesity

Inactive, sedentary lifestyle

Exposure to medications or chemicals that exacerbate neuropathy. See Medications Potentially Toxic to Persons with CMT (or Related) Neuropathy (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Avoid the following:

Foods that are likely to lead to choking

Medications acting on D2 receptor blockers (e.g., neuroleptics such as haloperidol or risperidone, anti-nauseous medications such as metoclopramide) as these can exacerbate the extrapyramidal features
Avoid the following:

Susceptibility factors (if known) (e.g., iron supplements, alcohol consumption, smoking, oral estrogen use, and hepatotoxins such as hexachlorobenzene)

Exposure to sunlight in symptomatic phase
Precipitating factors that should be avoided include: barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Updated lists are maintained at the Web sites of the American Porphyria Foundation and the European Porphyria Network.

Although birth control pills should generally be avoided, low-dose hormonal preparations may be tolerated.
Individuals with or at risk for PAH should avoid all the following:

Appetite-suppressant medications (e.g., fenfluramine/phentermine, dexfenfluramine, and amfepramone [diethylpropion]), which have been associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) [Abenhaim et al 1996, Abramowicz et al 2003]

Cocaine, amphetamines, and related compounds causing vasoconstriction, which have anecdotal association with PH and could be risk factors

Other medications that have anecdotal suggestion of increased risk of PH, including estrogen compounds used as oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy. Anecdotal reports associating pregnancy with onset of PH raise some concern about the risks involved with pregnancy; however, there is no published consensus regarding the best approach to birth control in women with PAH. Because avoidance of exogenous systemic estrogen is desirable, many experts prefer IUD [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Hypoxia. The hypoxia that accompanies high altitude is associated with pulmonary vasoconstriction and PH in susceptible individuals.
Avoid immobilization (e.g., casting).
There are no known substances that are reported to specifically worsen prion diseases, but as with any dementia, anticholinergics and antihistamines with high anticholinergic potential, should be avoided.
Individuals with prolidase deficiency who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.
Avoid prolonged fasting, catabolic stressors, and excessive protein intake.

Lactated Ringer’s solution is not recommended in patients with organic acidemias.

In patients with QT abnormalities, avoid medications that can prolong the QT interval.

Ondansetron, an antiemetic drug used to control nausea, has been associated with QT interval prolongation on ECG [Tay et al 2014] and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with PA who have cardiomyopathy and QT interval abnormalities.

Neuroleptic antiemetics (e.g., promethazine) can mask symptoms of progressive encephalopathy and are best avoided.
The following should be avoided:

Red and organ meats, shellfish, or oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines) in excess; beer, high-fructose corn syrup-enriched foods and drinks [Choi et al 2004]

Dehydration

If possible, urate-retaining medications: low-dose aspirin, thiazide diuretics
Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels et al 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished]
In the small fraction of individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension should be avoided.
F2 20210G>A heterozygotes:

With a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT; asymptomatic women should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT and should consider alternative forms of contraception and strategies for control of menopausal symptoms.

Who are asymptomatic and elect to use oral contraceptives should avoid formulations with third-generation and other progestins with a higher thrombotic risk;

Who elect short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms should use low-dose transdermal preparations, which have a lower thrombotic risk than oral formulations [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007, Renoux et al 2010].

F2 20210G>A homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen-containing contraception and HRT.
Racquet and contact sports carry an increased risk for ocular and head trauma, both of which have been reported to precipitate retinal hemorrhage in patients with angioid streaks; participation in such activities should be discouraged.

Individuals with PXE who participate in sports and physical recreation should wear appropriate protective eyewear such as polycarbonate sports goggles and/or protective helmets with eye shields.

Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be avoided whenever possible to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
At-risk family members and asymptomatic individuals with an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid alcohol or excessive exercise.

Infections and fever also are common triggers, and although practical prevention strategies are lacking, unnecessary exposure should be avoided. There is no known reason to avoid vaccinations.

RDP. Triggers associated with the abrupt onset of RDP that should be avoided include (but are not limited to) the following:

Alcohol

Fever

Psychological stress

Excessive exercise (such as running track)

AHC. Triggers associated with inducing paroxysmal episodes in AHC [Sweney et al 2009] include the following:

Psychological stress

Emotional excitement

Environmental stressors: bright light (sunlight or fluorescent lighting), excessive heat or cold, or situations associated with excessive sound, crowds

Water exposure in the form of bathing, swimming, shampooing

Certain foods or odors: chocolate, food dyes, missed meals

Excessive or atypically strenuous exercise (e.g., walking farther than usual, use of a playground swing)

Illness

Irregular sleep, missing a nap, delayed bedtime

CAPOS syndrome. Febrile illness can trigger an episode of ataxic encephalopathy and/or weakness.
Although no agents/circumstances resulting in complications of RASA1-related disorders have been reported, a theoretic consideration is avoidance of routine use of anticoagulants unless indicated for treatment of a different medical condition.
Avoid the following:

All food products containing phytanic acid such as ruminant (cow, sheep, and goat) products and certain fish (cod) products. Some nuts should also be avoided [Brown et al 1993].

Fasting because stored lipids, including phytanic acid, are mobilized into the plasma

Ibuprofen because it is metabolized by AMACR and may interfere with the metabolism of phytanic acid

Amiodarone because of the risk that hyperthyroidism would induce enhanced catabolism, with consequent increase of plasma phytanic acid
It has been suggested by Fletcher et al [2004] that cancer risks in survivors of heritable retinoblastoma may be reduced by limiting exposure to DNA-damaging agents (radiotherapy, tobacco, and UV light). It is plausible that cancer risks in these individuals may be reduced by limiting exposure to chemotherapy.
Although retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage occur in a minority of affected individuals (5%-22% and 4%-40%, respectively), general avoidance of head trauma and high-contact sports is recommended.
Because individuals with Rett syndrome have an increased risk of life-threatening arrhythmias associated with a prolonged QT interval, avoidance of drugs known to prolong the QT interval, including the following, is recommended:

Prokinetic agents (e.g., cisapride)

Antipsychotics (e.g., thioridazine), tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine)

Antiarrhythmics (e.g., quinidine, sotolol, amiodarone)

Anesthetic agents (e.g., thiopental, succinylcholine)

Antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, ketoconazole)
Avoid dietary restriction of riboflavin. If not possible to avoid dietary restriction, provide riboflavin supplements.
It is recommended that treatment with unopposed phosphate (without 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D) be avoided as this is felt to increase the risk for hyperparathyroidism.

Although 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D has been used as a single agent, this use is felt to increase the risk for hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis.
No adverse drug effects have been documented in Rotor syndrome; however, the absence of the hepatic proteins OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 may have serious consequences for liver uptake and toxicity of numerous commonly used drugs and/or their metabolites which enter the liver via either of the two OATP1B transporters.

A list of drugs that enter the liver mainly via OATP1B1 and whose pharmacokinetics are known to be influenced by genetic variability in SLCO1B1 has been published [Niemi et al 2011]. Some of these drugs are also taken up by OATP1B3 [Shitara 2011]. The list includes:

Statins – simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, puitavastatin, rosuvastatin, fluvastatin

Ezetimibe

Anticancer drugs - methotrexate and irinotecan

Sartans – olmesartan and valsartan

Rifampicin

Mycophenolic acid

Torsemide

Thiazolidine diones – pioglitazone and rosiglitazone

Glinides – nateglinide and repaglinide

Lopinavir

Fexofenadine
Vitamin E may adversely affect the course of RP; thus, it is recommended that individuals with RP avoid high-dose supplements (e.g., 400 IU/d) [Berson 2000].

Increased exposure to light has been demonstrated to accelerate progression in animal models of retinitis pigmentosa, particularly those with pathogenic variants in the gene encoding rhodopsin [Naash et al 1996, LaVail et al 1999]; thus, avoidance of bright light and use of UV-blocking sunglasses are recommended for all patients with RP.

Smoking has been demonstrated as a strong risk factor for age-related macular degeneration [Seddon et al 1996, Chew et al 2013], and is thought to contribute to retinal damage in retinitis pigmentosa and other inherited retinal degenerations as well; thus, avoidance of smoking is recommended for all patients with RP.

Pregnancy Management

Women of childbearing age need to be cautioned about potential teratogenic effects of high-dose vitamin A palmitate (see Therapies Under Investigation) to the developing fetus. See Clinical Manifestations for further information about possible progression of disease during pregnancy.
Avoid the following:

Valproic acid (commonly used for seizures and known to interfere with beta-oxidation) because it is considered to be a mitochondrial toxin with a theoretic risk of precipitating/exacerbating organ failure

Metformin (used to treat diabetes mellitus) because of the theoretic risk of exacerbating metabolic acidosis

Prolonged use of linezolid (an antibiotic used to treat S. aureus infections) because of the reported association with optic and peripheral neuropathy and lactic acidosis due to mitochondrial toxicity

Zidovudine (an antiretroviral nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase used to treat HIV) because of the reported risk of inducing mitochondrial disease by interfering with mtDNA replication

Dehydration and prolonged fasting, which can lead to clinical deterioration
Exposure to heat or sunlight may exacerbate the rash in some individuals.

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure decreases the risk for skin cancer.
Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes should be avoided for all individuals with LQTS. See CredibleMeds® (free registration required) for a complete and updated list. Epinephrine given as part of local anesthetics can trigger arrhythmias and is best avoided.

Since electrolyte imbalances may also lengthen the QTc interval, identification and correction of electrolyte abnormalities is important. These imbalances can occur as a result of diarrhea, vomiting, metabolic conditions, and imbalanced diets for weight loss.

Lifestyle modifications are advised based on genotype. For individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype avoidance of strenuous exercise – especially swimming without supervision – is advised. In individuals with LQTS type 2 phenotype reduction in exposure to loud noises such as alarm clocks and phone ringing is advised. In individuals at high risk for cardiac events or with exercise-induced symptoms competitive sport should be avoided [Priori et al 2013]. For some individuals participation in competitive sports may be safe. It is therefore recommended that all individuals with LQTS who wish to engage in competitive sports have their risk evaluated by a clinical expert [Johnson & Ackerman 2012, Priori et al 2013].
Ibuprofen (Brufen®):

Give with care in those with evidence of cardiomyopathy. A patient who had reduced LVEF developed edema following its administration [Subahi and Salih, unpublished observation]

Avoid in those with congestive heart failure.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic agents are contraindicated if thrombocytopenia is present and should be used with caution given the fluctuating nature of the cytopenias.

Avoid consuming alcohol and medications that cause sedation, which can increase problems with gait and coordination.
Valproate is contraindicated in patients with IOSCA, as it is in other disorders that potentially affect mitochondrial function in liver. Valproate caused significant elevation of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALAT] 232 units/L [normal: 10-35 U/L] and gamma-GT [GGT] 160 U/L [normal: 5-50 U/L]) and icterus with elevated bilirubin levels (total: 224 µmol/L [normal: 5-25 µmol/L]; conjugated: 160 µmol/L [normal:1-8 µmol/L]) in one patient, and similar elevation of liver transaminases in another. When valproate was discontinued, icterus disappeared and the liver enzymes normalized.
Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to be neurotoxic such as those that cause neuropathy (e.g., isoniazid, large-dose vitamin B6) or those associated with central nervous system toxicity (e.g., diphenylhydantoin). Circumstances that could lead to physical harm, such as operating machinery or climbing to great heights, should be avoided.
Alcohol and drugs known to adversely affect cerebellar functions should be avoided.

Falls should be avoided because resulting injuries may greatly compromise motor function and the ability to perform activities of daily living.

Any activities that are potentially dangerous to individuals with ataxia or epilepsy should be avoided, depending on the severity of the manifestations.
Alcohol and sedating drugs can exacerbate ataxia.
Alcohol and sedation may make gait and coordination worse.
Because individuals with ataxic syndromes in general have abnormal sensitivity to the motor effects of alcohol, it is reasonable to limit alcohol intake to lessen the risk of falls.
Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties, such as ethanol or certain medications, may markedly increase incoordination.
Alcohol and medications known to affect cerebellar function should be avoided.
Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to cause nerve damage (e.g., isoniazid).
Alcohol consumption and sedatives such as benzodiazepines may exacerbate gait ataxia and coordination difficulties.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol, as well as drugs with possible side effects on cerebellar function (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, metronidazole, amiodarone, lithium), or the inner ear (e.g., salicilates)

Environmental noise at work and in everyday life (e.g., listening to loud music or videos directly through headphones)
Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties such as ethanol or certain medications may produce marked increases in incoordination.
Alcohol should be avoided because it can exacerbate problems with incoordination.

Affected individuals should get plenty of rest; symptoms are often aggravated by fatigue.
Fasting longer than 12 hours especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness may predispose an affected individual to dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia. Shorter fasting periods (at least the normal age-appropriate recommendations) should be followed in infants and toddlers.
Exposure to genotoxic anti-cancer drugs such as camptothecins (e.g., irinotecan and topotecan) and bleomycin is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [Hirano et al 2007].

Exposure to radiation is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [El-Khamisy et al 2007].
Several families of affected individuals report worsening of seizures with levetiracetam (Keppra®) [M Hammer, unpublished data].
Prolonged use of cytokine and hematopoietic growth factors such as G-CSF is cautioned against in view of their potential contribution to leukemic transformation [Rosenberg et al 2006].

Some drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide and busulfan) used in standard HSCT preparative regimens may not be suitable because of possible cardiac toxicity [Mitsui et al 2004, Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007].
The following should be avoided:

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, which may lead to catastrophic complications in those with cardiovascular issues or cervical spine anomalies/instability

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system, including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint pain or injury
Given the increased risk for insulin resistance in individuals taking growth hormone, it has been suggested that growth hormone be contraindicated in individuals with SHORT syndrome [Thauvin-Robinet et al 2013].
Education for individuals with SCD involves learning how to control one's environment to minimize the chance of exacerbations. Environmental controls include avoiding the following:

Dehydration

Extremes of temperature (e.g., swimming in cold water, which can trigger a pain episode)

Physical exhaustion

Extremely high altitude without oxygen supplementation

Cocaine. While alcohol and illegal drugs are never endorsed, cocaine and its derivatives, with their vasoconstrictive and cardiac stimulation effects, are particularly dangerous drugs in the setting of SCD.

The analgesic meperidine, which should be avoided as first-line therapy because of potential CNS toxicity
Hypertension. Poor blood pressure control can exacerbate or evoke cerebral ischemia. In particular, the hypertension arising from using high-dose steroids for empiric treatment of the nephrotic syndrome can evoke cerebral ischemia.

Heat, stress, and lack of sleep. Individuals with transient neurologic attacks that are not of an ischemic origin have found that heat, stress, and lack of sleep can precipitate the attacks.

Vaccinations with live vaccines. The T-cell deficiency is substantial and there have been serious infections in some individuals. Therefore, vaccination with all live vaccines should be avoided, including rotavirus, MMR, varicella, BCG, oral Salmonella typhi vaccine, and yellow fever virus vaccine.

Anti-cancer therapies. SIOD cells and model organisms are hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents [Bansbach et al 2009, Ciccia et al 2009, Postow et al 2009, Yuan et al 2009, Yusufzai et al 2009, Bansbach et al 2010, Baradaran-Heravi et al 2012b].
The following should be avoided:

Environmental manganese exposure (i.e., contaminated drinking water, occupational manganese exposure in welding/mining industries, contaminated ephedrone preparations)

High manganese content of total parenteral nutrition

Foods very high in manganese, including: cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower seeds
Although dopamine agonists are used as first-line treatment of dystonia in SLC6A3-related DTDS, bromocriptine and pergolide are generally avoided due to increased risk of pulmonary, retroperitoneal, and pericardial fibrosis.

Drugs with anti-dopaminergic side effects (e.g., some antihistamines, sedatives, and dimenhydrinate) may exacerbate the movement disorder.
Treatment with haloperidol, which has a high affinity for the DHCR7 substrate binding site, may exacerbate the biochemical sterol abnormalities in individuals with SLOS and cause an increase in symptoms. It is likely that other drugs in this class will cause the same change in sterol levels [Kelley & Hennekam 2000]. Other psychotropic drugs shown to elevate 7DHC are trazodone and aripiprazole (Abilify®) [Hall et al 2013]. Thus, one must weigh the benefit of such medications against the potential negative side effects. As many individuals with SLOS do require psychotropic medications, close monitoring of clinical signs/symptoms and serum concentration of 7-DHC is recommended.

Photosensitivity can be severe and extended periods of sun exposure should be avoided, as severe sunburn can occur with only limited exposure; however, limited sun exposure is possible for some affected individuals as long as protective clothing is worn and a sunscreen with UVA and UVB properties is used.
In at least one case, a teenage female with SMS was documented to have a serious adverse event taking Strattera® (atomoxetine hydrochloride) with extreme escalation of behaviors and aggression leading to hospitalization. Significant changes in her sleep pattern were also documented. Care should be taken to track sleep parameters and behavior with this medication.
Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.
Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.
Although adverse events with specific agents have not been reported in persons with SRD, several should be avoided on a theoretic basis including:

Sulfa drugs, which impair BH4 biosynthesis by inhibiting sepiapterin reductase [Haruki et al 2013]

Methotrexate, which inhibits dihydropteridine reductase, an enzyme involved in BH4 regeneration [Woody & Brewster 1990]

Nitrous oxide, which may impair folate metabolism [Wyatt & Gill 1999]

Neuroleptics and other dopamine antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide)
Valproate is generally contraindicated as it may inhibit residual SSADH enzyme activity [Shinka et al 2003]. However, Vanadia et al [2013] reported an individual with SSADH deficiency who had refractory epilepsy after possible limbic encephalitis. The refractory epilepsy was finally controlled with magnesium valproate. One year after initiation of magnesium valproate therapy, the affected individual remained seizure free and had marked behavioral improvements, including decreases in aggression, coprolalia, and non-recognition of danger. In addition, the EEG demonstrated improved background organization.
Affected individuals should be advised to avoid activities that may lead to traumatic retinal detachment (e.g., contact sports).

At present, no prophylactic therapies to minimize joint damage in affected individuals exist. Some physicians recommend avoiding physical activities that involve high impact to the joints in an effort to delay the onset of the arthropathy. While this recommendation seems logical, there are no data to support it.
Margarines and other products containing stanols (e.g., campestanol and sitostanol), which are recommended for use by persons with hypercholesterolemia, are contraindicated in those with sitosterolemia as they can exacerbate plant stanol accumulation [Connor et al 2005].

Note: Foods with high plant sterol content including shellfish, vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, avocados, and chocolate should be taken in moderation due to increased intestinal absorption of plant sterols in those with sitosterolemia [Bhattacharyya & Connor 1974].
People with ARCA1 should be advised to avoid employment that may put them at risk of falls or that may require a high degree of physical dexterity.
The role of surgery in management of lesions is unclear since lesions appear to recur.
Avoid cow’s milk to reduce the severity of gastroenteritis and associated thrombocytopenia (in older children).
Long-term use of minocycline, which was studied in a randomized-controlled trial in individuals with ALS, was associated with worse outcomes [Gordon et al 2007].

Excessive exercise to the point of inducing fatigue in already weakened muscles is cautioned against by many practitioners based on experience.
Heterozygotes for a TBC1D24 pathogenic variant causing autosomal dominant deafness, DFNA65, should avoid excessive ambient noise as it may exacerbate hearing loss.
Medications that cause renal or otic toxicity should be avoided.
Since most individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis have decreased temperature and pain perception, affected individuals should not use local heating appliances, such as hot-water bottles, which can cause low-temperature burn injury.
Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron

Mineral supplements

Excess vitamin C

Uncooked seafood (because of the risk of infection from microorganisms thriving under conditions of excess iron)

For those with hepatic involvement, alcohol intake should be restricted because it increases iron absorption and is toxic to the hepatocytes.
Aspiration of food should be avoided to prevent pneumonia.

Administration of L-T4 or L-T3 alone can exacerbate the high serum T3 levels and the resulting hypermetabolism.
The prokinetic agent Reglan®, commonly used for treatment of bowel dysmotility, is contraindicated in individuals with TH deficiency because of its antidopaminergic activity. Use of Reglan® or related antidopaminergic agents, including some antipsychotic medications, could result in a dystonic crisis.
The following should be avoided:

All drugs reported to prolong QT interval (CredibleMeds®)

Drugs and dietary practices that could lead to hypoglycemia
The following should be avoided:

Foods with a high content of precursors of trimethylamine or inhibitors of FMO3 enzyme activity, including seafood (fish, cephalopods, and crustaceans), eggs, offal, legumes, brassicas, and soya products; avoid or eat in moderation.

Food supplements and "health" foods that contain high doses of the trimethylamine precursors choline and lecithin

Drugs that are metabolized by the FMO3 enzyme; for example, the antipsychotic clozapine; the monoamine oxidase B inhibitor deprenyl; the anti-histamine ranitidine; the anti-estrogen tamoxifen; and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories benzydamine and sulindac [Phillips et al 2007]. These compete for residual FMO3 activity. As well as exacerbating the condition, reduced metabolism of the drug may cause adverse effects.

Factors that promote sweating, such as exercise, stress, and emotional upsets
Avoid the following

Smoking

Estrogen use in adolescent and adult females

Nephrectomy (see Treatment of Manifestations, Renal angiomyolipoma)
Avoid inappropriate protein intake.
Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided.
Nephrotoxic substances contraindicated in individuals with renal impairment should be avoided if possible.
Competition in sports requiring acute vision and/or good balance may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Persons with Usher syndrome type I often become disoriented when submerged in water because they lack the sense of where 'up' is; they should therefore exercise caution while swimming.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.
Competition in various sports requiring a full range of vision may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.
Tobacco products should be avoided since they are considered a risk factor for kidney cancer.

Chemicals and industrial toxins known to affect VHL involved organs should be avoided.

Contact sports should be avoided if adrenal or pancreatic lesions are present.
Avoid the following:

Fasting, including periods of preparation and recovery from planned surgery or sedation [Vellekoop et al 2011]

Myocardial irritation (e.g., cardiac catheterization)

Dehydration (risk for acute tubular necrosis)

High-fat diet (long-chain fats) including ketogenic or carbohydrate-restricted diets for the purpose of weight loss. Careful weight reduction has been accomplished by restricting long-chain fats and calories, supplementing with calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), and limiting overnight catabolism with uncooked cornstarch [Zweers et al 2012]

Volatile anesthetics and those that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids such as propofol and etomidate [Vellekoop et al 2011]. However, the use of propofol for short duration procedures has been evaluated in individuals with LCHAD deficiency and not found to cause adverse events [Martin et al 2014].
Contraceptive pills with high estrogen levels should be avoided, as venous malformation lesions are estrogen dependent. Venous malformations can increase in size and become symptomatic, especially at initiation of estrogen-based contraception. (In some, but not all, instances, stabilization of a venous malformation lesion and diminution of pain may be observed after three months of contraceptive pill use.)
Agents known to predispose to hVOD (e.g., cyclophosphamide and senecio alkaloids/bush teas) should be avoided.
Activities with a high risk of trauma, particularly head injury, should be avoided.

Medications with effects on platelet function (ASA, clopidogrel, or NSAIDs) should be avoided as they can worsen bleeding symptoms.

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.
Neuroleptic drugs may increase the severity of parkinsonism in VPS35-PD (as in Parkinson disease in general). In general, atypical neuroleptics are less likely to exacerbate parkinsonism than typical neuroleptics. Other drugs that may induce or exacerbate parkinsonism include but are not limited to antidepressants, calcium channel blockers, valproate, lithium, and amiodarone [Bondon-Guitton et al 2011, Bohlega & Al-Foghom 2013].
Circumcision of an at-risk newborn male should not be undertaken in the presence of thrombocytopenia.

The use of over-the-counter medications should be discussed with a physician as some medications can interfere with platelet function.

When possible, elective surgical procedures should be deferred until after HCT.
Use of ophthalmic miotics and mydriatics should be avoided as they can induce pupillary block.
Smoking and excess weight increase the risk of atherosclerosis.

Trauma to the extremities should be avoided.
Carbamazepine may worsen atypical absence seizures [Battaglia & Carey 2005].
Children with WS should not be given multivitamins because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D.
Foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) should be avoided, especially at the beginning of treatment.
Persons with dystonia should avoid situations in which the risk of falling is increased.
Individuals with severe hypohidrosis can have marked heat intolerance; care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat and the potential for febrile seizures.
Individuals with XLP who come into contact with EBV are at risk until curative treatment with allogeneic HCT has been performed. Individuals are also at risk of developing HLH or inflammatory problems with other infections.
Although no formal trials exist, standard care avoids use or application of sun-sensitizing drugs or agents.
The following should be avoided:

Live vaccines. All immunizations should be deferred until after restoration of immunocompetence.

Transfusion of non-irradiated blood products. Only CMV-negative, irradiated (1500 to 5000 RADS) blood products should be used.

Breast-feeding and breast milk, until maternal CMV status is established by CMV DNA PCR testing of a blood sample. CMV is a chronic infection and intermittent viral shedding in various bodily fluids occurs unpredictably. If such testing is negative and the mother is CMV serology negative, breast milk may rarely be considered safe for feeding. Frequent retesting of breast milk is required given the risk of primary infection in the mother. Pasteurization of breast milk remains controversial in preparation for BMT given the severe negative consequences in BMT outcomes.

Exposure to young children, sick contacts, or individuals with cold sores
Live viral vaccines, particularly oral polio vaccine, should be avoided in individuals with XLA.
UV exposure from sunlight and artificial sources of UV radiation should be avoided (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Artificial sources of UV. Certain light sources (e.g., mercury arc, halogen, and other lamps) can be unrecognized sources of UV. Although such light sources are often shielded, in open areas such as gymnasiums they can be a source of UV if the shield has been breached. UV meters are readily available to enable monitoring of areas to identify unexpected UV sources.

Cigarette smoke. Because cells from individuals with XP are also hypersensitive to environmental mutagens, such as benzo[a]pyrene found in cigarette smoke, prudence dictates that individuals with XP should be protected against these agents. One individual with XP who smoked cigarettes for more than ten years died of bronchogenic carcinoma of the lungs at age 35 years [Kraemer et al 1994]. The authors recently cared for another individual with XP who smoked and developed lung cancer in the fifth decade of life.
Contraindications to testosterone replacement therapy include prostate cancer (known or suspected) and breast cancer.

Oral androgens such as methyltestosterone and fluoxymesterone should not be given (especially for long-term therapy) because of liver toxicity.
Individuals with ZAP70-related CID should avoid the following:

Non-irradiated blood products

Live virus vaccinations

Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) vaccine against tuberculosis, Salmonella typhi (Ty21a) vaccine against typhoid fever, and Vibrio cholerae (CVD 103-HgR) vaccine against cholera, which may be part of the routine vaccination schedule in countries where these diseases are endemic

Contaminated water sources

Exposure to fungus-enriched environments (e.g., construction sites, agricultural areas with active soil disruption, mulch, hay)
HbH disease

Inappropriate iron therapy

Oxidant drugs including sulphonamides; some antimalarials because of the risk of hemolytic crisis
To avoid additional light damage to the retina, it is recommended that individuals wear appropriate protective (dark) glasses in bright light.
Particularly in childhood, care must be taken to limit risk for injury to the spinal cord at the craniocervical junction. This should include proscription of activities including collision sports (e.g., American football, ice hockey, rugby), use of a trampoline, diving from diving boards, vaulting in gymnastics, and hanging upside down from knees or feet on playground equipment.

Protocols have been published regarding positioning that should be avoided in order to decrease the likelihood of development of a fixed, angular kyphosis [Pauli et al 1997].

There is no increased risk for bone fragility or joint degeneration, and no circumstances to avoid related to these.
Iron supplements. Individuals with aceruloplasminemia erroneously diagnosed as having iron deficiency anemia and treated with iron supplements had accelerated iron accumulation.
Affected individuals should avoid medications known to prolong QT intervals. See CredibleMeds® for a complete and updated list.

Salbutamol inhalers, which may be used in the treatment of primary hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, should be avoided because of the potential for exacerbation of cardiac arrhythmias.

Thiazide and other potassium-wasting diuretics may provoke drug-induced hypokalemia and could aggravate the QT interval.
For those with CIPO, high-fat foods (>30% of total calories) and consumption of lactose and fructose may worsen abdominal bloating and discomfort [Gabbard & Lacy 2013].

No drugs are known to exacerbate the smooth muscle functional defect in ACTG2-related disorders.
The use of adenine arabinoside (a substrate for ADA) as an antiviral agent or for chemotherapy of malignancies should be avoided.

Pentostatin, a potent ADA inhibitor used to treat some lymphoid malignancies, would be ineffective in persons who lack ADA, and would interfere with PEG-ADA.
Care must be taken during contact sports to avoid blunt trauma to the eye and head. Affected individuals should not participate in activities like boxing and other martial arts.
All patients have reported that anxiety and stress worsen disease manifestations.

Less commonly reported triggers include intercurrent illness, prolonged inactivity, fatigue, and excitement.
Prolonged exposure to sunlight should be avoided to prevent sunburn of hypopigmented areas and to prevent increasing the contrast between the patchy areas of hyper- and hypopigmentation seen in AEC syndrome. Reduced sun exposure can minimize freckling of skin in individuals with ADULT syndrome.
Unnecessary physiologic stress is to be avoided, if possible, and any surgical procedures should be carefully planned. If physiologic stress is unavoidable (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, trauma), the dosage of steroids should be increased two- to threefold following local guidance for sickness/emergencies.
Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking should be avoided.

Knowledge about the safety of many drugs and other over-the-counter preparations in acute porphyrias is incomplete; however, evidence-based guidelines for assessment of drug porphyrogenicity have been published [Thunell et al 2007, Hift et al 2011].

Searchable drug safety databases are available at the following Web sites:

The Drug Database for Acute Porphyria

The American Porphyria Foundation

Porphyria South Africa

Safe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

Welsh Medicines Information Centre - Porphyria Information Service

Unsafe drug lists are available at the following Web sites:

European Porphyria Network

British National Formulary (subscription required)
Contact sports should be avoided by all individuals, especially those with chronic liver disease, splenomegaly, and vascular involvement.

Individuals with liver disease should avoid alcohol consumption.
There is currently no evidence that individuals with ALK-related neuroblastoma tumor susceptibility have increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation therapy; thus, medical and surgical management of tumors should be the same as for the general population.
Avoidance of physical stress to the spine and large joints, including heavy manual labor or high-impact sports, may reduce the progression of severe arthritis.
Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided because of the risk of precipitating and/or accelerating liver disease [Bicknese et al 1992, Saneto et al 2010].

As with some other mitochondrial diseases, physical stressors such as infection, fever, dehydration, and anorexia can result in a sudden deterioration and should be avoided as much as possible.
Smoking (both active and passive) is a risk factor for lung disease in individuals with AATD.

Occupational exposure (including exposure to environmental pollutants used in agriculture, mineral dust, gas, and fumes) is an independent risk factor for lung function impairment in individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype.
Splenectomy to control autoimmune cytopenias and/or massive splenomagaly is discouraged because it typically does not lead to permanent remission of autoimmunity and may be associated with an increased risk for infections. The two recent cohort studies reveal clear-cut consequences of splenectomy. In the French cohort, nine (30%) of 30 affected individuals who underwent splenectomy suffered 17 cases of severe invasive bacterial infection with four deaths after splenectomy; in the NIH cohort, 27 (41%) of 66 affected individuals suffered one or more episodes of sepsis with seven deaths. Of note: Anti-microbial prophylaxis and appropriate vaccinations did not prevent the majority of episodes of sepsis, although poor compliance was found to be a risk factor in the French cohort [Neven et al 2011, Price et al 2014].

The use of over-the-counter medications such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be discussed with a physician as some of these medications can interfere with platelet function.
Patients and caregivers should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modifications for the home and at work.
Any substance contraindicated in persons with renal or cardiac failure should be avoided.

Therapy directed at one system may have adverse effects on other systems; for example, the use of glitazone therapy in diabetes mellitus is contraindicated in the presence of cardiac failure.
Sudden changes in environment and over-sedation should be avoided.
Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants.

Vigabatrin and tigabine (anticonvulsants that increase brain GABA levels) are contraindicated in individuals with Angelman syndrome. For unknown reasons, carbamazapine, vigabatrine, and tigabine can cause development of other seizure types or non-convulsive status epilepticus. This paradoxic seizure development is not limited to individuals with Angelman syndrome [Pelc et al 2008a]
It has been suggested that intraocular surgery may increase the likelihood of (or exacerbate existing) keratopathy [Edén et al 2010], and repeated intraocular surgery does predispose to the rare but severe aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Patients should therefore be counseled about these risks before undertaking such surgery.
Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided as very high levels of CK have been measured after strenuous exercise [Milone et al 2012, Penttilä et al 2012].

The use of statins, which can induce muscle pain and worsen muscle weakness, requires extra monitoring of clinical status especially at the beginning of treatment.
Avoid the following:

Splenectomy as it worsens the hypertriglyceridemia

For those with splenomegaly: contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture
Azathioprine should be avoided by individuals taking XDH inhibitors.
Valproic acid is to be avoided as it exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle defects and other inborn errors of metabolism [Scaglia & Lee 2006].
Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Large boluses of protein or amino acids

Less than recommended intake of protein

Prolonged fasting or starvation

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases

Valproic acid

Intravenous steroids

Hepatotoxic drugs in those with hepatic involvement
Avoid the following:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Scuba diving because of pressure differences and the need for positive pressure ventilation

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Use of tobacco, which increases cardiovascular risk and the likelihood of premature skin aging

Sun tanning, which increases the likelihood of premature skin aging
Individuals with ARVC are discouraged from participating in vigorous athletic activity including competitive athletics because of the strain caused on the right heart [Corrado et al 2015].
Individuals with AVED should avoid:

Smoking because it considerably lowers TRAP and reduces plasma vitamin E concentrations [Sharpe et al 1996];

Occupations requiring quick responses or good balance.
The following should be avoided:

Alcohol consumption, which in individuals with liver disease has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage

Iron-containing preparations
Avoid the following:

Arc welding

Asbestos

Smoking

Unnecessary and prolonged sun exposure
Avoid the following:

The use of rectal thermometers in those with neutropenia

The use of succinylcholine, as non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers could have a prolonged effect [Schlame 2013]

The use of human growth hormone is usually discouraged, as the majority of affected males will attain normal stature by adulthood.

Although the use of sevoflurane has been reported without adverse effects, the muscular involvement in Barth syndrome may increase the risk for malignant hyperthermia compared to the general population [Schlame 2013].
Any substances contraindicated in persons with renal impairment should be avoided.
Use of radiotherapy can lead to the development of thousands of BCCs in the radiation field [Strong 1977, Evans et al 1991a] and therefore should be avoided if there are alternative treatments, especially in childhood. If the treating team believes that no other treatment modality is possible, radiotherapy should be used through as few skin ports as possible.

Diagnostic x-rays should be used sparingly.

Individuals with NBCCS should be advised to avoid direct sun exposure as much as possible. Excessive sun exposure increases the likelihood of developing BCCs.
In patients with known gain-of-function pathogenic variants in KCNQ2, the use of the potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine may be contraindicated.
Neuroleptic medications should be used cautiously, since they may exacerbate extrapyramidal symptoms [Cummings et al 1983]. A poor response to neuroleptics was noted in a family with PFBC and mainly psychotic manifestations [Callender 1995]. Extrapyramidal symptoms may also be elicited or worsened by other drugs (e.g., some antiepileptics, medications to treat vertigo or dizziness).
Stress and trauma should be avoided as they can precipitate acute attacks.
Sun exposure is to be avoided because of predisposition to skin cancer.

Testing of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.
The following should be avoided:

Cigarette smoking

High ambient pressures, which may precipitate spontaneous pneumothorax

Radiation exposure
Raw eggs should be avoided because they contain avidin, an egg-white protein that binds biotin, thus decreasing its bioavailability. (Thoroughly cooked eggs present no problem because heating inactivates avidin, rendering it incapable of binding biotin.)
Sun exposure to the face, particularly in infancy and early childhood, should be avoided.
Individuals with renal abnormalities should use appropriate caution when taking medications (i.e., antibiotics and analgesics) that can impair renal function or require normal renal physiology for clearance.
No data specific to individuals with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants are available.
The following can unmask the Brugada syndrome ECG [Antzelevitch et al 2002]:

Febrile state

Vagotonic agents

α-adrenergic agonists [Miyazaki et al 1996]

β-adrenergic antagonists

Tricyclic antidepressants

First-generation antihistamines (dimenhydrinate)

Cocaine toxicity

The following should be avoided [Antzelevitch et al 2003]:

Class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs including flecainide and propafenone

Class 1A agents including procainamide and disopyramide
Excessive dietary fat intake should be avoided.
Cessation of smoking helps prevent neovascularization of the retina [Clemons et al 2005].
Acetazolamide should be avoided, as it inhibits carbonic anhydrase activity.
Avoid the following:

Contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma

Stressful emotional and physical situations (e.g., extreme temperatures)
Angiography and anticoagulants are contraindicated in CADASIL as they may provoke cerebrovascular accidents [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001].

Smoking increases the risk of stroke in individuals with CADASIL and should be avoided [Singhal et al 2004].

Thrombolytic therapy (intravenous thrombolysis) is contraindicated because of the presumed increased risk for cerebral hemorrhage in view of the fact that patients with CADASIL have microbleeds on MRI [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001, Dichgans et al 2002].
Physical stress such as febrile illness, gastroenteritis with dehydration, surgery accompanied by general anesthesia, and major trauma can precipitate an adrenal crisis in individuals with classic CAH. Increased doses of glucocorticoids are recommended in these situations.
Smoking and a high-salt diet, which may hasten the progression of arteriosclerosis, should be avoided.
Individuals with DIS should avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace or during recreation.
Potentially exacerbating circumstances:

Prolonged fasting (longer than overnight without dextrose-containing intravenous fluids)

Dietary protein intake below the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for age or more than that prescribed by a metabolic specialist

Methionine restriction. Methionine-free formulas given to infants with methylmalonic acidemia should be avoided as the decreased methionine intake may worsen hypomethioninemia in patients with decreased methionine production.

Nitrous oxide, an anesthetic that is potentially toxic as it depletes the body stores of vitamin B12 and inhibits methionine synthase activity [Abels et al 1990, Drummond & Matthews 1994]
To avoid head trauma, helmets and protective devices should be worn when participating in high-risk sports and activities.
General anesthesia in patients with CCFDN may cause complications such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004]. Although such complications have not been unequivocally documented, Masters et al [2017] recommend cautious use of general anesthesia until more information on related risks is available.

Prolonged exercise was reported to provoke myalgia in one patient with CCFDN [Merlini et al 2002].
Limited evidence suggests an increased risk of hemorrhage with certain analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, naproxen) and aspirin. Individuals with headaches and other pain should avoid these medications if suitable substitutes are available.

Other medications that increase risk of hemorrhage (e.g., heparin, sodium warfarin [Coumadin®]) should be avoided or, when such medications are necessary for treatment of life-threatening thrombosis, should be closely monitored by the affected individual’s medical team [Schneble et al 2012, Flemming et al 2013, Erdur et al 2014].

The use of narcotic pain medications is also discouraged in chronic pain conditions because of the potential for addiction and because of their association with rebound headaches.

Radiation to the central nervous system is associated with de novo lesion formation in FCCM [Larson et al 1998, Nimjee et al 2006, Golden et al 2015]. The pathology of these lesions appears to be histologically different from the cavernomas found prior to radiation [Cha et al 2015].
Although it is unknown how CCD is associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility or which pathogenic variants in RYR1 are absolutely related to MH susceptibility, it is prudent for individuals with CCD to avoid inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details.

Individuals suspected of having MH susceptibility are advised to avoid extremes of heat, but this does not mean restriction of athletic activity.
Activities with a high impact on joints (e.g., jogging) should be avoided.

Obesity, which places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints, should be avoided.
Avoid any preparation containing iron.
Acetaminophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.
Acetominophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.
No known agents exacerbate the severity of CdLS; however, caution should be exercised to avoid exacerbation of existing comorbidities including gastroesophageal reflux, self-injurious behavior, pica, and less commonly, thrombocytopenia and immunologic features.
Individuals with CDSP should avoid fasting longer than age-appropriate periods.
Use of sib or related donors for HSCT without prior assessment of the pathogenic germline variant in these individuals.
Bisphosphonates. Bone pain and uptake of 99mTc methylene diphosphonate by scintigraphy increased with pamidronate in a woman age 27 years with CED [Inaoka et al 2001]. Clodronate infusion caused increased bone pain in one individual with CED and no improvement in another individual reported by Castro et al [2005].

Excess phosphate. Treatment with cellulose phosphate led to worsening hypocalcemia and proximal myopathy in another individual.
Gluten in the diet (see Treatment of Manifestations and Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients undergoing surgeries, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage [Wahlin et al 2008]
Over-exposure to heat. Individuals with CFC syndrome report heat intolerance.
Extended immobilization following surgery can exacerbate muscle weakness and thus should be avoided [North 2004].
Exposures. Activities that expose the affected person to decayed organic matter (e.g., mulching, gardening, leaf raking, house demolition) are to be avoided as inhalation of fungal spores can result in fulminant pneumonitis leading to hypoxia and respiratory failure [Siddiqui et al 2007]. Therefore, the following should be avoided:

Exposure to mulch

Potting of plants or gardening

Raking leaves or mowing lawns

Swimming in stagnant water, brackish water, or ponds

BCG vaccination should be avoided (live viral vaccines are likely safe).

Transfusion considerations. Persons with CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome lack red blood cell Kell antigens and thus should not receive blood transfusions that are Kell antigen positive.
Avoid the following:

Seizure-provoking circumstances (e.g., sleep deprivation, alcohol intake)

Anticonvulsants that may worsen involuntary movements (e.g., carbamazepine, lamotrigine)
The following should be noted:

Baclofen used to treat spasticity can sometimes worsen muscle weakness.

Some drugs used to treat the behavioral manifestations of FTD may worsen dysarthria, dysphagia, and/or respiratory weakness.
Because clinical photosensitivity may result in injuries due to the consequences of induced seizures, the following are recommended:

Avoid flickering lights that may provoke seizures.

Advise patients and families that exposure to intensely flickering lights may provoke seizures including eyelid myoclonias, absence seizures, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Of note, most televisions do not transmit in the frequency range that is particularly provocative.
All nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen) are to be avoided as they can exacerbate the bleeding tendency.
Routine immunizations with inactivated vaccines are considered safe in persons with CHH. However, immunization with live vaccines should be carefully considered in those with CHH and evidence of abnormal immunologic function, and should be avoided in those with CHH and SCID [Rider et al 2009].
UV exposure from sunlight reflected from water and snow should be avoided.
Affected individuals should avoid heat exposure and prolonged physical activity in a hot climate.
Low-protein/high-caloric (high-carbohydrate) diet. Although a low-protein/high-caloric diet helps prevent hyperammonemia in urea cycle enzyme deficiencies, it is harmful for individuals with all forms of citrin deficiency (i.e., NICCD, FTTDCD, or CTLN2) [Saheki et al 2004, Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006]. A high-carbohydrate diet may increase NADH production, disturb urea synthesis, and stimulate the citrate-malate shuttle, resulting in hyperammonemia, fatty liver, and hypertriglyceridemia [Saheki & Kobayashi 2002, Imamura et al 2003, Saheki et al 2006, Saheki et al 2007].

Infusion of sugars including glycerol, fructose, and glucose. Severe brain edema treated with glycerol-containing osmotic agents has resulted in continued deterioration and is contraindicated in those with CTLN2 [Yazaki et al 2005]. Degradation of large amounts of glycerol and fructose generates NADH in liver cytosol, which may disturb liver function [Saheki et al 2004, Yazaki et al 2005, Takahashi et al 2006].

Infusion of high-concentration glucose may also exacerbate hyperammonemia [Tamakawa et al 1994, Takahashi et al 2006].

Note: Mannitol infusion appears to be safer [Yazaki et al 2005].

Alcohol. Drinking alcohol can trigger the onset of CTLN2 because alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) generates NADH in the cytosol of the liver.

Medications. Acetaminophen and rabeprozole may trigger CTLN2 [Shiohama et al 1993, Imamura et al 2003].
ADOII

Activities with high fracture risk should be avoided.

Orthopedic surgery should only be performed when absolutely necessary and the surgeon should be aware of potential complications and difficulties in handling osteopetrotic bone.
Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria (including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors) should be avoided.
Individuals with CLS who experience SIDAs should be protected as much as possible from being startled and/or from falls.
A number of drugs are known to affect neuromuscular transmission and therefore exacerbate symptoms of myasthenia gravis (e.g., ciprofloxacin, chloroquine, procaine, lithium, phenytoin, beta-blockers, procainamide, and quinidine). These drugs are not absolutely contraindicated and may be used with caution in CMS. See Medications and Myasthenia Gravis (Table 2) for a more complete.
The following should be avoided:

Obesity because of its negative effect on gait and balance

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with HMSN (CMT) ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Chemotherapy for cancer that includes vincristine may be especially damaging to peripheral nerves and severely worsen CMT [Graf et al 1996, Nishikawa et al 2008].
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
No specific data are available for TRPV4-associated neuromuscular or skeletal disorders.

In general, obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult for individuals with neuropathy, skeletal dysplasia, or both.

For neuromuscular disorders. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

For skeletal dysplasias

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints
Avoid neurotoxic agents (chemotherapy that may cause peripheral nerve injury).
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risk from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risks ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Excessive sun exposure should be avoided.
Caution should be used regarding medications with the potential to decrease the neutrophil count.
The following should be avoided:

Smoking because it increases the global risk of stroke

Hypertension because it increases the risk of stroke

Sustained head pressure during birth or postnatal physical activities that may cause head trauma [Gould et al 2006]

Anticoagulant use [Gould et al 2006]
Prolonged fasting should be avoided, especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness.

Potentially hepatotoxic agents such as valproate and salicylate should not be given, even though adverse effects of pharmacologic agents have not been reported in individuals with CPT1A deficiency.
Extended fasting and prolonged exercise are to be avoided.

Reports of medication-induced side effects in individuals with CPT II deficiency are rare. Relying mostly on case reports, the following agents should be avoided:

Valproic acid [Kottlors et al 2001]

General anesthesia

Ibuprofen

Diazepam in high doses [Bonnefont et al 1999]
Reduced visual acuity and difficulties seeing at night may preclude driving a car or restrict the class of driving license.
Avoid the following:

Excess protein intake

Obvious exposure to communicable diseases
Avoid the following:

Dehydration, which compromises remaining renal function

Sun exposure, which can exacerbate photophobia
Caution in the use of statins has been suggested [Federico & Dotti 2001].
Competitive sports and other strenuous exercise are always contraindicated. All individuals showing exercise-induced arrhythmias should avoid physical activity, with the exception of light training for those individuals showing good suppression of arrhythmias on exercise stress testing while on therapy. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006]. The risk for arrhythmias during sports in individuals who have pathogenic variants in genes associated with CPVT but no clinical phenotype (no exercise-induced arrhythmias) is not known; thus it may be safest for these individuals to refrain from intense physical activities.

Digitalis favors the onset of cardiac arrhythmias due to delayed afterdepolarization (DAD) and triggered activity; therefore, digitalis should be avoided in all individuals with CPVT.
Untreated individuals with DBH deficiency should avoid hot environments, strenuous exercise, standing still, and dehydration.
Individuals with DMD/BMD should avoid botulinum toxin injections.

Although it is recommended that triggering agents like succinylcholine and inhalational anesthetics be avoided in patients with DMD or BMD because of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia or malignant hyperthermia-like reactions (rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, hyperkalemia), it should be noted that an extensive literature search did not find an increased risk of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in people with DMD or BMD when compared with the general population [Gurnaney et al 2009].
Drugs (e.g., beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, others) that exacerbate heart block, if present, should be avoided in LMNA-related DCM unless an electronic pacemaker is in place.
Live viral vaccines should be avoided if agammaglobulinemia is present.
Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, persons with documented hearing loss should be counseled appropriately.
Some medications used to treat behavioral problems (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine) may lead to excessive weight gain. When possible, use medications that are not associated with weight gain.
Exposure to potential renal toxins (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and intravenous contrast agents) should be avoided, especially if renal function is below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD stage 3B).
Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, individuals with LAMM syndrome and a residual cochlea should be counseled appropriately.

Because of the high risk for disorientation when submerged in water, swimming needs to be undertaken with caution.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid the following:

Known environmental factors for hearing loss (e.g., loud noises)

Ototoxic medications
The rate of progression of high-frequency hearing loss can be reduced by encouraging individuals with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss to avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace and during recreation.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important is avoidance of repeated exposure to loud noises.
Individuals with hearing loss should avoid environmental exposures known to cause hearing loss. Most important among these for persons with DFNB1 and mild-to-moderate hearing loss is avoidance of repeated overexposure to loud noises.
Individuals with TS-NSAN. Avoid excessive body temperatures when possible. Follow-up studies have not demonstrated the success of preventative measures as an effective long-term treatment.
Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in persons with DBA because its side effects include neutropenia [Vlachos et al 2008].

Individuals with DBA, especially those on corticosteroid treatment, should take reasonable precautions to avoid infections, as steroid-dependent individuals are more prone to complications resulting from immune system dysfunction.
Obesity places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints and thus should be avoided.
Blood transfusions

Transfusions of red cells or platelets should be avoided or minimized for those who are candidates for HCT.

To minimize the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors if HCT is being considered.

All blood products should be leukodepleted and irradiated.

Radiation. It is prudent to minimize exposure to therapeutic radiation since data on radiation side effects are limited.

Androgens and growth factors. The combination of androgens and G-CSF was associated with splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and rupture in two individuals; thus, the combination should be avoided [Giri et al 2007].

Cancer prevention. Given the increased susceptibility of individuals with DC to developing leukemias and other malignancies, individuals with DC are advised to avoid toxic agents that have been implicated in tumorigenesis, including smoking.
Avoid the following:

Fasting

Catabolic stressors

Liver-toxic medications
In general, rapid-acting insulin preparations (lispro and aspart) as well as short-acting (regular) insulin preparations should be avoided (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events in young children.
General factors that predispose to late-onset diabetes (e.g., excessive weight gain) or risk factors for cardiovascular disorders should be avoided.
Avoid sharp objects and hot water, which may damage skin.
Discontinuation of levodopa treatment usually results in return of symptoms.

Exacerbation of symptoms after taking oral contraceptives has been reported in some women with GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 1998a, Postuma et al 2003, Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].
General anesthesia can increase the risk of intra- and postoperative seizures [Takayama et al 2002].
Drugs affecting renal clearance or the inner ear should be avoided in individuals with impaired renal function and/or hearing impairment.

Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias.
It is unclear if there are any agents or circumstances that individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia should avoid.

Some healthcare providers recommend avoiding all sources of milk and dairy products until age one year as a precaution against possible galactose toxicity; other healthcare providers argue that this precaution is not warranted. See Treatment of Manifestations.
Seizure triggers (e.g., sleep deprivation, stress, and failure to follow medication regimen) should be avoided.
The extremities affected by dystonia should not be placed in a brace or cast, unless medically necessary, as this can worsen the dystonia.
Known triggers of attacks should be avoided; physical exertion, emotional stress, and changes in environmental temperature are the most common triggers.

Marked generalized myokymia has been reported during induction of anesthesia [Kinali et al 2004].
Phenytoin has been reported to exacerbate symptoms.
Most persons with EB-PA cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.
Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are committed to participation in such activities should be encouraged to devise ways of protecting the skin.

Most persons with DEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.
Most persons with JEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®. Silicone-based products provide a good substitute for tape.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma.

Activities that, in general, traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.
Excessive heat may exacerbate blistering and infection in EBS.

Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear can cause trauma and should be avoided.

Avoiding activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) can reduce skin damage, but affected individuals who are determined to find ways to participate in these endeavors should be encouraged.

Many individuals with EBS cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.
The following should be avoided:

Obesity, which increases stress on joints

Exercise that causes repetitive strain on affected joints
Sports involving joint overload are to be avoided.
Although malignant hyperthermia susceptibility has not been described in EDMD, it is appropriate to anticipate a possible malignant hyperthermia reaction and to avoid triggering agents such as depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) and volatile anesthetic drugs (halothane, isoflurane). Other anesthetic precautions have to be considered [Aldwinckle & Carr 2002].

Body weight should be monitored, as affected individuals may be predisposed to obesity.
The following should be avoided:

Sports with heavy joint strain (contact sports, fighting sports, football, running)

Acetylsalicylate (aspirin)
Joint hyperextension may not need to be avoided. In a randomized controlled trial of physical therapy among 26 children and adolescents with joint hypermobility and knee pain, those allowed to exercise into hyperextension had similar improvement in pain score and better improvement in psychosocial score compared to those restricted to neutral joint position [Pacey et al 2013].

Resistance exercise can exacerbate joint instability and pain. In general, it is preferable to increase the number of repetitions of exercise rather than to increase the resistance.

High-impact activity increases the risk for acute subluxation/dislocation, chronic pain, and osteoarthritis. Some sports, such as tackle football, are therefore contraindicated. However, most sports and activities are acceptable with appropriate precautions.

Chiropractic adjustment is not strictly contraindicated, but must be performed cautiously to avoid iatrogenic subluxations or dislocations.
Trauma. Because of inherent tissue fragility, it is prudent for individuals with vEDS to avoid collision sports (e.g., football), heavy lifting, and weight training. Of note, no evidence suggests that moderate recreational exercise is detrimental.

Arteriography. Conventional arterial angiography (with contrast injection) should be discouraged because it has been associated with added de novo complications [Zilocchi et al 2007]. Arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter; furthermore, injection pressure may lead to arterial aneurysms. Arteriography is currently best used as part of a planned interventional procedure, such as coil embolization or stenting of bleeding arteries.

Routine colonoscopy. There are several reports of colonoscopy-associated bowel perforation in individuals with vEDS. Virtual colonoscopy, which also involves insufflation, may have similar complications. Routine colonoscopy for cancer screening is discouraged in the absence of concerning symptoms or a strong family history of colorectal cancer. Individuals with vEDS who have a family history of colon cancer are encouraged to utilize genetic testing for colon cancer risk assessment (provided the genetic etiology of colon cancer has been established in an affected family member).

Elective surgery. Because tissue fragility results in a higher risk of surgical complications, elective surgery for individuals with vEDS is discouraged unless the benefit is expected to be substantial. In general, avoidance of surgery in favor of more conservative management is advised.
In children with significant joint hyperextensibility, sports which impact the joints such as gymnastics or long-distance running should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Cigarette smoking, which can worsen emphysema

Sun tanning, which can damage skin
Any preparations containing iron should be avoided (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Contact sports are not advisable in those with splenomegaly; of note, acute or excessive splenomegaly is a greater risk than chronic mild splenomegaly.
Phenytoin should be avoided, as it has been found to have aggravating side effects on the associated neurologic symptoms, and may even accelerate cerebellar degeneration [Eldridge et al 1983].

Sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin) and GABAergic drugs (tiagabine, vigabatrin) as well as gabapentin and pregabalin should in general be avoided as they may aggravate myoclonus and myoclonic seizures [Medina et al 2005].
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs that may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]
The following are appropriate:

Avoidance of sunlight and UV light

In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of alcohol and drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens)

In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]
Symptoms are triggered by warmth and standing and, in some individuals, by alcohol and spicy foods including chili peppers or garlic.

In some individuals, exercise can trigger symptoms. However, for many individuals, the benefits of mild exercise outweigh the disadvantages. Swimming is a preferred exercise because the extremities remain cool.
Blood transfusions. Blood products should be cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe and irradiated. To reduce the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors. Once an individual requires transfusions, he/she should be referred for transplantation.

Toxic agents to avoid include smoking, second-hand smoke, and alcohol, which have been implicated in tumorigenesis.

Unsafe sex practices increase the risk for HPV-associated malignancy.

Radiographic studies for the purpose of surveillance should be minimized in the absence of clinical indications. However, baseline skeletal surveys may be considered, in order to document bony anomalies that may lead to problems with age, such as anomalies of the wrist, hip, and vertebrae.
The obstructive lung disease, which has been documented in older hemizygous males and heterozygous females, is more severe in smokers; therefore, affected individuals should be discouraged from smoking.

Amiodarone has been reported to induce cellular and biochemical changes resulting in a phenocopy in particular of the keratopathy of Fabry disease [Whitley et al 1983]. Given potential effects on cellular levels of α-Gal A enzyme activity, it has been contraindicated in persons with Fabry disease. However, little evidence of a detrimental effect in this specific group exists and the relative benefit in individuals with cardiac arrhythmia should be considered.
Women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT.

Asymptomatic women who are heterozygous for factor V Leiden should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT use and should be encouraged to consider alternative forms of contraception and control of menopausal symptoms.

Asymptomatic heterozygous women electing to use oral contraceptives should avoid third-generation formulations because of their higher thrombotic risk.

Homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen containing contraception and HRT.

For heterozygous women who require short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms, low-dose transdermal preparations may have a lower thrombotic risk [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007].
Surgery and desmoid risk. There is evidence that the risk for desmoid tumors is increased by abdominal surgery and may be higher in surgical procedures that require two stages to complete. Individuals at high risk for desmoids (women; those with APC pathogenic variants in codons 1395-1493; those with a family history of desmoids) may consider delaying surgery longer than might otherwise be recommended or undergoing an operation that is likely to be definitive for colorectal cancer risk (e.g., total colectomy with ileostomy) in order to minimize the likelihood of the need for a second operation.

Surgery and fecundity. There is a lower rate of fecundity in women after a total colectomy with ileo-anal anastamosis than after an ileorectal anastamosis. This issue should be included as part of the discussion of surgical options with women with FAP [Olsen et al 2003].
Smoking is contraindicated; however, the limited life span of affected individuals makes this recommendation mostly theoretic.
Symptoms tend to be worse in hot or humid weather; patients should try to avoid being outdoors in such conditions as much as possible.

Other situations that can exacerbate disease manifestations include a full bladder; frequent visits to the lavatory are recommended [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Since long car rides, coming out of a movie theater, or fatigue can also worsen symptoms, such situations should be avoided to the extent that this is possible [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Episodic hypertension can occur in response to emotional stress or visceral pain, and therefore patients should also try to avoid these [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007].

Environmental situations associated with hypobaric hypoxia (e.g., aircraft flight or ascent to high altitude) pose a potential risk to patients with daytime hypercapnia [Palma et al 2014].
In general, vasoconstricting agents should be avoided because of the risk of stroke.

Cerebral angiography is hazardous as it may precipitate a severe attack [Chabriat et al 2000].
Cisplatin. One report suggests that cisplatin worsens symptoms of FMF [Toubi et al 2003].

Cyclosporin A appears to adversely affect renal transplant graft survival in individuals with FMF [Shabtai et al 2002]. It has also been reported to trigger FMF attacks, which responded well to colchicine in a previously asymptomatic individual with myelodysplastic syndrome who was heterozygous for the MEFV pathogenic variant p.Met694Ile [Sasaki et al 2009].
Because some individuals with severe skin manifestations may have hypohidrosis (and thus be at increased risk for heat intolerance), care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat.
If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM. Although folic acid is very stable and inexpensive, and is the most common pharmacologic source of folate, it is not a physiologic folate. Folic acid binds very tightly to folate receptors, which transport the physiologic folate, 5-methylTHF, into cells by an endocytic mechanism [Kamen & Smith 2004]. Thus, folic acid may interfere with the interaction between 5-methylTHF and folate receptors required for 5-methylTHF transport across the choroid plexus into the cerebrospinal fluid [Grapp et al 2013, Zhao et al 2017].
Folic acid should be avoided in individuals with poorly controlled seizures [Hagerman 2002].
Alcohol can exacerbate ataxia and should be consumed in moderation. Illicit drugs may well affect neuronal well-being and may exacerbate FRDA and thus should be avoided. Environments that place an ambulant individual at risk for falls (e.g., rough surfaces) should be avoided.

Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with FRDA comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Limited epidemiologic studies suggest that head injury may be a risk factor for FTD in general, although this finding requires confirmation [Rosso et al 2003].
A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in FTD patients treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.
The ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Although there have been no clinical studies, it seems prudent to avoid the use of warfarin if possible because matrix Gla protein (MGP), a potent anti-mineralization factor, needs to be activated by a vitamin K-dependent enzyme, and warfarin interferes with the vitamin K cycle. Warfarin has also been shown to accelerate ectopic mineralization in Abcc6 knockout mice [Li et al 2013].
The following should be avoided:

Breast milk, proprietary infant formulas containing lactose, cow’s milk, dairy products, and casein or whey-containing foods

Lactose- or galactose-containing drug preparations

Medicines that contain lactose (tablets, capsules, sweetened elixirs), especially during infancy
Persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia should be on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, certainly as infants and perhaps for life.

Persons with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia may be placed on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet, either transiently or long-term. Assessment of hemolysate gal-1P and/or urinary galactitol following a galactose challenge (e.g., 2 weeks on a normal diet) may help determine if an individual should remain on a galactose/lactose-restricted diet for longer periods of time.
Individuals with thrombocytopenia should avoid antiplatelet agents including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., ibuprofen).

Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should be advised to avoid contact sports or activities with a high risk of trauma.

Individuals with significant neutropenia should avoid crowds and close contact with persons who have a communicable disease to minimize risk of infection.

Individuals with significant splenomegaly should avoid contact sports, which involve increased risk for traumatic splenic rupture.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia.
Several antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) which are effective for most forms of epilepsy can make seizures due to heterozygous SCN1A pathogenic variants worse:

Carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and vigabatrin, which can induce or increase myoclonic seizures [Horn et al 1986, Guerrini et al 1998, Ceulemans et al 2004a]

Phenytoin, which may worsen seizures and can induce choreoathetosis [Saito et al 2001]

Rufinamide, which has a pharmacologic mechanism similar to carbamazepine and phenytoin and may exacerbate seizures as well

Acetaminophen, which is hepatotoxic in overdose. Given the possibility of interaction with anticonvulsant medications, especially valproate and topiramate [Nicolai et al 2008], acetaminophen should be avoided. Any of the NSAIDs are effective as antipyretics, and represent much lower risk.

Activities in which a sudden loss of consciousness could lead to injury or death should be avoided (e.g., bathing, swimming, driving, or working/playing at heights).
Alpha-2 agonists should be avoided in children in the treatment of elevated IOP because of the risk for apnea and bradycardia.
The following should be avoided:

Barbiturates. Generally, children with infantile-onset seizures are treated with phenobarbital, the most commonly used antiepileptic drug in this age group. In vitro studies indicate that barbiturates aggravate the Glut1 transport defect in erythrocytes of individuals with Glut1-DS [Klepper et al 1999a]. On occasion, parents have reported that phenobarbital did not improve their child’s seizure control or may have worsened their child's clinical condition.

Methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine), which are known to inhibit transport of glucose by Glut1 [Ho et al 2001b], also have been reported to worsen the clinical state of individuals with Glut1-DS [Brockmann et al 2001]. Thus, it is advisable for affected individuals to avoid coffee and other caffeinated beverages.

Valproic acid. The following studies suggest that valproic acid effects in vitro are mixed and the clinical consequences of valproic acid usage in patients with Glut1-DS cannot be predicted.

Valproic acid inhibited Glut1 transport activity in normal and Glut1-deficient erythrocytes by 20%-30%. In primary astrocytes as well as in normal and Glut1-deficient fibroblasts, sodium valproate inhibited glucose transport by 20%-40%, accompanied by an up to 60% down-regulation of GLUT1 mRNA expression [Wong et al 2005].

A study using cultured astrocytes from the Glut1-DS mouse model showed an upregulation of Glut1 activity at lower valproic acid concentrations presumably from the valproic acid associated inhibition of histone deacetylase activity [Kim et al 2013].
Because psychotropic medications have been associated with worsening neurologic disease in adults with Tay-Sachs disease (which is caused by deficiency of the second enzyme in the β-galactosidase pathway) [Shapiro et al 2006], use of these medications in individuals with a GLB1-related disorder should be avoided whenever possible [Shapiro et al 2006].

For persons with MPS IVB, excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the ability to ambulate independently. Thus, it is important that nutrition optimize growth while maintaining a lean habitus.
Carbonated drinks and alcohol consumption may exacerbate hypocalcemia. Caffeine intake may contribute to or worsen anxiety.
Exposure to high temperatures and extended periods in the sun should be avoided because individuals with 22q13.3 deletion have reduced perspiration and tend to overheat easily.
In individuals with epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS), phenytoin, barbiturates and carbamazepine should be avoided as they are rarely effective, may worsen the EEG, and have negative effects on neuropsychological outcomes [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].
Maintain a low-sucrose, low-fructose diet.

Limit galactose and lactose intake to one serving per day.

Due to potential negative effects of sex hormones on hepatic adenomas, combined oral contraception must be avoided in women with GSDI, especially those with adenomas [Sechi et al 2013, Austin et al 2013].
Use of standard drugs for treatment of cardiac manifestations may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease. The use of digoxin, ionotropes, diuretics, and afterload-reducing agents may worsen left ventricular outflow obstruction, although they may be indicated in later stages of the disease.

Hypotension and volume depletion should be avoided.

Exposure to infectious agents is to be avoided.
Avoid the following:

High sugar intake as excess sugar is stored as glycogen, which cannot be broken down

Steroid-based drugs as they interfere with glucose metabolism and utilization. Long-term steroid usage itself can cause muscle weakness.

Growth hormone replacement therapy as it interferes with glucose metabolism, worsens ketosis, and may theoretically cause liver adenomas to grow

Use the following with caution:

Hormonal contraceptives in women as they can cause hepatic adenoma formation

Statins for control of hyperlipidemia. Use of statins requires CK monitoring because of the potential of exacerbating the muscle disease of GSD IIIa.

Beta blockers as they can induce hypoglycemia
Exercises that involve heavy static contractions or induce severe myalgia should be avoided [Quinlivan et al 2011, Lucia et al 2012].

Exercises that should be avoided in patients with GSDV [Lucia et al 2008] are the following:

Static muscle contractions (e.g., handgrip exercises)

Static muscle contractions or heavy loads on low muscle mass (e.g., weightlifting)

Dynamic exercises at a high-intensity level (e.g., competitive ball games)

Exercises with a high involvement of eccentric (lengthening) muscle contractions (e.g., jumps)

Very intense dynamic aerobic exercise (e.g., running, strenuous swimming, or cycling) except in individuals who are very fit and well habituated

General anesthetics. Risk of acute muscle damage is reported with certain general anesthetics (usually muscle relaxants and inhaled anesthetics), although in practice, problems appear to be rare. One report showed hyperthermia, pulmonary edema, and rhabdomyolysis [Lobato et al 1999]; however, GSDV does not appear to cause severe perioperative problems in routine anesthetic care. Nonetheless, measures for preventing muscle ischemia and rhabdomyolysis should be taken in individuals with GSDV [Bollig 2013].

Lipid-lowering drugs. A study in which 136 individuals with myopathy induced by one of the three lipid-lowering drugs atorvastatin, cerivastatin, and simvastatin were tested for the two more frequent PYGM pathogenic variants (p.Arg50Ter, p.Gly205Ser) revealed 20-fold more PYGM heterozygotes than expected for the general population [Vladutiu et al 2006]. These findings provide preliminary evidence that PYGM heterozygotes may be predisposed to statin-induced myopathy; however, because only two pathogenic variants were assessed, some individuals in this study who were presumed to be carriers could actually be compound heterozygotes. Thus, clinicians should be cautious when recommending statins to individuals who have GSDV or are carriers for a PYGM pathogenic variant.
Avoid the following:

Excessive amounts of simple sugars to prevent excessive hepatic glycogen deposition

Glucagon administration as a rescue therapy for hypoglycemia because blood glucose concentrations will not increase

Growth hormone for short stature because it usually exacerbates ketosis and often is not efficacious

When hepatomegaly is present, contact sports (or use appropriate cautions)
Liver PhK deficiency. Affected Individuals with should avoid the following:

Large amounts of simple sugars as they will increase liver storage of glycogen.

Prolonged fasting

High impact contact sports if significant (moderate to massive) hepatomegaly is present. The final decision is based on clinician judgment.

Drugs known to cause hypoglycemia such as insulin and insulin secretagogues (the sulfonylureas); though there are no reports in the literature of drugs precipitating hypoglycemia in children with liver PhK deficiency

Alcohol, as this may predispose to hypoglycemia.

Hypoglycemic events in adults with liver PhK deficiency are relatively uncommon; however, caution should be used with drugs causing potential hypoglycemia, particularly in persons with impaired liver function.

Muscle PhK deficiency. Affected individuals should avoid the following:

Vigorous exercise

Medications that can cause rhabdomyolysis (e.g., succinylcholine)
Avoid the following:

Extreme caloric deprivation (i.e., total fasting, gastric bypass surgery)

Female reproductive hormones. Birth-control pills are risky and not recommended. For recommendations regarding contraception, see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Selection of appropriate contraception for females.

Medications. Some drugs are clearly unsafe for CPOX heterozygotes. It is important to note, however, that many drugs are safe, lest providers regard individuals with acute porphyria as “untreatable.” Compilations of safe and unsafe drugs are available online and are updated as new information becomes available. See www.porphyriafoundation.com and www.porphyria-europe.com.

In theory, the most dangerous medications are inducers of CYPs, such as barbiturates and the related compound, phenytoin.
Any agents that increase ataxia should be used with caution.

Individuals with HDL2, like others with neurodegenerative disorders, are vulnerable to delirium from medical illnesses and medicines, especially polypharmacy.
The following should be avoided:

Use of first-generation neuroleptics, which increase seizure risk and risk of additional parkinsonian signs

Treatment agents for multiple sclerosis, as these medications are of no benefit and have major side effects
Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is excluded; or, if present, the infant should be treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin, should be avoided unless there is strong medical indication, such as in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Avoid the following:

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury
The following should be avoided:

Circumcision of infant males with a family history of hemophilia B unless hemophilia B is excluded; OR if circumcision is performed on an infant with hemophilia B, the infant should be treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin unless there is strong medical indication (e.g., in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease). Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Older, intermediate purity plasma-derived “prothrombin complex” concentrates should be used cautiously (if at all) in hemophilia B because of their thrombogenic potential.
Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron, mineral supplements, excess vitamin C, and uncooked seafood

Alcohol consumption in those with hepatic involvement
Persons of all ages should avoid exposure to sunlight.

Older individuals should avoid the known precipitating factors (e.g., alcohol, oral estrogen, smoking, and drugs that induce the cytochrome P450s).
The following agents/illnesses known to accelerate hepatic fibrosis could have the same effect in CHF and should be avoided or aggressively managed:

Alcohol

Obesity

Diabetes mellitus

Malnutrition

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Immunosuppression (e.g., after renal transplantation)

Hepatotoxic medicines should be avoided.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in those with varices because of the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and poor clotting as a result of impaired platelet function.

Behavior that could increase the risk of viral hepatitis should be avoided.

Contact sports, or activities that are likely to result in splenic injury, are to be avoided once the spleen is significantly enlarged.
Great care should be taken to avoid enteral or parenteral exposure to fructose, sorbitol, sucrose, sucralose, and polysorbate as administration of these substances to individuals with HFI can be fatal.

The following resources can be valuable in determining medical and dietary safety.

Dietary guidance –including prohibited foods- is outlined in Table 3.

An extensive list of tolerated and non-tolerated sugars in HFI can be found online, a site curated by the Boston University HFI laboratory.

Although there is no single consolidated list of medications that contain these or related sugars, an advanced search on www.medicines.org.uk using the search term “fructose OR sorbitol OR sucrose OR sucralose” yielded 1776 results. Many such medications are oral suspensions or chewable flavored tabs designed for pediatric use. Also listed were injectable medications like immunoglobulin solutions (e.g., trastuzumab, filgrastim, some intravenous immunoglobulin solutions), vaccines (e.g., certain influenza, meningococcal), and iron supplements, as well as enema solutions and rinsing aids. For many preparations, it may not be apparent that fructose or similar compounds are present.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should clear use of medications on a case-by-case basis. Of particular note, a 24% sucrose solution (routinely administered to hospitalized neonates for minor procedures) should

not be given to neonates known to have HFI.

The fructose tolerance testing (‘fructose challenge’) to diagnose HFI can be hazardous and should not be used.
Avoid the following:

Excessive sun exposure, which may exacerbate the rash

Exposure to heat because of heat intolerance secondary to hypohidrosis
Children should avoid being in the midst of large crowds with much taller and larger peers because of the increased risk of injury. Physical activity should be self-limited.
Avoid the following:

Excess dietary protein intake

Non-prescribed protein supplements such as those used to increase size of skeletal muscle during exercise regimens

Prolonged fasting during an illness or weight loss

Use of intravenous steroids

Valproic acid, which exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle disorders

Exposure to communicable diseases
Individuals with significant epistaxis are advised to avoid vigorous nose blowing, lifting of heavy objects, straining during bowel movements, and finger manipulation in the nose. Some individuals with HHT experience increased epistaxis after drinking alcohol.

Most otolaryngologists with experience treating individuals with HHT advise against electric and chemical cautery and transcatheter embolotherapy for treatment of recurrent nosebleeds in most situations.

Anticoagulants including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen that interfere with normal clotting should be avoided unless required for treatment of other medical conditions. In one study, lower dose agents, particularly anti-platelet agents, were not associated with hemorrhage in a high proportion of affected individuals. The findings support the use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents, with caution, if there is a very strong indication for their use [Devlin et al 2013].

Scuba diving should be avoided unless contrast echocardiography performed within the last five years was negative for evidence of a right to left shunt.

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].
Prolonged fasting of any sort should be avoided. Emergency treatment options for hypoglycemia must be available at all times in case of an unexpected hypoglycemic episode.
The following should be avoided:

Live vaccinations

Exposure to infections
Foods very high in manganese (cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame and sunflower seeds) should be avoided.
Although immunizations have been known to precede and possibly trigger attacks, it is still recommended that they be given on the usual recommended schedule because the risk of immunization precipitating an attack is probably low [based on expert opinion].

Patients with persistent weakness and especially scapular instability should be cautioned to avoid overexerting the affected limb.
Cigarette smoking increases the risk for colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome [Watson et al 2004, Pande et al 2010].
Risk factors for pressure palsies (and thus activities to avoid) include prolonged sitting with legs crossed, occupations requiring repetitive movements of the wrist, prolonged leaning on elbows, and rapid weight loss [Cruz-Martinez et al 2000, Marriott et al 2002].

Vincristine, commonly used in the chemotherapy of lymphoma, has been reported to exacerbate HNPP [Kalfakis et al 2002].
Oral contraceptives, which may tend to increase coagulability and represent risk for thromboembolism, should be avoided in females with homocystinuria.

Surgery should also be avoided if possible because the increase in plasma homocysteine concentrations during surgery and especially post-surgery elevates the risk for a thromboembolic event. If surgery is required, intravenous fluids containing 5% dextrose in 0.5 N saline at 1.5 times maintenance should be administered before, during, and after surgery until fluids can be taken orally. If fluids at 1.5 times maintenance represent a cardiovascular risk as a result of fluid overload, basic fluid maintenance may be administered with careful clinical observation.
Biphosphonates are relatively contraindicated in hypophosphatasia. Although adverse outcomes have not been identified in children with the severe infantile type [Deeb et al 2000], theoretic concern has long been raised based on the structure of bisphosphonates. The phosphate motifs in bisphosphonates have a similar conformation to inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), the natural substrate of TNSALP; thus, treatment with bisphosphonates is thought to be analogous to "adding fuel to the fire." In adults with hypophosphatasia and osteomalacia treated with bisphosphonates, lateral subtrochanteric femoral pseudofractures have been described [Whyte 2009]. As the prevalence of adult hypophosphatasia is not known and many undiagnosed adult patients undoubtedly are treated with bisphosphonates, the frequency of this unusual complication is not known.

Excess vitamin D can exacerbate hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria in children with infantile hypophosphatasia who have hypercalcemia.

Teriparatide (recombinant human parathyroid hormone fragment, amino acids 1-34) at high doses induces osteosarcoma in rats, and may increase the risk of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (a pediatric growth plate tumor) in humans. It is contraindicated in children with hypophosphatasia.
Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and/or pulmonary hypertension. People with such disorders require individual assessment by a cardiologist.
Factors such as the following can trigger paralytic attacks and thus should be avoided when possible:

Unusually strenuous effort

Excess of carbohydrate-rich meals

Sweets

Alcohol

Prolonged immobility

Oral or intravenous corticosteroids, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be used with care in individuals with HOKPP

Glucose infusionm, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be replaced by another type of infusion
Bleeding. All aspirin-containing products as well as activities that could involve the risk of a bleeding episode should be avoided.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Cigarette smoking decreases pulmonary function and may worsen progression of pulmonary fibrosis.
The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Radiation exposure

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck, which increases the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma
Avoid ill-fitting shoes or other sources of trauma to the feet or hands (e.g., use protective gloves when handling hot items when cooking).
Avoid the following:

Hot or cold environments; hot or cold foods; hot showers or baths

Jumping or high-impact activities and sports
Opiates are contraindicated as this is a chronic disorder.
Exposure to medications or chemicals that cause neuropathy should be avoided if possible.
L-dopa-containing compounds may increase chorea.

Alcohol and smoking are discouraged.
Discontinue cyclosporine or tacrolimus when aHUS develops following challenge with the medication.

Fresh frozen plasma should be avoided (i.e., plasma therapy is contraindicated) in persons with aHUS induced by Streptococcus pneumoniae because plasma from an adult contains antibodies against the Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, which may exacerbate the disease. It is preferable to transfuse washed red blood cells or platelets. There is no evidence that plasmapheresis is of value [Copelovitch & Kaplan 2008].

Avoid potential precipitants of aHUS, including the following known triggers of aHUS:

Pregnancy

Medications. Some chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., mitomycin C, cisplatin, daunorubimicin, cytosine arabinoside), immunotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporin and tacrolimus), antiplatelet agents (e.g., ticlopidine and clopidogrel), oral contraceptives, and anti-inflammatory agents
Affected individuals are advised to use moderation in all physical activities. Physical activity guidelines have been established to detail reasonable exercise restrictions for people with familial HCM [Maron et al 2004, Gersh et al 2011]:

Avoid competitive endurance training and participation in recreational activities that require an intensity level similar to competitive athletics.

Avoid burst activities, like sprinting, as well as intense isometric exercise, such as heavy weight lifting.

Avoid exercise in extreme environmental conditions and maintain adequate hydration.

To avoid exacerbation of obstructive physiology and worsening of symptoms, patients with outflow tract obstruction should be particularly careful in alcohol consumption; use Jacuzzis, steam rooms, saunas with caution; and avoid the following:

Dehydration/hypovolemia (therefore, diuretics must be used with caution)

Medications that decrease afterload (e.g., ACE inhibitors; angiotensin receptor blockers and other direct vasodilators including dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers)

Medications for erectile dysfunction (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil)

Cautious use of stimulant medications may be considered in children diagnosed with HCM only after other treatment methods have been explored. Children with HCM undergoing treatment with stimulants should be carefully monitored by a pediatric cardiologist [Vetter et al 2008].
The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) should be avoided, especially in persons who are dehydrated. The use of NSAIDs in a febrile child with ADTKD-REN precipitated acute renal failure [Bleyer et al 2010b]. The use of other analgesics/antipyretics should be considered.

It would appear that the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor may not be beneficial in the treatment of chronic kidney failure and could aggravate the underlying relative renin deficit.

Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Exertion under extreme conditions (e.g., physical exertion when it is hot) should be avoided.
See Prevention of Primary Manifestations and Prevention of Secondary Complications.
The following should be avoided:

Smoking

High intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fat

Excessive intake of cholesterol

Sedentary lifestyle

Obesity

Hypertension

Diabetes mellitus
It may be prudent to use medications/drugs with potential myotoxicity (for example: colchicine) with caution.
Individuals and their families should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modification in the home and at work.
Avoid individuals who are ill with an infectious disease and adhere to strict precautions regarding hand washing.

Only one episode of ANE following an immunization has been reported: cellular pertussis was given to a child age six months representing a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) in whom RANBP2 molecular genetic testing was not performed [Aydin et al 2010]. Because the likely causative component was the cellular pertussis, the acellular DTaP is preferred.

In mice, intranasal inoculation of certain influenza subtypes can result in CNS invasion [Shinya et al 2000]. Although this is unlikely with the live attenuated influenza virus, it may be preferable to choose an injectable form instead.
Immune activation, for example by immunizations or severe infections, has been reported to cause worsening or exacerbation of disease symptoms [Powell et al 1982]. This does not indicate an absolute contraindication for vaccination in IPEX syndrome but does suggest that there may be benefit to giving vaccines individually instead of combining several vaccines on a single day.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol consumption, which has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage in individuals with liver damage

Iron-containing preparations and supplemental vitamin C

Handling or eating uncooked shellfish or marine fish, because of susceptibility to fatal septicemia from the marine bacterium V vulnificus
The following should be avoided:

Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes; see www.crediblemeds.org for a complete and updated list (registration required).

Triggers for intense or sudden emotion; activities that are known to precipitate syncopal events in individuals with long QT syndrome, including:

Competitive sports

Amusement park rides

Frightening movies

Jumping into cold water

A cardiologist should make recommendations for activity restrictions based on the effectiveness of medical intervention.
Individuals with renal impairment should avoid nephrotoxic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Individuals with liver impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medications.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.
Individuals with a tendency to fall should avoid slippery or rough walking surfaces.
Avoid sun exposure by using SFP>30 and sun-protective clothing.
Medications to avoid:

Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria, including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors

Dichloroacetate (DCA) as a lactate-lowering agent, as DCA has been proven to cause peripheral neuropathy [Kaufmann et al 2006]
Because disease manifestations may be exacerbated with fever and infection, care should be taken to avoid whenever possible exposure to those with infections.
As in other forms of progressive myoclonus epilepsies, the use of phenytoin should be avoided.

Anecdotal reports describe possible exacerbation of myoclonus with the following:

Carbamazepine [Nanba & Maegaki 1999]

Oxcarbazepine [Kaddurah & Holmes 2006]

Lamotrigine [Cerminara et al 2004, Crespel et al 2005]
Those with thrombocytopenia should avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Melegh & Trombitas 1997, Anderson et al 2002].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the PDH complex.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006].

A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk for peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.In those with residual vision, dilating drops and medications that may dilate the pupils (i.e., antihistamines, decongestants, tricyclic antidepressants) should be used in consultation with an ophthalmologist because of the narrow anterior chamber and risk for angle closure glaucoma.
For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, treatment with growth hormone must be undertaken with great caution, if at all, to avoid exacerbating a cardiac condition.
In a number of leukodystrophies anecdotal evidence suggests episodic worsening of manifestations with mild head injuries and infection. While this has been clearly documented only for childhood ataxia with central nervous system hypomyelination/vanishing white matter, it appears prudent to avoid these triggers when possible.
Weight should be controlled to avoid obesity.
Strenuous and eccentric muscle exercise should be discouraged as it exacerbates muscle necrosis and could precipitate the onset of weakness or accelerate muscle wasting. Although individuals with minimal muscle weakness and functional limitation may be able to perform strenuous exercise, in some cases this may result in rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria [Lahoria & Milone 2016] which may lead to severe complications such as acute renal failure and compartment syndrome.

Body weight should be controlled to avoid obesity as well as excessive weight loss (atrophy of muscles can be accelerated by loss of muscle proteins).

Physical trauma, bone fractures, and prolonged immobility can induce disuse atrophy and thus should be avoided.

Although no association of the disease with malignant hyperthermia is reported, the use of succinylcholine and halogenated anesthetic agents should be avoided when possible (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

While the specific mechanism whereby cholesterol-lowering agents (e.g., statins) may produce muscle damage causing pain or weakness is unknown, such drugs should be avoided when possible.
Individuals harboring established LHON-causing mtDNA variants should be strongly advised not to smoke and to moderate their alcohol intake, avoiding binge-drinking episodes. Although based largely on anecdotal evidence, avoidance of other environmental factors that have been implicated in precipitating visual loss in LHON (e.g., head trauma, industrial toxins, drugs with mitochondrial toxic effects) would seem reasonable.
Skin irritants and overheating should be avoided.
There is some evidence that TP53 pathogenic variants confer an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation [Hisada et al 1998, Varley 2003, Wang et al 2003, Cohen et al 2005]. Thus, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants should avoid or minimize exposure to diagnostic and therapeutic radiation whenever possible [Varley 2003, Evans et al 2006]. Radiation-induced second malignancies have been reported among individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants [Hisada et al 1998, Limacher et al 2001, Cohen et al 2005]. Detailed studies to more formally assess this risk are in development.

Individuals with LFS are also encouraged to avoid or minimize exposures to known or suspected carcinogens, including sun exposure, tobacco use, occupational exposures, and excessive alcohol use, because the effects of carcinogenic exposures and germline TP53 pathogenic variants may be cumulative. For example, individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who smoke cigarettes have been shown to be at significantly increased risk of developing lung cancer than individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who do not smoke [Hwang et al 2003].
Probenecid and other uricosuric drugs designed to reduce the serum concentration of uric acid are contraindicated because they augment the delivery of uric acid into the urinary system and raise the risk for acute anuria from deposition of uric acid crystals in the renal collecting system.

Periods of relative dehydration are to be avoided because they could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system and increase the risk for renal stones or urate nephropathy with resulting oliguria/anuria.
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise

Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against a resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)
Corneal contact lenses. Because of the associated risks of corneal keloid formation and the inherent difficulties that the person with Lowe syndrome has in managing personal contact lens care, conventional eye glasses seem safer than corneal contact lenses.

Artificial lens implants. Although some infants have had primary intraocular lens implantation at the time of cataract surgery, the associated risk of glaucoma appears higher in those infants with artificial lens implants. Therefore, artificial lens implants should be used with extreme caution, with intraocular pressure carefully monitored (under anesthesia if required) on a continual basis.
Large boluses of protein or amino acids should be avoided.

It is not clear whether prolonged fasting may trigger hyperammonemic crises.
Avoidance of agents known to increase endogenous triglyceride concentration such as alcohol, oral estrogens, diuretics, isotretinoin, glucocorticoids, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and beta-adrenergic blocking agents is recommended.

Fish oil supplements are contraindicated as they contribute to chylomicron levels.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism in LRRK2-related PD, as in PD in general.
Avoid the following:

Positive pressure ventilation unless needed to treat life-threatening conditions

Isometric exercise and contact sports or activities that increase the risk for blunt abdominal trauma and/or joint injury or pain

People with respiratory infections

Sunbathing or tanning in order to preserve any residual skin elasticity

Smoking, which can result in rapid, severe loss of lung function in persons with LTBP4-related cutis laxa
If Madelung deformity is associated with discomfort, physical activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and sports that strain the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought [Fagg 1988].
Individuals with any degree of hearing loss. Avoid exposure to ototoxic drugs.

Individuals with cervical spine anomalies. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

Individuals with a single kidney. Follow guidelines outlined by the appropriate subspecialists (which likely include avoiding high-impact contact sports).

For subsequent pregnancies of a woman who has had a child with CFM

Avoid vasoactive medications (pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, ibuprofen, and aspirin);

Manage diabetes mellitus to maintain good control and avoid hyperglycemia.
Prolonged bed rest should be avoided because it can result in joint contractures and disuse atrophy.
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise. Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation.

Activities that cause joint injury or pain

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants. Caffeine can aggravate a tendency for arrhythmia.

Agents that cause vasoconstriction, including triptans

LASIK correction of visual deficits

For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)
Hypoglycemia must be avoided by frequent feedings to avoid catabolism, if necessary by intravenous administration of glucose.

Infant formulas containing medium-chain triglycerides as the primary source of fat are contraindicated in MCAD deficiency.

Alcohol consumption, in particular acute alcohol intoxication (e.g., binge drinking), often elicits a metabolic decompensation in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Lang 2009].
Contact sports and other high-risk activities should be avoided in patients with significant skeletal involvement.

Prophylactic optic nerve decompression increases vision loss in patients with craniofacial FD and is contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Amit et al 2011].

Surgical removal of ovarian cysts should be performed with caution and only in limited circumstances.

Radiation therapy is not indicated for treatment of FD, and radiation exposure to FD lesions should be limited due to potential risk for malignant transformation [Ruggieri et al 1994].

While a strong association between gsp mutations (i.e., activating GNAS mutations at residues Arg201 and Gln227) and malignancies in FD/MAS is lacking, it is prudent to minimize additional risk factors (e.g., radiation exposure) and encourage vigilance and monitoring.
Avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially when dehydrated, as NSAIDs can further impair kidney function in individuals with CKD. Avoid all nephrotoxic drugs or use with caution depending on the clinical indication.
Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout.

High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout.

Drugs known to be nephrotoxic should be avoided. NSAIDs are appropriate for short-term administration for treatment of gout or similar painful conditions. However, patients should avoid chronic daily use.
Blood transfusions with Kx antigens should be avoided in males and females with the McLeod blood group phenotype. Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Treatment with neuroleptics, in particular clozapine, should be carefully monitored.
Avoid the following:

Succinylcholine in induction of anesthesia because of risk of hyperkalemia and cardiac conduction abnormalities

Statin, cholesterol lowering medication, because of the risk of muscle damage
About 10% of the individuals with the 15q13.3 microdeletion develop schizophrenia. The use of cannabis has been reported as a risk factor for development of schizophrenia. Although no studies have been performed on the possible additional risk of the use of cannabis by persons with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, discouraging the use of cannabis may be considered.
Individuals with HNF1B-associated renal disease, including the 17q12 recurrent deletion, who develop ESRD and require renal transplantation are at increased risk for developing new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT); therefore, use of an immunosuppressive regimen that avoids tacrolimus and reduces corticosteroid exposure may be beneficial for those who do not have preexisting diabetes [Zuber et al 2009, Faguer et al 2011, Clissold et al 2015].
As all individuals to date have had involvement of PTCH1 resulting in Gorlin syndrome, affected individuals are at increased risk for malignant tumor formation with ionizing and ultraviolet radiation exposure, and for spontaneous development of basal cell carcinomas both from the numerous existing basal cell nevi and in apparently unaffected skin (see Gorlin Syndrome). Radiographs and computed tomography should be used sparingly, and the benefit versus risk to the individual’s health should be carefully considered.

Liberal use of topical sunblock and avoidance of excessive exposure to sunlight are warranted.
Avoid the following:

Phenytoin [Eldridge et al 1983]

Carbamezapine, oxycarbazepine [National Organization for Rare Disorders 1990]
Medications known to impair mitochondrial function (e.g., valproic acid) should be avoided.
Individuals with MELAS should avoid mitochondrial toxins such as: aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures [Lin & Thajeb 2007].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Anecdotal reports of effectiveness have not been substantiated by a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, which in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves and concluded that individuals with MELAS (who are already at increased risk for peripheral neuropathies) should avoid DCA [Kaufmann et al 2006a].
Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide and veralipride) and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (β-blockers) have a high potential to cause an adverse reaction in individuals with pheochromocytoma.

Other medications including monoamine oxidase inhibitors, sympathomimetics (e.g., ephedrine), and certain peptide and corticosteroid hormones may also cause complications; tricyclic antidepressants are inconsistent in causing adverse reactions [Eisenhofer et al 2007].
Individuals with MERRF should avoid mitochondrial toxins including aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, cigarettes, and alcohol. Valproic acid should be avoided in the treatment of seizures.
The following should be avoided:

Tobacco and alcohol use

Medications known to impair mitochondrial function
Individuals who are MH susceptible should avoid potent inhalation anesthetics and succinylcholine.

Calcium channel blockers should not be given together with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result.

Serotonin antagonist (5HT3-anatagonist) antiemetics should be used cautiously, as sudden death has been reported in a child with multiminicore disease caused by a pathogenic variant in RYR1 (p.Arg3983His) after receiving a therapeutic dose of ondansetron [Gener et al 2010].

Individuals with MH are generally advised to avoid extremes of heat but not to restrict athletic activity or lifestyle unless they have experienced overt rhabdomyolysis or heat stroke.

In individuals with MH undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, aggressive rewarming should be avoided, as it may be associated with development of clinical signs of MH [Metterlein et al 2011b].
Valproic acid. One individual with MIC-CAP syndrome died from complications of pancreatitis after starting valproic acid for seizures [Carter et al 2011]. However, several other individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome have been treated with valproic acid without adverse effects. Therefore, it is unclear whether or not an association exists between MIC-CAP syndrome and adverse outcomes with valproic acid therapy. The benefits of use of valproic acid for seizure management in some patients may outweigh the potential risk for serious complications.
The following should be avoided:

Wounds to the swollen limbs, because of their reduced resistance to infection

Long periods of immobility with the legs in a dependent position (e.g., on a long airplane flight)

Medications, particularly calcium channel-blocking drugs, that can cause increased leg swelling in some individuals
Complex bimanual movements or sustained/repetitive hand activity should be limited in order to reduce the occurrence of pain or discomfort in the upper limbs.
Control weight to avoid obesity; avoid use of steroids [Walter et al 2013].
In the newborn with severe HMC, care with anesthesia in the neonatal period is appropriate, as HMC can cause diaphragmatic compression.
Vigorous stretching exercises are not recommended because they are ineffective, painful, and may damage the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons.
Chloroquine may be contraindicated, based on published research in patient cultured skin fibroblasts [Goldin et al 1999].
Minor head trauma may lead to temporary motor deterioration or (rarely) to coma. For this reason contact sports and other activities with a high risk of head trauma should be avoided.
While environmental factors are thought to influence the onset and severity of MLD symptoms, no specific exacerbating agents are known. Initial symptoms are often noted following a febrile illness or other stress, but it is unclear if a high fever actually accelerates progression.

Excessive alcohol and drug use are often associated with later-onset MLD, but it is unclear if this is caused by the disease or is simply an attempt at self-medication in the face of increasing cognitive difficulties [Alvarez-Leal et al 2001].

Exacerbation of symptoms has been noted following anesthesia because affected individuals may have altered responses to sedatives and anesthetics [Mattioli et al 2007, Birkholz et al 2009, Cappuccio et al 2013].
The following should be avoided:

Fasting. During acute illness, intake of adequate calories is necessary to arrest/prevent decompensation.

Stress

Increased dietary protein

Supplementation with the individual propiogenic amino acids valine and isoleucine, as they directly increase the toxic metabolite load in patients with disordered propionate oxidation [Nyhan et al 1973, Hauser et al 2011, Manoli et al 2016b]
Risk for malignant hyperthermia. Depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine) and inhalational agents (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, desflurane) can cause malignant hyperthermia and therefore need to be avoided during surgical procedures/childbirth, as RYR1 pathogenic variants are associated with both malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and MmD.
Avoid drugs that interfere with mitochondrial function; these include valproate, phenytoin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, and certain antipsychotic medications [Shoffner 2008].

Medications primarily metabolized in the liver should be used with caution [Finkenstedt et al 2013].
Avoid physical trauma to reduce the risk of fractures.
Because excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the duration of independent ambulation, it is important to optimize nutrition for growth while maintaining a lean habitus.

Due to small ventricular diameter and stroke volume, beta blockers should be avoided in the treatment of tachycardia.
Prolonged fasting can lead to hypoglycemia and should be avoided.
The risk of penetrating injury to the brain is small but may cause anxiety. Education of parents, teachers, and the affected child to avoid risky behaviors suffices in most circumstances.

Contact sports should be avoided if a midline bony defect persists.
Aminoglycosides and noise exposure should be avoided, particularly in individuals with normal hearing who have the m.1555A>G

MT-RNR1 pathogenic variant.
Bleeding tendency

Agents. Drugs that inhibit platelet function or blood coagulation:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially aspirin, which are strong inhibitors of platelet aggregation

Other substances that interfere with platelet function including some antibiotics; cardiovascular, psychotropic, and oncologic drugs; drugs that affect platelet cAMP; some anesthetics; antihistamines; and radiographic contrast agentsNote: (1) Drugs that impair platelet function should be prescribed only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits. (2) Physicians should try to avoid prescribing any other drugs that increase the risk of bleeding in individuals with MYH9RD. (3) Individuals with MYH9RD can develop thromboembolic events [Girolami et al 2011]. The use of antithrombotic agents (such as heparin) must be carefully balanced against the risks according to the overall clinical picture of each affected individual.

Circumstances. In individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, avoidance of activities at high risk of trauma (e.g., contact sports)

Hearing loss

Agents. Ototoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicylates in large quantities, loop diuretics, some drugs used in chemotherapy regimens). These should be used only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits.

Circumstances. Exposure to hazardous noise. If noise exposure cannot be avoided, use ear devices (e.g., earplugs, headphones) to attenuate intense sound.

Nephropathy

Agents that can damage renal function, including radiocontrast, antibiotics, NSAIDs, diuretics, and oncologic drugs. The balance between benefit and risk of such agents should be carefully considered, especially in individuals with established kidney involvement or with MYH9 pathogenic variants associated with high risk for kidney damage.

Cataract

Agents. Glucocorticoids and radiation therapy, which predispose to development of cataracts

Elevation of liver enzymes

Agents. In affected individuals with liver enzyme elevation, assessment of risks versus benefits before use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs
Patients should be aggressively counseled not to smoke.

Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive concept in this disorder to communicate to all health care providers involved in their care (see Prevention of Secondary Findings).
Avoid sustained fatiguing physical exertion.
In general, anesthesia should be used with caution [Bandschapp & Laizzo 2013]. Particular care must be taken with the use of depolarizing muscle relaxants during anesthesia because they may cause adverse anesthesia-related events. Because life-threatening muscle spasms and secondary ventilation difficulties occurred following a preoperative injection of suxamethonium, Farbu et al [2003] recommended that suxamethonium be avoided in individuals with myotonia congenita.

Note: Non-depolarizing muscle relaxants appear to act normally in individuals with myotonia congenita but do not counteract a myotonic response caused by suxamethonium [Farbu et al 2003].

In rare cases, injections of adrenaline or selective beta-adrenergic agonists in high doses may aggravate myotonia.

The beta-antagonist propranolol has likewise been reported to worsen myotonia [Blessing & Walsh 1977]. Accordingly, beta-agonists and beta-antagonists should be used with caution and particular care should be taken with the use of intravenous fenoterol or ritodrine.

Colchicine may cause a myopathy with myotonia in individuals with renal insufficiency [Rutkove et al 1996] and may thus also, in theory, aggravate the myotonia of individuals with myotonia congenita.
Statins used to lower cholesterol may sometimes cause muscle pain and weakness.

Mathieu et al [1997] noted that “[n]umerous cases of perioperative complications in patients with DM have been reported. Hazards have been associated with the use of thiopentone, suxamethonium, neostigmine, and halothane. A retrospective study of perioperative complications was conducted for 219 patients who had their first surgery under general anesthesia at the Chicoutimi Hospital. The overall frequency of complications was 8.2% (18 of 219). Most complications (16 of 18) were pulmonary, including five patients with acute ventilatory failure necessitating ventilatory support, four patients with atelectasis, and three patients with pneumonia. Using multivariate analysis, [the authors] found that the risk of perioperative pulmonary complications (PPC) was significantly higher after an upper abdominal surgery and for patients with a severe muscular disability, as assessed by the presence of proximal limb weakness. The likelihood of PPC was not related to any specific anesthetic drug. Because of the increased risk of PPC, careful monitoring during the early postoperative period, protection of the upper airways, chest physiotherapy, and incentive spirometry are mandatory in all symptomatic patients with DM, particularly those with a severe muscular disability or those who have undergone an upper abdominal surgery.”

Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed appropriate anesthetic care for patients with DM1 and DM2.

Malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia including the use of vecuronium [Nishi et al 2004] has been reported in DM1 but is very uncommon [Kirzinger et al 2010]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Aggressive doxorunbicin-based chemotherapy for lymphoma in a person with DM1 produced sudden atrial fibrillations [Montella et al 2005].
Increased weakness has been associated with the use of certain cholesterol-lowering medications. In these cases, some strength can return if statin-type cholesterol-lowering medications are eliminated.

Note: Not all individuals with DM2 have an adverse response to statin medications, and thus diagnosis of DM2 is not an absolute contraindication to use of these drugs.
Chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided because of their detrimental effect on kidney function.
Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Anderson et al 2002].

Anesthesia can potentially aggravate respiratory symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure, so careful consideration should be given to its use and to monitoring of the individual prior to, during, and after anesthetic procedures [Parikh et al 2015].

Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.

Anecdotal reports have suggested that DCA may cause some short-term clinical improvement in mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome [Fujii et al 2002].

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006].

A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome or NARP to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk of peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.
Carbamazepine (CZP) and phenytoin may increase seizure activity and myoclonus in NCL and result in clinical deterioration.

Lamotrigine may exacerbate seizures and myoclonus especially in CLN2 disease.

In a series of 60 individuals with JNCL, valproic acid (VPA) was withdrawn in 20% and clonazepam (CZP) in 16% because of side effects [Aberg et al 2000].

Fifty percent of individuals receiving VPA had sleep disturbances or excessive sedation.

CZP stimulates salivation and respiratory secretions, increasing the risk for pneumonia in bedridden individuals, many of whom have gastroesophageal reflux. CZP is a sedative and can cause behavior disturbances.
Water intake must not be restricted.
Malignant hyperthermia is a risk in congenital myopathies such as central core disease and in some muscular dystrophies. NM has not been definitively associated with malignant hyperthermia to date, although bradycardia and slight hyperthermia have been reported during cardiac surgery. It is advisable to avoid neuromuscular blocking agents when possible, especially given the reports of core-rod myopathies linking to genes for ryanodine receptor pathogenic variants [Monnier et al 2000, Scacheri et al 2000].

Prolonged periods of immobilization should be avoided after illness or surgery, as immobility may markedly exacerbate muscle weakness [Ryan et al 2001].
Nephrotoxic agents, e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), aminoglycosides, and radiocontrast studies should be avoided.

Individuals with liver function impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medication.
Iron supplements are not recommended for affected individuals and those at risk. This recommendation is empiric [Chinnery et al 2007] Iron replacement therapy with careful monitoring may be required if affected individuals develop coincidental iron deficiency anemia.
No limitations are necessary for most individuals with NF1. Limitations may be required if certain particular features such as tibial dysplasia or dysplastic scoliosis are present; in these instances the limitation is determined by the feature, not by the presence of NF1 itself.

Radiotherapy of individuals with NF1 appears to be associated with a high risk of developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors within the field of treatment [Evans et al 2002, Sharif et al 2006].
Radiotherapy should be avoided in children with NF2 [Evans et al 2006].
Because the cells from individuals with NBS are as radiosensitive in vitro as those from individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia (another chromosome instability syndrome), conventional doses of radiation used in radiotherapy could be lethal in individuals with NBS. Family members should be made aware of this risk so that they can discuss appropriate treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed.

Similarly, unnecessary exposure to ionizing radiation should be avoided; instead of radiograph or CT scan, MR imaging and ultrasound examination are strongly recommended.
Valproate is contraindicated in glycine encephalopathy as an antiepileptic drug (AED). It raises blood and CSF glycine concentrations and may increase seizure frequency. It has resulted in severe lethargy, coma, severe seizures, and chorea particularly in mildly affected patients [Hall & Ringel 2004; Author, personal observation].
No agents or circumstances are known to trigger or exacerbate NKX2-1-related disorders.
Aspirin therapy should be avoided because it may exacerbate a bleeding diathesis.
Given the increased risk of hearing loss, exposure to loud noises should be avoided.
Individuals who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports.
Drugs that cause excessive salivation or that may exacerbate seizures directly by interacting with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided.

Alcohol as well as many drugs exacerbate ataxia and should be avoided.
Other than the avoidance of prolonged solar exposure because of the enhanced damage to the skin and increasing cumulative risk of cutaneous neoplasms, no special precautions are needed.
Prolonged unprotected sun exposure should be avoided.
Avoid prolonged exposure of the skin to the sun.
Contact sports should be avoided.
Ideally, children with CCHS should not go swimming. If they do, they should be carefully supervised, regardless of the presence or absence of a tracheostomy. Children with CCHS should not compete in underwater swimming contests as they cannot perceive the asphyxia that occurs with drowning and breath-holding and, therefore, are likely to swim longer and farther than children without CCHS, thereby increasing the risk of drowning. Furthermore, breath-holding contests can lead to asphyxia and/or death.

Alcohol (respiratory depression), recreational drugs (varied effects), and prescribed as well as non-prescribed medications/sedatives/anesthetics that could induce respiratory depression should be avoided [Chen et al 2006].
Individuals with an OPA1 pathogenic variant are advised:

Not to smoke;

To moderate their alcohol intake;

To use sunglasses to limit UV exposure;

Note: While limiting UV exposure is a good practice, no evidence for its effectiveness exists.

To avoid medications (antibiotics, antivirals) that interfere with mitochondrial metabolism.
Avoid the following:

Valproate

Haloperidol

Fasting

Stress, especially physical stress; potentially also psychological stress

Systemic corticosteroids because they cause catabolism, which can trigger a hyperammonemic crisis

Note: If systemic corticosteroids need to be administered as a life-saving therapy (e.g., during a severe asthma attack or an anaphylactic reaction), a metabolic specialist should be consulted; at the same time, preemptive measures (e.g., increased calorie intake) should be instituted to prevent catabolism.
The following should be avoided:

Medications that affect coagulation including aspirin, ibuprofen, and some herbal remedies

High-risk activities such as contact sports
Consultation with a specialist in nephrology before using medications known to impact renal function is appropriate.
Penetrance of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes may be increased in those who live in high altitudes or are chronically exposed to hypoxic conditions [Pacheco-Ojeda et al 1988, Astrom et al 2003]. Avoidance of habitation at high altitudes and activities that promote long-term exposure to hypoxia should be considered.

Activities such as cigarette smoking that predispose to chronic lung disease should be discouraged in persons who have a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX.
Avoidance of cow's milk and related products reduces exposure to phytanic acid.
Although hyperthermic episodes have been documented in individuals with PCH2, no special risk appears to be associated with generalized anesthesia.
Some report that higher temperatures and higher humidity worsen the condition.
Cough suppressants should not be used because cough is critical for clearing secretions.

Exposure to respiratory pathogens, tobacco smoke, and other pollutants and irritants that may damage airway mucosa and stimulate mucus secretion should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Fasting

The ketogenic diet, which aggravates life-threatening metabolic acidosis
Overuse of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Secondary Complications) is to be avoided.
Based on anecdotal reports that increased intracranial pressure in individuals with dilation of the vestibular aqueduct (DVA) can trigger a decline in hearing, some physicians recommend avoiding activities like weightlifting and contact sports.
For individuals with hearing loss:

Avoid ototoxic medication such as aminoglycosides if alternatives are available.

Avoid exposure to loud noise, which may contribute to deterioration in hearing.
Use of central respiratory depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, alcohol, narcotics) should be minimized.
Agents that increase risk of glaucoma (e.g., corticosteroids) are to be avoided.
Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for developing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

(IPF) and was shown to be an independent risk factor in families with FPF [Steele et al 2005].
Avoid:

Dehydration;

Any activity that would potentially increase blood viscosity.
Susceptibility to sensorineural hearing loss in ATP8B1 deficiency may argue against use of aminoglycoside antibiotics or other potentially ototoxic agents.
Avoid the following:

Intravascular volume depletion. The importance of maintaining dilute urine cannot be overemphasized.

Foods high in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, and starfruit in particular)

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D, as both may promote stone formation

Loop diuretics to maintain dilute urine, as they can lead to hypercalciuria and increase the production of calcium oxalate stones

One infant with PH1 developed hepatitis after exposure to the anesthetic sevoflurane; this was felt to be an idiosyncratic reaction [Reich et al 2004]
The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Excessive ascorbate (i.e., vitamin C; >1000 mg/day)

Foods rich in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, spinach, and starfruit in particular)
The following should be avoided:

Intravascular volume contraction (Note: Liberal use of intravenous fluids is indicated whenever oral fluid intake is inadequate.)

Delays in treatment of acute stone episodes

Nephrotoxic agents

Marked dietary oxalate excess

High-dose ascorbic acid
Untreated individuals with PHAII should avoid excessive intake of foods high in salt and potassium as these may exacerbate hypertension and hyperkalemia.
As noted in Prevention of Secondary Complications, some stimulants (commonly used for attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders) may exacerbate seizures.
Because of the propensity for rapid tissue regrowth and the propensity to form keloid tissue, it is recommended that cutaneous lesions be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms (e.g., pain, deformity) are significant.
Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.
No agents that increase the risk for polyp development or for cancers have been described.
Anecdotal reports of three sibs with atypical PKAN treated with alpha-tocopherol and idebenone indicated worsening of symptoms, with subsequent improvement once these compounds were stopped [JP Harpey, personal communication].
The following should be avoided:

Long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesics and NSAIDs

Caffeine in large amounts because it interferes with the breakdown of cAMP and hence may promote renal cyst growth

Use of estrogens and possibly progestogens in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease [Alvaro et al 2006, Glaser et al 2008]

Smoking
Aspartame, an artificial sweetener in widespread use, contains phenylalanine. Persons with PKU should either avoid products containing aspartame or calculate intake of Phe and adapt diet components accordingly.
No specific agents or exposures are known to accelerate the long-term disease course.

Elevated body temperature, as with fever, may cause neurologic signs and symptoms to transiently worsen, as occurs in individuals with multiple sclerosis (Uthoff phenomenon).
Alcohol, coffee, tea, excitement, stress, fatigue, and chocolate are all known to precipitate attacks and thus should be avoided.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol

Obesity

Inactive, sedentary lifestyle

Exposure to medications or chemicals that exacerbate neuropathy. See Medications Potentially Toxic to Persons with CMT (or Related) Neuropathy (pdf) for an up-to-date list.
Avoid the following:

Foods that are likely to lead to choking

Medications acting on D2 receptor blockers (e.g., neuroleptics such as haloperidol or risperidone, anti-nauseous medications such as metoclopramide) as these can exacerbate the extrapyramidal features
Avoid the following:

Susceptibility factors (if known) (e.g., iron supplements, alcohol consumption, smoking, oral estrogen use, and hepatotoxins such as hexachlorobenzene)

Exposure to sunlight in symptomatic phase
Precipitating factors that should be avoided include: barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Updated lists are maintained at the Web sites of the American Porphyria Foundation and the European Porphyria Network.

Although birth control pills should generally be avoided, low-dose hormonal preparations may be tolerated.
Individuals with or at risk for PAH should avoid all the following:

Appetite-suppressant medications (e.g., fenfluramine/phentermine, dexfenfluramine, and amfepramone [diethylpropion]), which have been associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) [Abenhaim et al 1996, Abramowicz et al 2003]

Cocaine, amphetamines, and related compounds causing vasoconstriction, which have anecdotal association with PH and could be risk factors

Other medications that have anecdotal suggestion of increased risk of PH, including estrogen compounds used as oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy. Anecdotal reports associating pregnancy with onset of PH raise some concern about the risks involved with pregnancy; however, there is no published consensus regarding the best approach to birth control in women with PAH. Because avoidance of exogenous systemic estrogen is desirable, many experts prefer IUD [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Hypoxia. The hypoxia that accompanies high altitude is associated with pulmonary vasoconstriction and PH in susceptible individuals.
Avoid immobilization (e.g., casting).
There are no known substances that are reported to specifically worsen prion diseases, but as with any dementia, anticholinergics and antihistamines with high anticholinergic potential, should be avoided.
Individuals with prolidase deficiency who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.
Avoid prolonged fasting, catabolic stressors, and excessive protein intake.

Lactated Ringer’s solution is not recommended in patients with organic acidemias.

In patients with QT abnormalities, avoid medications that can prolong the QT interval.

Ondansetron, an antiemetic drug used to control nausea, has been associated with QT interval prolongation on ECG [Tay et al 2014] and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with PA who have cardiomyopathy and QT interval abnormalities.

Neuroleptic antiemetics (e.g., promethazine) can mask symptoms of progressive encephalopathy and are best avoided.
The following should be avoided:

Red and organ meats, shellfish, or oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines) in excess; beer, high-fructose corn syrup-enriched foods and drinks [Choi et al 2004]

Dehydration

If possible, urate-retaining medications: low-dose aspirin, thiazide diuretics
Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels et al 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished]
In the small fraction of individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension should be avoided.
F2 20210G>A heterozygotes:

With a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT; asymptomatic women should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT and should consider alternative forms of contraception and strategies for control of menopausal symptoms.

Who are asymptomatic and elect to use oral contraceptives should avoid formulations with third-generation and other progestins with a higher thrombotic risk;

Who elect short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms should use low-dose transdermal preparations, which have a lower thrombotic risk than oral formulations [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007, Renoux et al 2010].

F2 20210G>A homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen-containing contraception and HRT.
Racquet and contact sports carry an increased risk for ocular and head trauma, both of which have been reported to precipitate retinal hemorrhage in patients with angioid streaks; participation in such activities should be discouraged.

Individuals with PXE who participate in sports and physical recreation should wear appropriate protective eyewear such as polycarbonate sports goggles and/or protective helmets with eye shields.

Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be avoided whenever possible to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
At-risk family members and asymptomatic individuals with an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid alcohol or excessive exercise.

Infections and fever also are common triggers, and although practical prevention strategies are lacking, unnecessary exposure should be avoided. There is no known reason to avoid vaccinations.

RDP. Triggers associated with the abrupt onset of RDP that should be avoided include (but are not limited to) the following:

Alcohol

Fever

Psychological stress

Excessive exercise (such as running track)

AHC. Triggers associated with inducing paroxysmal episodes in AHC [Sweney et al 2009] include the following:

Psychological stress

Emotional excitement

Environmental stressors: bright light (sunlight or fluorescent lighting), excessive heat or cold, or situations associated with excessive sound, crowds

Water exposure in the form of bathing, swimming, shampooing

Certain foods or odors: chocolate, food dyes, missed meals

Excessive or atypically strenuous exercise (e.g., walking farther than usual, use of a playground swing)

Illness

Irregular sleep, missing a nap, delayed bedtime

CAPOS syndrome. Febrile illness can trigger an episode of ataxic encephalopathy and/or weakness.
Although no agents/circumstances resulting in complications of RASA1-related disorders have been reported, a theoretic consideration is avoidance of routine use of anticoagulants unless indicated for treatment of a different medical condition.
Avoid the following:

All food products containing phytanic acid such as ruminant (cow, sheep, and goat) products and certain fish (cod) products. Some nuts should also be avoided [Brown et al 1993].

Fasting because stored lipids, including phytanic acid, are mobilized into the plasma

Ibuprofen because it is metabolized by AMACR and may interfere with the metabolism of phytanic acid

Amiodarone because of the risk that hyperthyroidism would induce enhanced catabolism, with consequent increase of plasma phytanic acid
It has been suggested by Fletcher et al [2004] that cancer risks in survivors of heritable retinoblastoma may be reduced by limiting exposure to DNA-damaging agents (radiotherapy, tobacco, and UV light). It is plausible that cancer risks in these individuals may be reduced by limiting exposure to chemotherapy.
Although retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage occur in a minority of affected individuals (5%-22% and 4%-40%, respectively), general avoidance of head trauma and high-contact sports is recommended.
Because individuals with Rett syndrome have an increased risk of life-threatening arrhythmias associated with a prolonged QT interval, avoidance of drugs known to prolong the QT interval, including the following, is recommended:

Prokinetic agents (e.g., cisapride)

Antipsychotics (e.g., thioridazine), tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine)

Antiarrhythmics (e.g., quinidine, sotolol, amiodarone)

Anesthetic agents (e.g., thiopental, succinylcholine)

Antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, ketoconazole)
Avoid dietary restriction of riboflavin. If not possible to avoid dietary restriction, provide riboflavin supplements.
It is recommended that treatment with unopposed phosphate (without 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D) be avoided as this is felt to increase the risk for hyperparathyroidism.

Although 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D has been used as a single agent, this use is felt to increase the risk for hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis.
No adverse drug effects have been documented in Rotor syndrome; however, the absence of the hepatic proteins OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 may have serious consequences for liver uptake and toxicity of numerous commonly used drugs and/or their metabolites which enter the liver via either of the two OATP1B transporters.

A list of drugs that enter the liver mainly via OATP1B1 and whose pharmacokinetics are known to be influenced by genetic variability in SLCO1B1 has been published [Niemi et al 2011]. Some of these drugs are also taken up by OATP1B3 [Shitara 2011]. The list includes:

Statins – simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, puitavastatin, rosuvastatin, fluvastatin

Ezetimibe

Anticancer drugs - methotrexate and irinotecan

Sartans – olmesartan and valsartan

Rifampicin

Mycophenolic acid

Torsemide

Thiazolidine diones – pioglitazone and rosiglitazone

Glinides – nateglinide and repaglinide

Lopinavir

Fexofenadine
Vitamin E may adversely affect the course of RP; thus, it is recommended that individuals with RP avoid high-dose supplements (e.g., 400 IU/d) [Berson 2000].

Increased exposure to light has been demonstrated to accelerate progression in animal models of retinitis pigmentosa, particularly those with pathogenic variants in the gene encoding rhodopsin [Naash et al 1996, LaVail et al 1999]; thus, avoidance of bright light and use of UV-blocking sunglasses are recommended for all patients with RP.

Smoking has been demonstrated as a strong risk factor for age-related macular degeneration [Seddon et al 1996, Chew et al 2013], and is thought to contribute to retinal damage in retinitis pigmentosa and other inherited retinal degenerations as well; thus, avoidance of smoking is recommended for all patients with RP.

Pregnancy Management

Women of childbearing age need to be cautioned about potential teratogenic effects of high-dose vitamin A palmitate (see Therapies Under Investigation) to the developing fetus. See Clinical Manifestations for further information about possible progression of disease during pregnancy.
Avoid the following:

Valproic acid (commonly used for seizures and known to interfere with beta-oxidation) because it is considered to be a mitochondrial toxin with a theoretic risk of precipitating/exacerbating organ failure

Metformin (used to treat diabetes mellitus) because of the theoretic risk of exacerbating metabolic acidosis

Prolonged use of linezolid (an antibiotic used to treat S. aureus infections) because of the reported association with optic and peripheral neuropathy and lactic acidosis due to mitochondrial toxicity

Zidovudine (an antiretroviral nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase used to treat HIV) because of the reported risk of inducing mitochondrial disease by interfering with mtDNA replication

Dehydration and prolonged fasting, which can lead to clinical deterioration
Exposure to heat or sunlight may exacerbate the rash in some individuals.

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure decreases the risk for skin cancer.
Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes should be avoided for all individuals with LQTS. See CredibleMeds® (free registration required) for a complete and updated list. Epinephrine given as part of local anesthetics can trigger arrhythmias and is best avoided.

Since electrolyte imbalances may also lengthen the QTc interval, identification and correction of electrolyte abnormalities is important. These imbalances can occur as a result of diarrhea, vomiting, metabolic conditions, and imbalanced diets for weight loss.

Lifestyle modifications are advised based on genotype. For individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype avoidance of strenuous exercise – especially swimming without supervision – is advised. In individuals with LQTS type 2 phenotype reduction in exposure to loud noises such as alarm clocks and phone ringing is advised. In individuals at high risk for cardiac events or with exercise-induced symptoms competitive sport should be avoided [Priori et al 2013]. For some individuals participation in competitive sports may be safe. It is therefore recommended that all individuals with LQTS who wish to engage in competitive sports have their risk evaluated by a clinical expert [Johnson & Ackerman 2012, Priori et al 2013].
Ibuprofen (Brufen®):

Give with care in those with evidence of cardiomyopathy. A patient who had reduced LVEF developed edema following its administration [Subahi and Salih, unpublished observation]

Avoid in those with congestive heart failure.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic agents are contraindicated if thrombocytopenia is present and should be used with caution given the fluctuating nature of the cytopenias.

Avoid consuming alcohol and medications that cause sedation, which can increase problems with gait and coordination.
Valproate is contraindicated in patients with IOSCA, as it is in other disorders that potentially affect mitochondrial function in liver. Valproate caused significant elevation of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALAT] 232 units/L [normal: 10-35 U/L] and gamma-GT [GGT] 160 U/L [normal: 5-50 U/L]) and icterus with elevated bilirubin levels (total: 224 µmol/L [normal: 5-25 µmol/L]; conjugated: 160 µmol/L [normal:1-8 µmol/L]) in one patient, and similar elevation of liver transaminases in another. When valproate was discontinued, icterus disappeared and the liver enzymes normalized.
Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to be neurotoxic such as those that cause neuropathy (e.g., isoniazid, large-dose vitamin B6) or those associated with central nervous system toxicity (e.g., diphenylhydantoin). Circumstances that could lead to physical harm, such as operating machinery or climbing to great heights, should be avoided.
Alcohol and drugs known to adversely affect cerebellar functions should be avoided.

Falls should be avoided because resulting injuries may greatly compromise motor function and the ability to perform activities of daily living.

Any activities that are potentially dangerous to individuals with ataxia or epilepsy should be avoided, depending on the severity of the manifestations.
Alcohol and sedating drugs can exacerbate ataxia.
Alcohol and sedation may make gait and coordination worse.
Because individuals with ataxic syndromes in general have abnormal sensitivity to the motor effects of alcohol, it is reasonable to limit alcohol intake to lessen the risk of falls.
Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties, such as ethanol or certain medications, may markedly increase incoordination.
Alcohol and medications known to affect cerebellar function should be avoided.
Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to cause nerve damage (e.g., isoniazid).
Alcohol consumption and sedatives such as benzodiazepines may exacerbate gait ataxia and coordination difficulties.
Avoid the following:

Alcohol, as well as drugs with possible side effects on cerebellar function (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, metronidazole, amiodarone, lithium), or the inner ear (e.g., salicilates)

Environmental noise at work and in everyday life (e.g., listening to loud music or videos directly through headphones)
Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties such as ethanol or certain medications may produce marked increases in incoordination.
Alcohol should be avoided because it can exacerbate problems with incoordination.

Affected individuals should get plenty of rest; symptoms are often aggravated by fatigue.
Fasting longer than 12 hours especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness may predispose an affected individual to dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia. Shorter fasting periods (at least the normal age-appropriate recommendations) should be followed in infants and toddlers.
Exposure to genotoxic anti-cancer drugs such as camptothecins (e.g., irinotecan and topotecan) and bleomycin is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [Hirano et al 2007].

Exposure to radiation is likely to be extremely harmful and possibly fatal [El-Khamisy et al 2007].
Several families of affected individuals report worsening of seizures with levetiracetam (Keppra®) [M Hammer, unpublished data].
Prolonged use of cytokine and hematopoietic growth factors such as G-CSF is cautioned against in view of their potential contribution to leukemic transformation [Rosenberg et al 2006].

Some drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide and busulfan) used in standard HSCT preparative regimens may not be suitable because of possible cardiac toxicity [Mitsui et al 2004, Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007].
The following should be avoided:

In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension

Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints
The following should be avoided:

Contact sports, which may lead to catastrophic complications in those with cardiovascular issues or cervical spine anomalies/instability

Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system, including routine use of decongestants

Activities that cause joint pain or injury
Given the increased risk for insulin resistance in individuals taking growth hormone, it has been suggested that growth hormone be contraindicated in individuals with SHORT syndrome [Thauvin-Robinet et al 2013].
Education for individuals with SCD involves learning how to control one's environment to minimize the chance of exacerbations. Environmental controls include avoiding the following:

Dehydration

Extremes of temperature (e.g., swimming in cold water, which can trigger a pain episode)

Physical exhaustion

Extremely high altitude without oxygen supplementation

Cocaine. While alcohol and illegal drugs are never endorsed, cocaine and its derivatives, with their vasoconstrictive and cardiac stimulation effects, are particularly dangerous drugs in the setting of SCD.

The analgesic meperidine, which should be avoided as first-line therapy because of potential CNS toxicity
Hypertension. Poor blood pressure control can exacerbate or evoke cerebral ischemia. In particular, the hypertension arising from using high-dose steroids for empiric treatment of the nephrotic syndrome can evoke cerebral ischemia.

Heat, stress, and lack of sleep. Individuals with transient neurologic attacks that are not of an ischemic origin have found that heat, stress, and lack of sleep can precipitate the attacks.

Vaccinations with live vaccines. The T-cell deficiency is substantial and there have been serious infections in some individuals. Therefore, vaccination with all live vaccines should be avoided, including rotavirus, MMR, varicella, BCG, oral Salmonella typhi vaccine, and yellow fever virus vaccine.

Anti-cancer therapies. SIOD cells and model organisms are hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents [Bansbach et al 2009, Ciccia et al 2009, Postow et al 2009, Yuan et al 2009, Yusufzai et al 2009, Bansbach et al 2010, Baradaran-Heravi et al 2012b].
The following should be avoided:

Environmental manganese exposure (i.e., contaminated drinking water, occupational manganese exposure in welding/mining industries, contaminated ephedrone preparations)

High manganese content of total parenteral nutrition

Foods very high in manganese, including: cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower seeds
Although dopamine agonists are used as first-line treatment of dystonia in SLC6A3-related DTDS, bromocriptine and pergolide are generally avoided due to increased risk of pulmonary, retroperitoneal, and pericardial fibrosis.

Drugs with anti-dopaminergic side effects (e.g., some antihistamines, sedatives, and dimenhydrinate) may exacerbate the movement disorder.
Treatment with haloperidol, which has a high affinity for the DHCR7 substrate binding site, may exacerbate the biochemical sterol abnormalities in individuals with SLOS and cause an increase in symptoms. It is likely that other drugs in this class will cause the same change in sterol levels [Kelley & Hennekam 2000]. Other psychotropic drugs shown to elevate 7DHC are trazodone and aripiprazole (Abilify®) [Hall et al 2013]. Thus, one must weigh the benefit of such medications against the potential negative side effects. As many individuals with SLOS do require psychotropic medications, close monitoring of clinical signs/symptoms and serum concentration of 7-DHC is recommended.

Photosensitivity can be severe and extended periods of sun exposure should be avoided, as severe sunburn can occur with only limited exposure; however, limited sun exposure is possible for some affected individuals as long as protective clothing is worn and a sunscreen with UVA and UVB properties is used.
In at least one case, a teenage female with SMS was documented to have a serious adverse event taking Strattera® (atomoxetine hydrochloride) with extreme escalation of behaviors and aggression leading to hospitalization. Significant changes in her sleep pattern were also documented. Care should be taken to track sleep parameters and behavior with this medication.
Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.
Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.
Although adverse events with specific agents have not been reported in persons with SRD, several should be avoided on a theoretic basis including:

Sulfa drugs, which impair BH4 biosynthesis by inhibiting sepiapterin reductase [Haruki et al 2013]

Methotrexate, which inhibits dihydropteridine reductase, an enzyme involved in BH4 regeneration [Woody & Brewster 1990]

Nitrous oxide, which may impair folate metabolism [Wyatt & Gill 1999]

Neuroleptics and other dopamine antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide)
Valproate is generally contraindicated as it may inhibit residual SSADH enzyme activity [Shinka et al 2003]. However, Vanadia et al [2013] reported an individual with SSADH deficiency who had refractory epilepsy after possible limbic encephalitis. The refractory epilepsy was finally controlled with magnesium valproate. One year after initiation of magnesium valproate therapy, the affected individual remained seizure free and had marked behavioral improvements, including decreases in aggression, coprolalia, and non-recognition of danger. In addition, the EEG demonstrated improved background organization.
Affected individuals should be advised to avoid activities that may lead to traumatic retinal detachment (e.g., contact sports).

At present, no prophylactic therapies to minimize joint damage in affected individuals exist. Some physicians recommend avoiding physical activities that involve high impact to the joints in an effort to delay the onset of the arthropathy. While this recommendation seems logical, there are no data to support it.
Margarines and other products containing stanols (e.g., campestanol and sitostanol), which are recommended for use by persons with hypercholesterolemia, are contraindicated in those with sitosterolemia as they can exacerbate plant stanol accumulation [Connor et al 2005].

Note: Foods with high plant sterol content including shellfish, vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, avocados, and chocolate should be taken in moderation due to increased intestinal absorption of plant sterols in those with sitosterolemia [Bhattacharyya & Connor 1974].
People with ARCA1 should be advised to avoid employment that may put them at risk of falls or that may require a high degree of physical dexterity.
The role of surgery in management of lesions is unclear since lesions appear to recur.
Avoid cow’s milk to reduce the severity of gastroenteritis and associated thrombocytopenia (in older children).
Long-term use of minocycline, which was studied in a randomized-controlled trial in individuals with ALS, was associated with worse outcomes [Gordon et al 2007].

Excessive exercise to the point of inducing fatigue in already weakened muscles is cautioned against by many practitioners based on experience.
Heterozygotes for a TBC1D24 pathogenic variant causing autosomal dominant deafness, DFNA65, should avoid excessive ambient noise as it may exacerbate hearing loss.
Medications that cause renal or otic toxicity should be avoided.
Since most individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis have decreased temperature and pain perception, affected individuals should not use local heating appliances, such as hot-water bottles, which can cause low-temperature burn injury.
Avoid the following:

Medicinal iron

Mineral supplements

Excess vitamin C

Uncooked seafood (because of the risk of infection from microorganisms thriving under conditions of excess iron)

For those with hepatic involvement, alcohol intake should be restricted because it increases iron absorption and is toxic to the hepatocytes.
Aspiration of food should be avoided to prevent pneumonia.

Administration of L-T4 or L-T3 alone can exacerbate the high serum T3 levels and the resulting hypermetabolism.
The prokinetic agent Reglan®, commonly used for treatment of bowel dysmotility, is contraindicated in individuals with TH deficiency because of its antidopaminergic activity. Use of Reglan® or related antidopaminergic agents, including some antipsychotic medications, could result in a dystonic crisis.
The following should be avoided:

All drugs reported to prolong QT interval (CredibleMeds®)

Drugs and dietary practices that could lead to hypoglycemia
The following should be avoided:

Foods with a high content of precursors of trimethylamine or inhibitors of FMO3 enzyme activity, including seafood (fish, cephalopods, and crustaceans), eggs, offal, legumes, brassicas, and soya products; avoid or eat in moderation.

Food supplements and "health" foods that contain high doses of the trimethylamine precursors choline and lecithin

Drugs that are metabolized by the FMO3 enzyme; for example, the antipsychotic clozapine; the monoamine oxidase B inhibitor deprenyl; the anti-histamine ranitidine; the anti-estrogen tamoxifen; and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories benzydamine and sulindac [Phillips et al 2007]. These compete for residual FMO3 activity. As well as exacerbating the condition, reduced metabolism of the drug may cause adverse effects.

Factors that promote sweating, such as exercise, stress, and emotional upsets
Avoid the following

Smoking

Estrogen use in adolescent and adult females

Nephrectomy (see Treatment of Manifestations, Renal angiomyolipoma)
Avoid inappropriate protein intake.
Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided.
Nephrotoxic substances contraindicated in individuals with renal impairment should be avoided if possible.
Competition in sports requiring acute vision and/or good balance may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Persons with Usher syndrome type I often become disoriented when submerged in water because they lack the sense of where 'up' is; they should therefore exercise caution while swimming.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.
Competition in various sports requiring a full range of vision may be difficult and possibly dangerous.

Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.
Tobacco products should be avoided since they are considered a risk factor for kidney cancer.

Chemicals and industrial toxins known to affect VHL involved organs should be avoided.

Contact sports should be avoided if adrenal or pancreatic lesions are present.
Avoid the following:

Fasting, including periods of preparation and recovery from planned surgery or sedation [Vellekoop et al 2011]

Myocardial irritation (e.g., cardiac catheterization)

Dehydration (risk for acute tubular necrosis)

High-fat diet (long-chain fats) including ketogenic or carbohydrate-restricted diets for the purpose of weight loss. Careful weight reduction has been accomplished by restricting long-chain fats and calories, supplementing with calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), and limiting overnight catabolism with uncooked cornstarch [Zweers et al 2012]

Volatile anesthetics and those that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids such as propofol and etomidate [Vellekoop et al 2011]. However, the use of propofol for short duration procedures has been evaluated in individuals with LCHAD deficiency and not found to cause adverse events [Martin et al 2014].
Contraceptive pills with high estrogen levels should be avoided, as venous malformation lesions are estrogen dependent. Venous malformations can increase in size and become symptomatic, especially at initiation of estrogen-based contraception. (In some, but not all, instances, stabilization of a venous malformation lesion and diminution of pain may be observed after three months of contraceptive pill use.)
Agents known to predispose to hVOD (e.g., cyclophosphamide and senecio alkaloids/bush teas) should be avoided.
Activities with a high risk of trauma, particularly head injury, should be avoided.

Medications with effects on platelet function (ASA, clopidogrel, or NSAIDs) should be avoided as they can worsen bleeding symptoms.

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.
Neuroleptic drugs may increase the severity of parkinsonism in VPS35-PD (as in Parkinson disease in general). In general, atypical neuroleptics are less likely to exacerbate parkinsonism than typical neuroleptics. Other drugs that may induce or exacerbate parkinsonism include but are not limited to antidepressants, calcium channel blockers, valproate, lithium, and amiodarone [Bondon-Guitton et al 2011, Bohlega & Al-Foghom 2013].
Circumcision of an at-risk newborn male should not be undertaken in the presence of thrombocytopenia.

The use of over-the-counter medications should be discussed with a physician as some medications can interfere with platelet function.

When possible, elective surgical procedures should be deferred until after HCT.
Use of ophthalmic miotics and mydriatics should be avoided as they can induce pupillary block.
Smoking and excess weight increase the risk of atherosclerosis.

Trauma to the extremities should be avoided.
Carbamazepine may worsen atypical absence seizures [Battaglia & Carey 2005].
Children with WS should not be given multivitamins because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D.
Foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) should be avoided, especially at the beginning of treatment.
Persons with dystonia should avoid situations in which the risk of falling is increased.
Individuals with severe hypohidrosis can have marked heat intolerance; care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat and the potential for febrile seizures.
Individuals with XLP who come into contact with EBV are at risk until curative treatment with allogeneic HCT has been performed. Individuals are also at risk of developing HLH or inflammatory problems with other infections.
Although no formal trials exist, standard care avoids use or application of sun-sensitizing drugs or agents.
The following should be avoided:

Live vaccines. All immunizations should be deferred until after restoration of immunocompetence.

Transfusion of non-irradiated blood products. Only CMV-negative, irradiated (1500 to 5000 RADS) blood products should be used.

Breast-feeding and breast milk, until maternal CMV status is established by CMV DNA PCR testing of a blood sample. CMV is a chronic infection and intermittent viral shedding in various bodily fluids occurs unpredictably. If such testing is negative and the mother is CMV serology negative, breast milk may rarely be considered safe for feeding. Frequent retesting of breast milk is required given the risk of primary infection in the mother. Pasteurization of breast milk remains controversial in preparation for BMT given the severe negative consequences in BMT outcomes.

Exposure to young children, sick contacts, or individuals with cold sores
Live viral vaccines, particularly oral polio vaccine, should be avoided in individuals with XLA.
UV exposure from sunlight and artificial sources of UV radiation should be avoided (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Artificial sources of UV. Certain light sources (e.g., mercury arc, halogen, and other lamps) can be unrecognized sources of UV. Although such light sources are often shielded, in open areas such as gymnasiums they can be a source of UV if the shield has been breached. UV meters are readily available to enable monitoring of areas to identify unexpected UV sources.

Cigarette smoke. Because cells from individuals with XP are also hypersensitive to environmental mutagens, such as benzo[a]pyrene found in cigarette smoke, prudence dictates that individuals with XP should be protected against these agents. One individual with XP who smoked cigarettes for more than ten years died of bronchogenic carcinoma of the lungs at age 35 years [Kraemer et al 1994]. The authors recently cared for another individual with XP who smoked and developed lung cancer in the fifth decade of life.
Contraindications to testosterone replacement therapy include prostate cancer (known or suspected) and breast cancer.

Oral androgens such as methyltestosterone and fluoxymesterone should not be given (especially for long-term therapy) because of liver toxicity.
Individuals with ZAP70-related CID should avoid the following:

Non-irradiated blood products

Live virus vaccinations

Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) vaccine against tuberculosis, Salmonella typhi (Ty21a) vaccine against typhoid fever, and Vibrio cholerae (CVD 103-HgR) vaccine against cholera, which may be part of the routine vaccination schedule in countries where these diseases are endemic

Contaminated water sources

Exposure to fungus-enriched environments (e.g., construction sites, agricultural areas with active soil disruption, mulch, hay)
