Because of immunodeficiency, affected individuals should be included in prophylactic vaccination programs.

The tendency to develop caries as a result of poor tooth quality can be reversed or delayed by good tooth hygiene or dental support [Malm, personal observation].

Regular physiotherapy to increase muscle strength may help compensate for the slowly progressive ataxia [Malm, personal observation].
HbH disease

During febrile episodes, a clinical evaluation is recommended because of the increased risk of hemolytic/aplastic crisis (similar to G6PD deficiency, hemolysis in HbH disease can be triggered by infection or oxidative stresses).

When chronic red blood cell transfusions are instituted for individuals with HbH disease, the management should be the same as for all individuals who have been polytransfused, including use of iron chelation therapy (see Beta-Thalassemia).

In individuals with HbH disease who are not red blood cell transfusion dependent, the only iron chelator specifically approved is deferasirox, which has been shown to be superior to placebo in reducing liver iron concentration in those older than age ten years who have beta-thalassemia intermedia, HbE/beta-thalassemia, and HbH disease [Taher et al 2012].

Regular folic acid supplementation should be recommended, as for other hemolytic anemias.

If splenectomy is required, antimicrobial prophylaxis is usually provided, at least until age five years, to decrease the risk of overwhelming sepsis caused by encapsulated organisms. Use of antimicrobial prophylaxis notwithstanding, a careful clinical evaluation of splenectomized individuals with fever is recommended.
Supplementation with appropriate steroid hormones in individuals who are deficient has helped alleviate:

Adrenal crisis

Lack of or poor pubertal development in males and females

Sleepiness and fatigue

Early intervention services may improve the outcome for individuals at risk for developmental delays and learning difficulties.
As the disease progresses in childhood various orthoses for the upper and lower limbs are needed.

Regular physiotherapy is required to prevent contractures of the hands and feet.
For issues related to the secondary complications that may arise in achondroplasia, see Treatment of Manifestations and Surveillance.
Cardiologists should be aware that some antiarrhythmic drugs, particularly Class I drugs, may paradoxically exacerbate the neuromuscular symptoms and should be used cautiously in individuals with ATS.

Although malignant hyperthermia has not been reported in ATS, appropriate anesthetic precautions should be undertaken as with individuals with other forms of periodic paralysis.
Establishing the correct diagnosis of an ACTG2-related disorder may help avoid unnecessary exploratory laparotomies for unexplained episodes of apparent intestinal obstruction (i.e., CIPO).

Surgical procedures associated with general anesthesia can produce a post-surgical ileus which can persist for an extended period.

Clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters for administration of TPN and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.
As noted under Treatment of Manifestations, affected individuals receive antibiotic prophylaxis for Pneumocystis, and also IVIG, prior to immune reconstitution. The use of such prophylaxis following transplantation and while receiving ERT varies and depends on the level of immune reconstitution achieved.
Physical and occupational therapy may assist patients in maintaining mobility and function.
Daytime complaints such as morning tiredness and somnolence may be caused by sleep fragmentation due to seizure-related arousals. To prevent this, it is important to provide diagnosis and treatment for ADNFLE appropriately.
Infants with severe skin erosions should be monitored and treated aggressively for dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, malnutrition, and secondary infection and sepsis.
Spasticity can result in contractures or limited range of motion affecting not only mobility but hygiene care as well. Patients benefit from evaluation by physicians specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation as well as physical, occupational, and speech therapists.

Costovertebral defects can lead to scoliosis. Appropriate musculoskeletal support and treatment for prevention of scoliosis-related complications is indicated.

Constipation and gastrointestinal problems are frequent and require ongoing management at regular physician visits.
End-stage renal disease, which is thought to result from chronic systemic arterial hypertension, may be delayed through effective blood pressure control [Andersson et al 2000b].

Because 100 mg of hemin contains 8 mg of iron, frequent administration of hemin may increase the risk for iron overload. Periodic monitoring of serum ferritin concentration and/or transferrin saturation is therefore appropriate in individuals treated repeatedly with hemin.
The following are appropriate:

Optimization of nutrition to maximize growth and development

Close monitoring of plasma concentration of fat-soluble vitamins, nutritional optimization, and vitamin replacement therapy to maximize growth potential and prevent some of the developmental delay documented in early studies

For those with splenomegaly or with known chronic liver disease, use of a spleen guard during activities
The following are appropriate:

Swallow studies and nutritional intervention (i.e., gastrostomy tube placement) for those with severe feeding difficulties

Speech assessments to identify problems amenable to interventions such as assistive communication devices

Early recognition of abnormal tone and spinal problems (i.e., scoliosis) in order to prevent long-term complications
For individuals with any of the POLG-related phenotypes, dose reduction in medications metabolized by hepatic enzymes may be necessary to avoid toxicity.

Reports suggest that CSF folate may be deficient in disorders that lead to mtDNA depletion [Hasselmann et al 2010]. Therefore, testing for CSF folate deficiency and offering treatment to those with deficiency is one option; the other option is empiric therapy with folinic acid (calcium leucovorin).
To lessen the progression of lung disease, the following are recommended:

Complete cessation of smoking

Avoidance of dusty occupational exposures

Yearly vaccination against influenza and pneumococcus

To lessen the risk of liver disease, the following are recommended:

Minimal consumption of alcohol [Kershaw & Guidot 2008]

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B
Individuals who suffer recurrent corneal erosions may need to take measures (e.g., wearing goggles when riding a bicycle) to protect their corneas from minor trauma.

Exposure to loud noise should be minimized.
Vaccinations pre-splenectomy (with consideration of post-splenectomy boost vaccinations) and penicillin prophylaxis are strongly recommended for individuals who undergo splenectomy.
Routine pediatric immunizations should be given and administration of pneumococcal vaccination should be considered.

Care must be taken during sedation or operative procedures. The combination of dilated cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary fibrosis can cause sudden severe hypoxia in an affected individual following surgery or even during a minor infection. Close monitoring of cardiac status and oxygenation are necessary until the individual is fully recovered.
Standard measures for prevention of aspiration pneumonia and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) should be followed; offering psychosocial support may be helpful.
Children with AS are at risk for medication overtreatment because their movement abnormalities can be mistaken for seizures and because EEG abnormalities can persist even when seizures are controlled.

The behavioral phenotype of Angelman syndrome includes hyperexcitability, hypermotoric behaviors, and deficits in social communication. These limitations place them at risk for social disruptions. On occasion, the use of risperidone (Risperdal®) or other atypical antipsychotic drugs provides some but often limited benefit. When such drugs are needed, care must be taken to avoid over-sedation and other side effects.

Older adults tend to become less mobile and less active; attention to activity schedules may be helpful in reducing the extent of scoliosis and obesity.
Detection of high refractive errors and amblyopia in children will allow therapy to protect or restore the vision

Early detection of ocular hypertension and glaucoma will allow the instigation of therapy to prevent the further loss of visual function.

Protection of the ocular surface with lubricants and lacrimal punctual obstruction may help slow the progression of sight-threatening corneal changes.
High-protein diet to restore serum albumin concentration is indicated to prevent edema secondary to hypoalbuminemia.

Low-cholesterol diet is advised.
A low-cholesterol diet is advised.
Gait aids and urologic management of neurogenic bladder may prevent falls and urosepsis, respectively.
Patients with splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.
Most individuals with arginase deficiency have persistent hepatic synthetic function abnormalities; particularly, elevated prothrombin time.

In some circumstances hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis have developed and have either been fatal or required a liver transplant.

Arginine is the substrate for nitric oxide synthase; however, abnormalities in this pathway have not been described.

The spasticity may be reactive and instances of marked improvement with Botox® have been described.
Salt restriction and use of antihypertensives are indicated in those with elevated blood pressure. Antihypertensives may be tried although their efficacy has not been established.

Electrolyte (potassium) supplementation is appropriate when indicated.
Because of immune system compromise in males with Arts syndrome, the following are recommended:

An annual influenza immunization

Routine immunizations against other common childhood infections (e.g. measles, mumps)
Pulmonary and nutritional complications of dysphagia are common. Often, gastrostomy tube feedings are recommended to manage these comorbidities. Children with disorders with predictable progression (like A-T) and impaired swallowing may benefit from early rather than late placement of a feeding tube [Lefton-Greif et al 2000].

Anesthesia carries unique potential risks in persons with A-T because of impaired coordination of swallowing, increased risk of aspiration, reduced respiratory capacity, and propensity to infections [McGrath-Morrow et al 2008]. In a recent review, 24% of patients required supplemental oxygen (maximum duration 24 hours) post anesthesia; mild postoperative hypothermia was also relatively common [Lockman et al 2012].
Transfusional Iron Overload

The most common secondary complications are those related to transfusional iron overload, which can be prevented by adequate iron chelation.

Assessment of iron overload

Serum ferritin concentration. In clinical practice, the effectiveness of chelators is monitored by routine determination of serum ferritin concentration. However, serum ferritin concentration is not always reliable for evaluating iron burden because it is influenced by other factors, the most important being the extent of liver damage.

Liver biopsy. Determination of liver iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen shows a high correlation with total body iron accumulation and is the gold standard for evaluation of liver iron overload. However, (1) liver biopsy is an invasive technique involving the possibility (though low) of complications; (2) liver iron content can be affected by hepatic fibrosis, which commonly occurs in individuals with iron overload and HCV infection; and (3) irregular iron distribution in the liver can lead to possible false-negative results [Clark et al 2003].

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a reliable measurement of hepatic iron concentration, is another option [Fischer et al 2003]; however, magnetic susceptometry is presently available only in a limited number of centers worldwide.

MRI techniques for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart are commonly used [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. T2 and T2* parameters have been validated for liver iron concentration. Cardiac T2* is reproducible, is applicable between different scanners, correlates with cardiac function, and relates to tissue iron concentration [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. Clinical utility of T2* in monitoring individuals with siderotic cardiomyopathy has been demonstrated. In one study, twelve human hearts from transfusion-dependent affected individuals after either death or transplantation for end-stage heart failure underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* (the reciprocal of T2*) measurement. Tissue iron concentration was measured in multiple samples of each heart with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, providing calibration in humans for cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* against myocardial iron concentration and detailing the iron distribution throughout the heart in iron overload [Carpenter et al 2011].

Chelation therapy

Desferrioxamine B (DFO). The first chelator introduced clinically was desferrioxamine B (DFO) administered five to seven days a week by 12-hour continuous subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. Recommended dosage depends on the individual's age and the serum ferritin concentration. Young children start with 20-30 mg/kg/day, increasing up to 40 mg/kg/day after age five to six years. The maximum dose is 50 mg/kg/day after growth is completed. The dose may be reduced if serum ferritin concentration is low. By maintaining the total body iron stores below critical values (i.e., hepatic iron concentration <7.0 mg per gram of dry weight liver tissue), desferrioxamine B therapy prevents the secondary effects of iron overload, resulting in a consistent decrease in morbidity and mortality [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2004].

Ascorbate repletion (daily dose not to exceed 100-150 mg) increases the amount of iron removed after DFO administration.

Side effects of DFO chelation therapy are more common in the presence of relatively low iron burden and include ocular and auditory toxicity, growth retardation, and, rarely, renal impairment and interstitial pneumonitis. DFO administration also increases susceptibility to Yersinia infections. The major drawback of DFO chelation therapy is low compliance resulting from complications of administration.

Deferiprone (L-1), a bidentated oral chelator, is administered in a dose of 75-100 mg/kg/day. The main side effects of deferiprone therapy include, arthropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms and, above all, neutropenia and agranulocytosis [Galanello & Campus 2009] that demand close monitoring. The effect of deferiprone on liver iron concentration may vary among the individuals treated. However, results from independent studies suggest that deferiprone is more cardioprotective than desferrioxamine; compared to those being treated with DFO, individuals being treated with deferiprone have better myocardial MRI pattern and less probability of developing (or worsening pre-existing) cardiac disease [Anderson et al 2002, Piga et al 2003]. These retrospective observations have been confirmed in a prospective study [Pennell et al 2006].

Deferasirox was developed as a once-daily oral monotherapy for the treatment of transfusional iron overload. It is effective in adults and children and has a defined safety profile that is clinically manageable with appropriate monitoring. The most common treatment-related adverse events are gastrointestinal disorders, skin rash, and a mild, non-progressive increase in serum creatinine concentration [Cappellini 2008]. Cases of renal failure, hepatic failure, cytopenias and gastrointestinal hemorrhage have been reported in the post-marketing phase. Provided adequate doses are given, there is a good response to deferasirox across the full range of baseline liver iron concentration values. Prospective data demonstrate the efficacy of deferasirox in improving myocardial T2* and in maintaining a normal left ventricle ejection fraction [Pennell et al 2012, Pennell et al 2014]. Deferasirox has not been evaluated in formal trials for affected individuals with symptomatic heart failure or low left-ventricle ejection fraction.

Strategies of chelation using a combination of desferrioxamine and deferiprone have been effective in individuals with severe iron overload. Retrospective, prospective, and randomized clinical studies have shown that combined iron chelation with deferiprone and desferrioxamine rapidly reduces myocardial siderosis, improves cardiac and endocrine function, reduces liver iron and serum ferritin concentration, reduces cardiac mortality, and improves survival; toxicity is manageable [Tanner et al 2007, Galanello et al 2010].

Cardiac Disease

Particular attention has been directed to the early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac disease because of its critical role in determining the prognosis of individuals with β-thalassemia. Assessment of myocardial siderosis and monitoring of cardiac function combined with intensification of iron chelation can result in excellent long-term prognoses [Wood 2008, Kirk et al 2009, Chouliaras et al 2011].

Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is a common complication in adults with thalassemia major or thalassemia intermedia [Voskaridou & Terpos 2008]. Its origin is multifactorial, making it difficult to manage. Treatment involves appropriate hormonal replacement, an effective regimen of transfusion and iron chelation, calcium and vitamin D administration, and regular physical activity. Sufficient evidence exists to support the use of bisphosphonates in the management of thalassemia-associated osteoporosis (to prevent bone loss and improve the bone mineral density). Further research is warranted to establish their anti-fracture efficacy and long-term safety [Giusti 2014]. However, since the origin of bone disease in thalassemia major is multifactorial and some of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are still unclear, further research in this field is needed to allow for the design of optimal therapeutic measures [Skordis & Toumba 2011].
Antibiotic prophylaxis has been used to prevent recurrent infections. In the French study of 22 patients, four received antibiotic prophylaxis [Rigaud et al 2013].

As males with Barth syndrome may be predisposed to hypoglycemia, episodes of fasting (such as prior to surgery) should be as short as possible and accompanied by intravenous glucose infusion [Schlame 2013].

Potassium issues:

Increased risk for hypokalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome can rapidly become potassium-depleted during a gastrointestinal illness (as would anyone with marked muscular hypoplasia) [Kelley 2002], serum potassium levels should be monitored during episodes of diarrhea.

Increased risk for hyperkalemia. Because males with Barth syndrome lack normal muscle “reservoir” for potassium, they can rapidly develop hyperkalemia when given intravenous fluids containing potassium [Kelley 2002]; thus, serum potassium levels should be monitored during the administration of intravenous fluids.

Because of their growth delay, males with Barth syndrome have lower than normal caloric requirements, and attempts to induce growth by overfeeding can lead to chronic diarrhea [Kelley 2002].
Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.
Prophylaxis of chest infections with vaccination and physiotherapy as well as early and aggressive use of antibiotics may prevent further respiratory problems in both disorders.
As seizure frequency tends to decrease with age, the option to taper and eventually stop AED after a sufficient seizure-free period should be considered in order to prevent complications of long-term AED use. Some children may require lifelong antiepileptic treatment.
Renal anomalies such as vesicoureteral reflux can lead to progressive renal failure, a secondary complication that can be avoided by surgical correction of retrograde flow of urine from the bladder into the ureter.
Significant adverse consequences of tamoxifen treatment included higher rates of endometrial cancer and thromboembolic episodes (including pulmonary embolism) in those individuals who took the medication than in those who did not. Women with a history of thromboembolic disease or with a coagulation disorder should avoid taking tamoxifen. Women on tamoxifen should be counseled to report any abnormal vaginal bleeding immediately to their gynecologist.
During surgery and in the post-surgical recovery period persons with Brugada syndrome should be monitored by ECG.
Prompt evaluation and standard treatment for suspected urinary tract infections is appropriate to prevent secondary renal damage.
Considering the known adverse effect of fever, it is important to prevent infections and fever as much as possible (e.g., through the use of vaccinations, including anti-flu vaccination); low-dose maintenance antibiotics during winter time, antibiotics for minor infections, and antipyretics for fever are appropriate. For children, wearing a helmet outside helps minimize the effects of possible head trauma.
Short stature. Short stature may result from glucocorticoid-induced growth suppression caused by over-treatment with glucocorticoids or from advanced skeletal maturation caused by inadequate glucocorticoid treatment. Evidence derived from observational studies suggests that the final height of individuals with CAH treated with glucocorticoids is lower than the population norm and lower than expected given parental height [Muthusamy et al 2010]. See Therapies Under Investigation for a discussion of treatment of short stature in individuals with CAH.
Risk associated with use of anesthesia prior to imaging or surgery. If a cervical spine abnormality is identified, special care should be exercised for any surgical procedure.
Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Contractures and decubiti need to be prevented by exercise and position changes.

Feeding difficulties and seizures increase the risk of aspiration, which can be reduced with use of a G-tube for feeding.
Anti-platelet therapy and anti-hypertension therapy may be recommended; however, there is no evidence for their effectiveness.
Development of metabolic abnormalities from Cushing syndrome or arthropathy and other complications from acromegaly may be prevented by medical or surgical treatment of the respective endocrine manifestations.
Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae. Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production.

Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies. In contrast, early auditory intervention, whether through amplification, otologic surgery, or cochlear implantation, is effective [Smith et al 2005] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Although decreased cognitive skills and performance in mathematics and reading are associated with deafness, examination of persons with hereditary hearing loss has shown that these deficiencies are not intrinsically linked to the cause of the deafness.

Thus, early identification and timely intervention are essential for optimal cognitive development in children with prelingual deafness.
In individuals with isolated hyperCKemia, special precautions during surgical procedures and anesthesia should be considered, despite the fact that malignant hyperthermia (MH) has not been reported in association with CAV3 mutations. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)
Antiplatelet doses of aspirin may be given to patients with isolated homocystinuria to decrease the risk for thrombosis [Brunel-Guitton et al 2010].
Anesthetic management of those with CCD needs to be carefully planned since affected individuals may present with a large brachycephalic head with mandibular prognathism and maxillary underdevelopment. In addition, the depressed nasal bridge and hypoplastic sinuses disturb nasal breathing. The dental and craniofacial abnormalities result in predictably difficult airway management. If this is anticipated, an otolaryngologist should be consulted to assist in securing the airway, and alternative anesthetic approaches, including neuraxial block, should be considered [Ioscovich et al 2010].
Individuals with CCFDN are prone to develop severe and potentially life-threatening complications related to anesthesia, such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004] and thus need close monitoring and possibly intensive postoperative care.

Affected individuals and care providers need to be aware of rhabdomyolysis as a potential complication following viral infections, and seek medical attention with the first recognizable symptoms. Oral corticosteroid treatment for two to three weeks can result in a full recovery within two to six months [Walter et al 2014]. The long-term outcome depends on the recurrence of rhabdomyolysis episodes [Walter et al 2014].
Secondary complications can include respiratory compromise from scoliosis; hence, orthopedic intervention may reduce the risk of this problem.

Immunization against influenza is encouraged.

Prompt treatment of respiratory infection is important.

Joint contractures may be prevented by encouraging mobility and by active participation in physical therapy.
Treatment of iron overload with regular phlebotomies, if possible, along with iron chelators as necessary, is indicated. Iron overload therapy should follow the guidelines used for non-transfusion dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].
Because infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) have less physiologic reserve than their peers, parents should have a low threshold for evaluation by a physician for prolonged fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. Aggressive intervention with antipyretics, antibiotics if warranted, and hydration may prevent the morbidity associated with the "infantile catastrophic phase."

Although only one individual with skeletal dysplasia in PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) has been reported, plain spine films assessing cervical spine anomalies may be useful [Schade van Westrum et al 2006].
Because infants with CDG have more limited reserves than their peers, parents should have a low threshold for evaluation by a physician for prolonged fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. Aggressive intervention with antipyretics, antibiotics (if warranted), and hydration may prevent stroke-like episodes, seizures in children with potentially lower seizure threshold as well as the morbidity associated with the “infantile catastrophic phase.”
To prevent secondary complications:

Preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease

Care during sedation and/or operative procedures in an institution with pediatric anesthesiologists experienced in the management of the small airways of children with CdLS

During anesthesia, attention to the risk of malignant hyperthermia (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility), which has been reported in a few children with CdLS [Papadimos & Marco 2003]
L-carnitine supplementation is well tolerated and has relatively few side effects: increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor.
Prevention of secondary complications is similar to that for other types of AML:

Supportive care includes blood products such as red blood cell and platelet transfusions as needed and treatment of infections with antibiotics.

Prophylactic antibiotics and antifungal agents are administered during periods of severe neutropenia including the consolidation and post-transplantation periods [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2009].
Monitor blood pressure in individuals treated with corticosteroids and treat hypertension if necessary.

Individuals taking losartan also need regular blood pressure monitoring due to the increased risk for hypotension.

Taper corticosteroid dose as tolerated to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and compression fractures of the spine.
Treatment with a gluten-free diet can:

Reverse growth failure and the reduced bone mineralization in children with celiac disease;

Decrease the rate of spontaneous abortions and frequency of low-birth-weight infants in women with celiac disease;

Reduce to the general population level the risk for certain types of cancers including small-intestine adenocarcinoma, esophageal cancer, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma;

Reduce the excess risk of mortality in symptomatic individuals.
Vitamin D supplementation is advised as affected individuals are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.
Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valve dysplasias) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Anesthesia. Individuals with CFC syndrome may have an unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, tracheomalacia, or a predisposition to cardiac rhythm disturbances and should be evaluated for these issues prior to anesthetic administration.
The following are appropriate:

Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less-preferred eye

Eye lubrication to avoid dry eyes, particularly following ptosis surgery but also after successful strabismus surgery in some cases

Surgical repositioning of the eyes and lids to help correct head position and alleviate secondary musculoskeletal complications from chronic head turn
Although malignant hyperthermia has not been described in CFTD, it has been seen in other congenital myopathies, particularly RYR1-associated myopathies; therefore, precautions for malignant hyperthermia prior to anesthesia should be considered (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.)

Preoperative assessment of pulmonary and cardiac function is recommended to avoid complications.

Prevention of scoliosis, respiratory and feeding issues, and cardiac disease may be possible with comprehensive early screening and regular monitoring as described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Contractures may be avoided by consistent joint movement or therapy.
The following are advised:

Prevention of falls

Keeping an object such as a handkerchief in the mouth to diminish damage to lips and tongue from involuntary biting
Facial palsy. Because the facial nerves are often ectopic, an MRI to determine the location of the facial nerves is appropriate before craniofacial surgery or cochlear implantation is considered.

Anesthesia. The airway problems associated with anesthesia in individuals with CHARGE syndrome can be attributed to choanal atresia, cleft lip and palate, and other upper-airway problems observed in approximately half of individuals with CHARGE syndrome. The soft cartilage and resultant floppy trachea add to potential anesthesia risk. Neurogenic incoordination of swallow and closure of the epiglottis may complicate the postoperative course, especially with repeated general anesthetics. If possible, procedures should be combined to reduce the overall use of anesthesia.
Patients should be protected from infectious exposures as much as is practical. Antibiotics and antiviral agents should be used promptly and aggressively to treat bacterial and viral illnesses. A study by Wolff et al [1972] did not find antibiotic prophylaxis to be beneficial; however, in situations of recurrent bacterial infections, it should be considered.

Antibiotic prophylaxis should be given prior to dental or invasive procedures Widespread use of prophylactic antibiotics prior to invasive dental procedures has been under scrutiny. However, for individuals with compromised immune systems and neutropenia who will be undergoing invasive dental procedures or procedures that cause significant bleeding, prophylaxis should be considered according to American Heart Association guidelines [Tong & Rothwell 2000].

Immunizations are generally well tolerated and should be administered.

Intravenous DDAVP (0.2-0.4 µg/kg/dose over 15 to 30 minutes) can be given 30 minutes prior to invasive procedures to help control bleeding. For serious trauma or extensive bleeding, platelet transfusion may be necessary.
Early treatment (i.e., orthodontic and surgical reconstruction of the jaw) may reduce the risk for secondary complications such as upper airway obstruction, obstructive sleep apnea, and tooth displacement.
If a cervical spine abnormality and/or instability is identified, special care should be exercised when general anesthesia is administered.
Rare cases of choroidal neovascularization may be treated with intravitreal bevacizumab [Palejwala et al 2014]
Vitamin D deficiency and zinc deficiency are common complications in NICCD [Song et al, personal communication]. Severe infection and liver cirrhosis have also been reported to be lethal complications in some individuals with NICCD. Therefore, vitamin D and zinc supplements and active infection control are recommended in persons with NICCD.
ARO. Restricted intake of calcium and vitamin D just before, during, and following HSCT to prevent hypercalcemia is recommended.

Parents and patients should be informed about possible complications of the disease and recommendations for prevention should be given accordingly (e.g., severe CNS bleeding in patients with thrombocytopenia, pathologic fractures). Because of the heterogeneity of the disease, recommendations should be given on an individual basis.

ADOII. Good routine dental care and oral hygiene may help prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible.
Early recognition of spinal problems such as kyphoscoliosis and stenosis may allow prevention of progression and/or intervention to prevent long-term cardiovascular or neurologic complications. Intervention should be directed at preventing progression of kyphoscoliosis to the point of cardio-respiratory compromise, which may be life threatening.

Similarly, early recognition of some cardiac anomalies may allow prevention of secondary complications or prolongation of adequate function. Some individuals with CLS may require SBE (subacute bacterial endocarditis) prophylaxis.

Attention to vision and hearing may prevent some secondary behavioral changes. Identification and treatment of blepharitis may prevent eye rubbing and potential retinal damage.

Attention to dental hygiene and gum disease may reduce the risk of premature tooth loss.
The following are appropriate:

Stretching exercises to prevent contractures

Positive-pressure hyperinsufflation pulmonary exercises to enhance thoracic growth and reduce thoracic cage rigidity and contractures

Medications such as laxatives to prevent constipation, medication for gastroesophageal reflux (GER), and oral caloric supplements as required

Trunk bracing in those with severe axial or cervical hypotonia with spinal collapse to prevent severe spinal deformities and to allow a stable and comfortable position when sitting or standing (during use of an upright stander). Of note, when such bracing is used, pulmonary assessment is needed to monitor for evidence of secondary respiratory compromise or complications.
Side effects of drugs used to treat myasthenic symptoms should be carefully monitored. If necessary, individual doses should be adjusted or treatment should be stopped. For example, quinidine has some major side effects including torsades de pointes (a potentially life-threatening arrhythmia), hypotension, cinchonism (or quininism), and hypersensitivity reactions. In individuals with CMS, adverse effects including exacerbation of weakness and development of respiratory failure may occur.
The most common secondary complications include foot contractures and acquired foot deformities, difficulty walking, and, in severe cases, inability to ambulate. Physical therapies such as stretching and exercise are recommended to prevent these secondary complications.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable, as well as gripping exercises for hand weakness [Vinci et al 2005b].
Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.
Daily heel cord-stretching exercises help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening.
Stretching exercises, finger splints, and ankle braces to prevent contractures and deformities are appropriate.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening.

Physical activity (e.g., swimming, bicycling, stretching) adapted to the abilities of each individual by a physiotherapist is useful to prevent contractures.

Individuals with diabetes mellitus need excellent foot care to avoid foot ulceration and necrosis.
Ankle braces can help prevent tripping and falling or ankle injuries.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.
Daily heel cord stretching exercises are desirable to prevent Achilles’ tendon shortening from peripheral neuropathy, which can occur in individuals with CMTX5.
Recommended measures:

Physical therapy to prevent joint contractures

Aggressive dental care to minimize dental caries

Home safety assessments to prevent falls
Therapies and interventions which can prevent secondary complications mirror the recommended treatments for an individual’s particular needs. This may include developmental therapies, appropriate cardiac, gastrointestinal, and neurologic evaluations and treatments, and ophthalmologic and audiologic surveillance.
See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.
Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valvar pulmonic stenosis) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), available by prescription from the cardiologist or other physician caregiver. Because aortic dilation has not been studied long term, is infrequent, is typically mild-moderate in severity, and has not been associated with dissection to date, there are no data to recommend treatment; care should be individualized.

Sedation. Individuals with Costello syndrome may require relatively high doses of medication for sedation. No standardized information is available, but review of an individual's medical records documenting previously given dosages may provide guidance.

Anesthesia may pose a risk to individuals with some forms of unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or those who have a predisposition to some types of atrial tachycardia.
Prevention of hypoglycemia reduces the risk of related neurologic damage.
The most important aim while treating an individual with CPT II deficiency is to prevent renal failure during an episode of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Therefore, sufficient hydration and, if necessary, dialysis must be performed immediately when renal failure is imminent.
Delayed tooth eruption should be considered when planning orthodontic treatment [Chen et al 2014].
The primary treatment of craniofacial abnormalities associated with craniosynostosis is surgical reconstruction. Early treatment may reduce the risk for secondary complications (e.g., hydrocephalus, cognitive impairment).

Patients with severe proptosis often require ophthalmologic lubrication to prevent exposure keratopathy.
Patching to prevent amblyopia in children with strabismus is appropriate.
Occasionally, a boy with X-linked CSNB may adopt a cosmetically unacceptable or functionally awkward head posture to dampen the degree of nystagmus in a particular position of gaze (the so-called "null point"). In some instances the position of gaze for the null point may be shifted to a better functional range by carefully planned strabismus surgery.
Intercurrent infections (particularly some viral exanthems) may induce a catabolic state. Affected individuals must be observed carefully during such episodes and medical attention sought to prevent hyperammonemia.

Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided.
Affected individuals who have undergone a renal transplantation should be monitored for the signs of immunodeficiency and infection.

Carnitine supplementation may improve muscle strength in pre-transplant individuals.

Treatment with proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole, relieves cysteamine-induced gastric acid hypersecretion and improves gastrointestinal symptoms [Osefo et al 2009].
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation improve osteoporosis.
Treat for bleeding disorder linked to coagulation factor deficiency to prevent anemia.
Secondary complications are mainly related to therapy.

Beta-blockers could worsen allergic asthma. Therefore, the cardiac-specific beta-blocker, metoprolol, could be indicated in some individuals with CPVT who have a history of asthma. The dose of metoprolol is based on the need of the affected individual (≤3 mg/kg). Note: It is important to keep in mind that metoprolol and newer beta-blockers (e.g., bisorpolol) may not have the same efficacy as nadolol or propranolol; the reasons for this are under investigation.

For persons with an ICD, anticoagulation to prevent formation of thrombi may be necessary (particularly in children who require looping of the right ventricular catheter).
Good dental hygiene with regular hygiene visits (several times per year) and careful brushing and flossing are recommended.
The effect of droxidopa on renal function is unknown.
Cardiorespiratory

Evaluation by pulmonary and cardiac specialists before surgeries [Finder et al 2004]

Administration of pneumococcal vaccine and influenza vaccination annually [Finder et al 2004]

Nutritional. Assessment if:

Planning to commence steroids [Davidson & Truby 2009]

Dysphagia is present

Patient is chronically constipated

Major surgery has been planned

Patient is malnourished

Muscular

Physical therapy to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Exercise

All ambulatory boys with DMD or those in early non-ambulatory phase should participate in regular gentle exercise to avoid contractures and disuse atrophy.

Exercise can consist of a combination of swimming pool and recreation-based activities. Swimming can be continued in non-ambulatory patients under close supervision, if medically safe.

If patients complain of muscle pain during or after exercise, the activity should be reduced and monitoring for myoglobinuria should be carried out. Myoglobinuria within 24 hours after exercise indicates overexertion leading to rhabdomyolysis.

Bone health

Assessments [Bushby et al 2010b, Darras 2011]:

Blood

Measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphorus, and activity of alkaline phosphatase

25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) level in springtime or biannually

Magnesium and parathyroid hormone levels may be considered

Urine (calcium, sodium, creatinine)

Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning

At baseline (age ≥3 years) or at start of corticosteroid therapy

Repeated annually in those at risk (history of fractures, chronic corticosteroid therapy) and those with DEXA Z score <-2

Spine radiograph

If back pain is present

To exclude vertebral compression fracture

To assess degree of kyphoscoliosis if present on physical examination

Bone age if growth failure occurs (height for age < 5th percentile or if linear growth is faltering) in persons on or off corticosteroids

Interventions:

Exposure to sunshine and a balanced diet rich in vitamin D and calcium to improve bone density and reduce the risk of fractures. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with a dietician.

Vitamin D supplementation should be initiated if the vitamin D serum concentration is <20 ng/mL [Bachrach 2005, Biggar et al 2005, Quinlivan et al 2005] and should be considered in all children if levels cannot be maintained [Bushby et al 2010b]. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with an endocrinologist and in accordance with country-specific pediatric guidelines.

Intravenous bisphosphonates; recommended in persons with symptomatic vertebral fracture(s), but a bone health expert should be consulted.

Use of oral biphosphonates for prophylaxis or treatment remains controversial.
Whether conventional medical therapy (e.g., ACE inhibitors, beta blockers) is able to ameliorate or prevent DCM or heart failure in LMNA-related DCM has not been formally tested and is therefore unknown.

Implantable cardiac defibrillators or pacemakers are highly effective in preventing sudden cardiac death.
Adequate antiepileptic treatment is important to reduce the number of seizures, which may be associated with irreversible and life-threatening complications.
Agammaglobulinemia (see X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia). Management focuses on prevention of bacterial infections with the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae. Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies. In contrast, early auditory intervention is effective – whether through amplification, otologic surgery, or cochlear implantation [Smith et al 2005].

Although decreased cognitive skills and performance in mathematics and reading are associated with deafness, examination of persons with hereditary hearing loss has shown that these deficiencies are not intrinsically linked to the cause of the deafness. For example, assessment of cognitive skills in individuals with GJB2-related hearing loss reveals a normal Hiskey IQ and normal reading performance after cochlear implantation [Bauer et al 2003]. Thus, early identification and timely intervention is essential for optimal cognitive development in children with prelingual deafness.
At this time, it is not known why many individuals with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome are obese. To the extent that it is feasible, the authors recommend an active lifestyle and good dietary habits to help avoid development of obesity.
Bone disease has not been a prominent component of Dent disease in recent case series. When present it has been reported to respond to vitamin D supplementation and phosphorus repletion in those with elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels [Wrong et al 1994].

Limited reports suggest that growth failure can be successfully treated with human growth hormone without adversely affecting kidney function [Sheffer-Babila et al 2008].
Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae: Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies.

In contrast, early auditory intervention (whether through amplification or cochlear implantation) is effective (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). However, the presence of severe inner ear anomalies and Michel aplasia in individuals with LAMM syndrome limits auditory habilitation options.

Delayed gross development (presumably the result of impaired balance and profound deafness) increases the risk for accidents and trauma.

The risk for accidents can be addressed in part by use of visual or vibrotactile alarm systems in homes and schools.

The risk for pedestrian injury can be reduced by choosing routes with visual displays of crosswalks.

Anticipatory education of parents, health providers, and educational programs about hazards can help address the risk for falls [Gaebler-Spira & Thornton 2002, Chakravarthy et al 2007].
Nutritional deficiencies such as essential fatty acid deficiency and fat-soluble vitamin deficiency need to be prevented. Specific management requires a dietician experienced in the management of individuals with liver disease. Affected individuals need to be supplemented with fat-soluble vitamins and essential fatty acids [Feranchak & Sokol 2007].

Because they have not been associated with clinical decompensation in persons with DGUOK deficiency, routine immunizations (including influenza vaccine) are recommended at this time for all individuals with DGUOK deficiency and their household contacts.
Transfusion iron overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals. The following methods are used both to assess for evidence of transfusion iron overload and to evaluate the effectiveness of iron chelation therapy:

Measurement of iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen, which accurately determines total body iron accumulation

MRI for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart

Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a measurement of hepatic iron concentration

Note: (1) Although the latter two methods of total iron measurement are noninvasive, they are available at only a limited number of centers and should be correlated with the “gold standard” liver biopsy [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. (2) Routine measurement of serum ferritin concentration is not reliable in detecting iron overload because the serum ferritin concentration does not always correlate with total body iron accumulation.

Iron chelation therapy is usually started after ten to 12 transfusions (170-200 mL/kg of packed red blood cells), when serum ferritin concentration reaches 1000-1500 µg/L, or when hepatic iron concentration reaches 6-7 mg/g of dry weight liver tissue.

Deferasirox is recommended in individuals age two years or older. It is administered once daily in an oral dose of 20-30 mg/kg/day. Side effects are usually mild and include rash, nausea, creatinine elevation, and rarely proteinuria and transaminase elevation. Patient satisfaction with deferasirox is greater than with desferrioxamine, mostly because of ease of administration [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Porter et al 2008, Vlachos et al 2008].

Desferrioxamine is administered four to seven nights a week in an eight- to 12-hour subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. The recommended initial dose is 40 mg/kg/day; the maximum dose is 50-60 mg/kg/day. The dose and frequency of infusion may be modified using the serum ferritin concentration or the hepatic iron concentration as a guide [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. Side effects include ocular and auditory toxicity and growth retardation. Compliance rate is hampered by the demanding administration route and schedule.

Note: Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in individuals with DBA [Vlachos et al 2008] because its side effects include neutropenia [Henter & Karlen 2007].

Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006].

One of the critical side effects of corticosteroids is growth retardation. If growth is severely impaired, corticosteroids should be stopped and replaced by a short-term red blood cell transfusion regimen [Vlachos et al 2008].
Individuals with DC should not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.
Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided.

Dichloroacetate (DCA) has been associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy; thus, patients receiving this medication require close monitoring [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].
Aggressive treatment and frequent monitoring of blood glucose concentrations is essential to avoid acute complications such as diabetic ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia.

Long-term complications of diabetes mellitus can be significantly reduced by maintaining blood glucose concentrations in the appropriate range. The American Diabetes Association recommends the following glycemic goals across all pediatric age-groups [American Diabetes Association 2016a]:

Glycemic targets for children younger than age six years:

90-130 mg/dL before meals

90-150 mg/dL at bedtime/overnight

Hemoglobin A1c value < 7.5%
The main concerns are related to failure to make the diagnosis soon enough. Dehydration secondary to hyperglycemia can cause serious long-term sequelae if not treated promptly. Therefore, rehydration is most important in the early stages of the disease.
To prevent injury to extremities with decreased sensation, protect the skin with appropriate socks and shoes and avoid exposure of feet to hot water.
Early diagnosis and therapy (with low doses of levodopa) may prevent transient dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa treatment.
A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).
The following are appropriate:

Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less preferred eye

Surgery to prevent loss of binocular vision in individuals who abandon the compensatory head posture and allow strabismus to become manifest
Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations is indicated.
Aggressive medical and surgical intervention including regular follow up for adjustment of medicines and timely referral for GPi DBS surgery when indicated is appropriate in order to prevent long-term orthopedic complications such as joint contractures or spine deformities. However, little systematic data support or negate the use of this approach.
Contractures occur in a small proportion of individuals and can be prevented by appropriate physiotherapy.
The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), multidrug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Group A beta-hemolytic Streptococci. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

Dilated cardiomyopathy can occur in individuals who survive the neonatal period. The development of dilated cardiomyopathy was associated with nutritional deficiency of carnitine in one study, and it has been postulated that nutritional deficiency of selenium may also contribute [Sidwell et al 2000].

In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified:

Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007]

Selenium and carnitine replacement for possible prevention of dilated cardiomyopathy

Iron deficiency anemia, a chronic problem, can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.
The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus

aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas

aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.
Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

In infants and children with JEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes 2006].

In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified:

Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007]

Treatment of iron-deficiency anemia (a chronic problem) with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions

Wound infections should be treated with the appropriate antiseptic or antimicrobial medication.
Infection is the most common secondary complication. Surveillance for wound infection is important and treatment with topical and/or systemic antibiotics or silver-impregnated dressings or gels can be helpful.

Additional nutritional support may be required for failure to thrive in infants and children with EBS-gen sev or EBS-gen intermed who have more severe involvement. Infants with significant oral disease may develop an aversion to eating by mouth, even after oral disease improves. The involvement of a feeding therapist in these cases is suggested.

Management of fluid and electrolyte problems is critical, as they can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease.

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis, especially in EBS-gen sev. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.
Intensive physiotherapy may help in delaying joint contractures and in maintaining mobility.
Physical therapy and stretching exercises promote mobility and help prevent contractures.

When indicated, implantation of cardiac defibrillators can considerably reduce the risk of sudden death [Meune et al 2006].

Antithromboembolic drugs (vitamin K antagonists, warfarin, heparin) are probably required to prevent cerebral thromboembolism of cardiac origin in those individuals with either decreased left ventricular function or atrial arrhythmias [Boriani et al 2003].
For recommendations on prevention of secondary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Secondary Complications.
Calcium (500-600 mg/2x/day), vitamin D (400 or more units daily), and low-impact weight bearing exercise should be encouraged to maximize bone density.
Individuals with mitral valve prolapse should follow standard American Heart Association guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis.
All affected individuals should receive routine immunizations; as well as annual immunizations for influenza.

Physicians must pay particular attention to the prevention of infections that could be fatal.
Care during sedation and/or operative procedures should be provided by a pediatric anesthesiologist as small airways, various palatal abnormalities, and laryngomalacia can be seen in children with Emanuel syndrome.
Regular immunizations are recommended as well as influenza vaccine annually to prevent infections that can precipitate hemolytic or aplastic crisis.

Iron overload and its associated chronic organ failure are risks with any chronic hemolytic anemia especially if frequent transfusions are required.

Treatment with an iron chelator should be implemented, typically after about ten transfusions (which correlate to a serum ferritin concentration of approximately 1000 ng/mL).

The effectiveness of chelation should be monitored by evaluation of liver iron by T2*-weighted MRI or FerriScan® so that the dose of iron chelator can be adjusted appropriately.
Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency as a result of to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.
Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance.

Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.
Secondary complications from prolonged immersion in ice baths include: skin maceration, infection, and gangrene. Amputation has occasionally been necessary to treat these complications.

Cooling with a fan is generally safer than immersion in water.
Individuals with FA treated with HSCT who developed graft vs host disease (GVHD) had a 28% incidence of head and neck cancers in the ten years following treatment (vs 0% in those without GVHD); this finding points to the importance of minimizing the risk of GVHD [Guardiola et al 2004]. Increased risk for GVHD observed in earlier studies was reduced significantly by T-cell depletion of the donor graft [Chaudhury et al 2008, MacMillan et al 2015].

Individuals successfully treated with HSCT are at increased risk for solid tumors, in addition to the baseline increased risk [Rosenberg et al 2005]. Due to the known contribution of radiation to the long-term complication of secondary solid tumors most recent efforts have focused on using a conditioning regimen without radiation even in an unrelated donor setting. German, Brazilian, and US groups now report excellent outcomes with alternative donors with a 'chemotherapy-only' preparative regimen in single-center studies. The study from Germany showed 88% survival and normal hematopoiesis at a median follow up of 30 months [Bonfim et al 2015, Chao et al 2015]. A prospective multi-institutional US study also showed similar excellent outcomes. One-year probabilities of overall and disease-free survival for the entire cohort, including patients with myeloid malignancy and those receiving mismatched related/haploidentical grafts, were 80% and 77.7% respectively at a median follow-up of 41 months. All young children (age <10 years) undergoing HSCT for marrow failure using low-dose busulfan-containing regimen survived [Mehta et al 2017].
The prophylaxis for renovascular disease, ischemic heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease in persons with Fabry disease is the same as for the general population.

Proteinuria/microalbuminuria should be minimized with ACE inhibitors/ARBs [Tahir et al 2007]; blood pressure control optimized; and cholesterol normalized [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014].

Aspirin and other anti-platelet agents such as clopidogrel may be recommended for the prophylaxis of stroke.

Although evidence as to the effect on long-term outcomes is lacking, use of aspirin and lipid-lowering agents and optimal blood pressure control are recommended in persons with symptoms of cardiac ischemia [Eng et al 2006].

The role of ERT in the long-term prophylaxis of renal, cardiac, and CNS manifestations is unproven; however, on the basis of stabilization of organ function in persons with more advanced disease, some have suggested the initiation of ERT in early disease stages: at first sign of disease manifestations in boys; at age 12-13 years in asymptomatic boys; and at the time of diagnosis in adult males [Eng et al 2006]. Studies indicate that late initiation of therapy when renal or cardiac manifestations are significant is associated with less effect than initiation earlier in the disease course [Germain et al 2015, Ortiz et al 2016].
Prevention of pregnancy loss. The current data on antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss are limited to several observational studies and two randomized trials.

In one study, 50 women with thrombophilia (including 20 factor V Leiden heterozygotes) and recurrent pregnancy loss were treated with enoxaparin throughout 61 subsequent pregnancies. The live birth rate was 75% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 20% in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2000].

Another study reported a similar live birth rate of 77% with enoxaparin prophylaxis compared to 44% in untreated historical controls, suggesting a threefold greater likelihood of a favorable outcome. The beneficial effect of anticoagulation was most pronounced in women with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, although the small number of individuals studied precluded definitive conclusions [Carp et al 2003].

A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women with factor V Leiden, the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or protein S deficiency and a single unexplained fetal loss. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin, suggesting a 15-fold higher likelihood of a successful outcome. In the subgroup of women with heterozygous factor V Leiden (n=72) the live birth rate was 94% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 33% with aspirin, suggesting a 34-fold higher likelihood of a successful pregnancy outcome [Gris et al 2004].

A prospective randomized trial (Live-Enox) compared two different prophylactic doses of enoxaparin in thrombophilic women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss (including 55 heterozygous for factor V Leiden). Both prophylactic doses (40 mg/day and 80 mg/day) achieved similar high live birth rates of 84% and 78%, respectively. These rates were substantially higher than the 23% live birth rate in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005b].

No prospective randomized trials including an untreated control group confirming the benefit of low molecular weight heparin in preventing pregnancy loss in thrombophilic women have been performed. However, the concordant results of the studies cited above suggest that anticoagulation may improve pregnancy outcome in thrombophilic women.

Antithrombotic prophylaxis may be considered in selected women with factor V Leiden and unexplained pregnancy loss after an informed discussion of the risks and the data suggesting benefit [Walker et al 2005].

ACCP 2008 and recent obstetric consensus guidelines and expert opinion do not routinely recommend antithrombotic therapy for women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy loss because of the lack of sufficient evidence confirming benefit [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008, Rodger et al 2008].

Several randomized trials with a no treatment or placebo arm are currently underway. Until the results are available, the risks and benefits of antithrombotic therapy and limited evidence of an improved pregnancy outcome should be discussed with the patient to allow an informed decision.

Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in thrombophilic women with other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited. In the Live-Enox study, the incidence of preeclampsia, placental abruption, and fetal growth retardation was substantially lower with enoxaparin prophylaxis than in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005a]. A study of thrombophilic women with prior fetal loss who received either enoxaparin or aspirin during a subsequent pregnancy showed that those who received enoxaparin had newborns with significantly higher birth weights and fewer classified as small for gestational age [Gris et al 2004]. However, neither study was designed to evaluate these complications as primary outcomes.

A recent pilot randomized trial compared dalteparin to no treatment in a group of women without thrombophilia and a prior history of placental-mediated complications. Prophylactic dose dalteparin significantly reduced the incidence of the composite outcome of severe preeclampsia, low birth weight, placental abruption, and fetal death after 20 weeks. However, the study design excluded women with factor V Leiden [Rey et al 2009].

ACCP 2008 guidelines recommend low-dose aspirin throughout pregnancy for women at high risk for preeclampsia. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin is not routinely recommended for thrombophilic women with a history of preeclampsia or other adverse pregnancy outcomes [Bates et al 2008]. An obstetric expert consensus panel was also unable to make recommendations on the efficacy and safety of low molecular-weight heparin in this group [Duhl et al 2007].

Decisions about antithrombotic therapy in women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy complications should be based on an individual risk/benefit assessment. Assessment of the maternal thrombotic risk during pregnancy should also be incorporated into the decision regarding prophylaxis.
Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition and prevent aspiration. Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated.
The following are appropriate:

Attention to respiratory function prior to surgery

Prophylactic antibiotics (cotrimoxazole) in case of vesicoureteral reflux
Regular immunization to prevent life-threatening infections is indicated.

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be indicated for those with immunodeficiency [Antoun et al 2016].
Use of general anesthetics requires adequate hydration.

Fitting of braces requires care as reduced sensitivity to pain may cause decubitus ulcers to develop at pressure points.

Exercise can help correct or prevent secondary contractures.
Prophylactic antibiotics may be needed when cardiac or renal anomalies are present.
Patients with FEVR associated with reduced bone density would be expected to benefit from drugs used to treat osteoporosis, although long-term data demonstrating an increase in bone density in these patients is not yet available [Downey et al 2006].
Physical therapy can help prevent and manage joint contractures for individuals with FGS1 or LS.
Evidence suggests that preemptive posterior stabilization of the cervical spine in individuals with Larsen syndrome with cervical spine dysplasia may prevent this complication and that combined anterior and posterior stabilization can lead to clinical improvement in individuals with evidence of myelopathy [Sakaura et al 2007].

Because of the cervical vertebral abnormalities observed in both SCT syndrome and Larsen syndrome, the cervical spine should be evaluated for features of instability prior to general anesthesia. Care must be taken intraoperatively to minimize extension of the cervical spine [Malik & Choudhry 2002, Critchley & Chan 2003]. Additionally, individuals with Larsen syndrome are at increased risk for airway complications related to laryngotracheomalacia; thus, it has been suggested that anesthetic agents that exhibit more rapid induction and recovery are preferred [Morishima et al 2004].
Treatment with colchicine 1.0 mg/day prevents renal amyloidosis even if the FMF attacks do not respond to the medication.
Preoperative evaluation by an otolaryngologist for hypopharyngeal and tonsillar papillomas [Rhee et al 2006] is indicated prior to general anesthesia. Any papillomas that would complicate endotracheal intubation should be surgically removed or communicated to the anesthesiologist prior to the procedure.

Note: These lesions may change significantly over time, so the evaluation should be within a few months of the procedure. The papillomas may be friable and prone to bleeding; when papillomas are present, the airway must be handled as gently as possible (which may include fiberoptic bronchoscopy for intubation rather than direct laryngoscopy) [Rhee et al 2006].
If transfusion is required, care should be taken to administer blood products that are appropriate given the immunologic status of the affected individual (e.g., washed packed red blood cells for those who have IgA-deficienciency).
For those with prenatally detected CDH, it is important to prevent lung injury that can result from inflation of bowel that has herniated into the chest and immediate intubation at birth has been recommended as above.
Good dental hygiene, including careful brushing and flossing and regular visits to the dentist, helps decrease the potential for infection. Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered with dental procedures, including routine dental repair and cleaning, especially in individuals with heart defects.
Patients with GACI are predisposed to periarticular calcifications, and at least two individuals with cervical spine fusion have been reported [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008, Nitschke et al 2012]. Thus, it seems prudent to perform a lateral cervical spine x-ray when elective endotracheal intubation is necessary, for example, prior to surgery. In persons with cervical spine fusion, fiberoptic intubation is recommended and, if hypertension is also present, a nasal route may be preferred over an oral route since it produces a less prominent pressor response [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008].
Because bone mineral density in children and adults with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia may be diminished, supplements of vitamin D in excess of 1000 IU/day and vitamin K have been advocated [Panis et al 2006b, Batey et al 2013].

For calcium and vitamin D intake for individuals with classic and clinical variant galactosemia, see the recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes (pdf) from the Health and Medicine Division of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Click here for additional dietary reference intake tables.

If routine follow-up visits with a dietitian knowledgeable about metabolic disorders have verified that calcium and vitamin D intake are adequate for age and if plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range but bone mineral density is decreased, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.
Wheelchair-bound or bedridden patients require frequent examination for decubitus ulcers and appropriate prophylaxis.
Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should receive a platelet transfusion prior to surgical or invasive dental procedures.

Individuals with neutropenia should be counseled regarding their increased risk of infection. They should avoid crowds and contact with individuals who have communicable diseases. When febrile, those who are severely neutropenic (absolute neutrophil count <500/µL) should seek medical attention; typically blood cultures are obtained and parenteral antibiotics are administered to avoid the possibility of life-threatening sepsis.
The use of anticoagulants in individuals with severe thrombocytopenia and/or coagulopathy should be discussed with a hematologist to avoid the possibility of excessive bleeding.
The only recognized preventable secondary complication may be developmental delay, which may be preventable or ameliorated by early intervention.

Surveillance *

Individuals with an OFC that is increasing faster than normal, signs of increased intracranial pressure, developmental delay, loss of milestones, or seizures should undergo appropriate CNS imaging studies to exclude hydrocephalus, other CNS abnormalities, or cerebral cavernous malformations (seen in some individuals with GCPS and large deletions [Bilguvar et al 2007; Author, unpublished observations]).

*As with the diagnostic criteria (see Diagnosis), no published data support these recommendations, which are those of the author.
Individuals experiencing atonic seizures or myoclonic-astatic epilepsy should be advised to wear a protective helmet.

Although immunization may trigger a seizure, it does not affect the natural course of the disorder. McIntosh et al [2010] looked retrospectively at a cohort of 14 individuals with Dravet syndrome, and found no effect of immunization on cognitive outcome. These authors suggest that the immunization schedule not be altered and that the risk for fever following immunization could be reduced by providing a scheduled, long-acting NSAID (e.g., naproxen). The treating neurologist may also consider increasing the anticonvulsant dose(s) temporarily around the time of the immunization.
Medications such as Phospholine Iodide® (echothiophate) need to be discontinued before surgery, especially if succinylcholine is used because of the danger of prolonged apnea.
For those who are treated with the ketogenic diet:

L-carnitine supplementation to avoid carnitine deficiency

Proper hydration and avoidance of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors to minimize likelihood of kidney stones.

Avoid carbohydrate-containing foods, intravenous fluids, and medications that will interrupt the state of ketosis. Family care providers often need to serve as the “watch dogs” to intercept these indiscretions.

Valproic acid treatment may be dangerous in individuals on a ketogenic diet because it increases the risk of a Reye-like illness. Additionally, valproic acid may inhibit glucose transport.
Immunizations. All individuals with GLB1-related disorders should receive routine immunizations. Influenza and pneumococcal immunizations should be administered on schedule because of the low pulmonary reserve of individuals with MPS IVB and the risk for secondary infections due to chronic disease in children with GM1 gangliosidosis.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for all high-risk patients, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].

Anesthesia. Because children with MPS IVB and those with GM1 gangliosidosis with skeletal involvement (spine anomalies, short neck, large head, and atlantoaxial instability) are at increased risk for complications of anesthesia, the following are recommended [Walker et al 2013]:

Preoperative evaluation should include a history of complications with previous anesthetics, as well as any ongoing problems with airway obstruction, the heart, and respiratory function.

Obtain flexion/extension x-rays of the lateral cervical spine [Muhlebach et al 2011; Tomatsu et al 2011; Author, unpublished observations].

Fiber-optic bronchoscopy and smaller than expected endotracheal tubes are often required [Muhlebach et al 2011].

For procedures lasting greater than 45 minutes, intraoperative spinal cord monitoring may be necessary to detect exacerbation of pre-existing spinal stenosis.

Post-operative management may be complicated by pre-existing sleep apnea and/or pulmonary edema [Morgan et al 2002].
Infants with lymphocyte abnormalities should not be immunized with live vaccines (i.e., oral polio, MMR). Their immune status should be reevaluated in childhood before receiving live vaccines.

Antibody studies to assess results of immunizations are warranted.

Irradiated blood products are recommended until normalization of the immune system can be confirmed.

Serum ionized calcium concentration should be measured pre- and postoperatively to avoid hypocalcemic seizures due to physical stress.

Consider the following:

Assessment of carotid arteries prior to surgical procedures involving the pharynx

Possible effects on speech prior to adenoidectomy

Assessment of cervical spine anomalies prior to hyperextension of the neck during surgical procedures/athletic pursuits, such as tumbling

Pre- and postoperative sleep studies when performing pharyngeal procedures

Assessment of platelet volume and function prior to surgical procedures
AEDs are associated with possible adverse reactions (e.g., sedation, gastrointestinal symptoms, changes in appetite [increase or decrease], weight gain or loss, and rash) which vary according to the specific medication. Patients on AEDs should be monitored closely for adverse reactions and, if they develop, a change to an alternate AED should be considered.

Corticosteroids are associated with a wide variety of possible adverse reactions, including weight gain with cushingoid appearance, skin thinning and purpura, alopecia, acne, posterior subscapular cataract, glaucoma, exophthalmos, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, gastrointestinal upset, pancreatitis, hypokalemia, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, myopathy, behavioral/psychiatric disturbance, diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, and increased infection risk. If complications of corticosteroid therapy become of concern, gradual tapering and alternate therapy should be considered.
Improve hyperuricemia and hyperlipidemia and maintain normal renal function to prevent the development of renal disease.

Maintain lipid levels within the normal range to prevent atherosclerosis and pancreatitis.
Infections need to be aggressively managed.

Immunizations need to be kept current.

Patients and household members should receive annual influenza vaccinations.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) prophylaxis (palivizumab) should be administered in the first two years of life.

Anesthesia should be used only when absolutely necessary because reduced cardiovascular return and underlying respiratory insufficiency pose significant risks.
Surgery. Persons with GSD III undergoing surgery should be admitted the night before the procedure and an IV infusion containing 10% dextrose started within two hours of the last cornstarch dose or the last meal. Glucose and ketone monitoring should continue overnight and during the procedure. IV dextrose infusion should not be stopped abruptly as dangerous hypoglycemia can occur from a hyperinsulinemic state. IV fluids need to be tapered slowly once optimal oral intake has been established and tolerated.

Osteoporosis may occur in adults with GSD III. Good metabolic control leads to improved muscle strength and decreased ketosis. Bone mineralization is adversely affected in acidic environments. In contrast, improved muscle condition and strength increase bone mineralization. Supplementation with vitamin D and calcium is also recommended to augment bone mineralization.
Nutritional deficiencies (e.g., of fat-soluble vitamins) can be prevented by ensuring adequate dietary intake based on frequent assessments by and recommendations of a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver disease.

Bleeding due to coagulopathy can occur especially with surgical procedures; therefore, it is recommended that a coagulation profile be assessed before surgical procedures and fresh frozen plasma be given preoperatively as needed.
To prevent muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis) and myoglobinuria-induced renal damage: follow the exercise and nutritional measures described in Treatment of Manifestations.
Osteoporosis related to chronic ketosis is common in GSD VI that has not been aggressively treated; treatment with complex carbohydrates or cornstarch may improve bone density.

Short stature and delayed puberty, which also occur in the setting of chronic ketosis, improve with better metabolic control.
Liver PhK deficiency. Perioperative care for elective procedures should include IV glucose infusion preoperatively which should start as soon as the patient is made NPO. Continue with intraoperative and postoperative IV glucose infusion to prevent hypoglycemia. IV glucose should be tapered off gradually as the patient tolerates the usual diet. Abrupt discontinuation of fluids could result in hypoglycemia.

If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with liver PhK deficiency may have increased CK levels and myopathy [Author, personal experience]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule. Any immunizations that may prevent illness, such as influenza leading to hypoglycemia, should be offered.

Muscle PhK deficiency. Lipid-lowering drugs (e.g., statins) that can worsen or unmask myopathy should be used cautiously.

If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with muscle PhK deficiency have increased CK levels and myopathy. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule.
Loose rugs and clutter should be removed from the individual's home to help prevent falls and other injuries. Driving may need to be curtailed or limited to prevent risk of accidents. Food preparation may need to be altered to prevent choking.
Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendencies are often associated with the progression of the disease. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder.
Reduction of bleeding and chronic joint disease is achieved by prophylactic treatment and prompt effective treatment of bleeding, including by use of home therapy. Many recombinant products are now created without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.
Many recombinant products are now produced without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.
Individuals with iron overload should be advised against ingestion of shellfish or raw fish.

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is advised [Tavill 2001].
The CDC (Centers for Disease Control) recommends immunization for hepatitis A and B in persons with chronic liver disease.

Although evidence is lacking, antibiotic prophylaxis for recurrent cholangitis is sometimes used in individuals who have had cholangitis [Shneider & Magid 2005].
The following are appropriate:

Prophylactic antibiotics or surgery as needed to prevent urinary tract infections or other complications of ureteral reflux or UPJ obstruction

Gynecologic examination prior to menstruation for small hymenal opening

Pre-pregnancy evaluation of the vaginal and uterine anatomy because of the increased risk for premature labor and fetal loss associated with structural abnormalities of the uterus
Ensuring adequate vitamin supplementation in the setting of reduced fruit and vegetable intake is imperative. Daily supplementation with a “sugar-free” multivitamin is recommended to prevent micronutrient deficiencies, specifically the water-soluble vitamins.
Aspirin. Based on the evidence from adult studies that low doses of aspirin help delay heart attacks and strokes, it is probably appropriate to give children with HGPS low-dose aspirin treatment, at doses of 2-3 mg/kg body weight per day. Note: If chicken pox or influenza is prevalent in the community, it may be advisable to discontinue the aspirin during that time because of the increased risk of Reye syndrome.

Adequate oral hydration is recommended, as the vasculature becomes generally less pliable and the risks of stroke and cardiac complications increase over time due to decreased vascular compensation. This is especially important during hot weather or airplane travel.

Vitamin supplementation. Standard amounts of ordinary multiple vitamin tablets are appropriate.

Fluoride supplements are recommended in areas where needed.

Immunizations. The routine doses and administration schedule for all immunizations are recommended. Immunizations are generally handled as for unaffected children.
If contrast echocardiography is positive for pulmonary shunting, even if no pulmonary AVM is demonstrated by chest CT, a lifetime recommendation for prophylactic antibiotics in accordance with the American Heart Association protocol for dental cleaning and other "dirty" procedures is advised because of the risk of abscess, particularly brain abscess, associated with right to left shunting [Dupuis-Girod et al 2007]. For the same reason, an air filter or extreme caution not to introduce air bubbles is recommended with IV lines.

Note: The risk associated with these lesions is not for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE).
Aggressive treatment to prevent hypoglycemia helps avoid irreversible brain damage.
Prophylactic antimicrobials are used to decrease the number of boils and pneumonias. Aberrant healing from pyogenic pneumonias leads to bronchiectasis and pneumatocoeles; therefore, prevention of these pneumonias may lead to better preservation of lung parenchyma and decreased risk of secondary, more difficult to treat pulmonary infections. The role of prophylactic antifungals to prevent pulmonary mold infections is unknown.

Osteoporosis and minimal trauma fractures are frequent findings. The effect of calcium and vitamin D supplementation is not known.
Prompt treatment of HLH with infection prophylaxis is indicated in immunocompromised individuals.
Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices.

Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications including baclofen and botulinum toxin, and levodopa has been attempted with limited success.

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition. Once an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. In order to prevent aspiration pneumonia gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required.

The potential for complications from chelation therapy and/or iron supplementation can be lessened by careful surveillance.
Bracing of weak muscles, such as ankle-foot-orthosis for foot drop, may prevent injury.
Calcium supplementation and vitamin D therapy may prevent secondary hyperparathyroidism in adults. This should only be pursued with close monitoring by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia.
A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).
Children with hormonal disturbances should receive prompt evaluation during times of stress (e.g., illness, surgery).

Consultation with subspecialists regarding fluid and electrolyte management should be sought if elective surgery is planned.

Children with diabetes insipidus need careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte intake.
Creating a safe environment, getting help in case of paralytic attack, and preventing falls and accidents are critical [Levitt 2008].

An affected person experiencing a paralytic attack must have access to potassium as well as physical assistance. Thus, those with HOKPP should inform their companions or acquaintances of their risk for paralytic attack, especially in a sports or school context, so that they can access appropriate help rapidly in case of an attack.

Falls and injuries from falls are frequent in those with HOKPP (67% of affected individuals age >40 years report such falls and injuries) [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].

Pre- or postoperative paralysis. Because of the risk for paralysis preceding or following anesthesia, precautions should be taken during administration of anesthesia to individuals with HOKPP. Individuals with HOKPP should be considered susceptible to malignant hyperthermia and managed with a non-triggering anesthetic technique – although general anesthesia using volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine has been reported as safe in a small number of individuals with HOKPP.

General guidelines for perioperative care include the following:

Strict control of serum potassium concentration

Avoidance of large glucose and salt loads

Low-carbohydrate diet

Maintenance of body temperature and acid-base balance

Careful use of neuromuscular blocking agents with continuous monitoring of neuromuscular function [Hofer et al 2001]

Late-onset myopathy with fixed muscle weakness. It is not known whether the prevention of paralytic attacks also prevents the development of myopathy. Individuals with known pathogenic variants who developed myopathy without having experienced episodes of weakness have been reported.
Skin. Skin care in HPS is dictated by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Protection from the sun should be provided to prevent burning, other skin damage, and skin cancer. In very sensitive individuals, sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be significant, while exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually significant in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, and socks). For extremely sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with a high SPF value (total blocks with SPF 45-50+) are appropriate; for less sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with SPF values of 15 or above can be used.

Bleeding. Individuals with HPS should consider obtaining a medical alert bracelet that explicitly describes the functional platelet defect, as the standard tests for bleeding dysfunction (platelet count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time) are normal in HPS.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Prior to the development of pulmonary fibrosis, attention should be paid to maximizing pulmonary function. This entails avoidance of cigarette smoke, prompt treatment of pulmonary infections, immunization with influenza and pneumococcal vaccines, and regular moderate exercise.
The risk of post-operative hypoparathyroidism can be minimized by: ensuring normal preoperative 25-(OH) vitamin D concentrations; recognizing risk factors for hungry bone syndrome preoperatively (e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentration); and implementing close postoperative monitoring that includes prompt replacement of calcium and vitamin D as indicated. Minimization of postoperative nausea and vomiting can help prevent an increase in venous pressure, which could lead to oozing and devascularization of the remaining in situ parathyroid glands.

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck should be avoided when possible to reduce the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.

An en bloc resection should be considered in all patients suspected of having parathyroid carcinoma in order to optimize a surgical cure and prevent positive surgical margins or seeding of parathyroid tissue during removal.
Dental care includes the following:

Regular dental examinations and restriction of sweets to prevent dental caries

Early treatment of dental caries and periodontal disease to prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible.

During surgical procedures, the following potential complications need to be considered and avoided:

Inadequate sedation. The congenital absence of peripheral pain fibers may result in analgesia, but inadequate sedation in the postoperative period may trigger unexpected movement, causing secondary injuries. Therefore, tachycardia and hypertension in the postoperative period should raise consideration of the possibility of inadequate sedation.

Hyper- or hypothermia. Temperature needs to be monitored carefully during the perioperative period; heating blankets should not be used.

Of note, the use of muscle relaxants during surgery is not a problem as malignant hyperthermia has not been associated with HSAN [Tomioka et al 2002].
Foot ulcers are frequently caused by breakdown of callus. Therefore, it is important to prevent callus formation by removing sources of pressure and to treat existing callus by softening the skin. Routine foot care by a diabetic clinic or by a podiatrist instructed to treat as for a diabetic foot is recommended.

Burns can be prevented by using gloves as needed (e.g., during cooking).

A diabetic education clinic is an excellent source of advice regarding skin care.
Daily regimen of physical therapy is recommended to improve cardiovascular fitness, maintain and improve muscle strength and gait, and reduce spasticity.
Given the risks associated with sedation with/without intubation, anesthesia is best administered in centers familiar with the potential complications in persons with MPS II. Risks associated with general anesthesia include the following:

Ankylosis of the temporomandibular (TM) joint can restrict oral access to the airway.

Visualization of the vocal cords is compromised by the large tongue, GAG-infiltrated soft tissues, and large tonsils and adenoids.

Care must be taken to avoid hyperextension of the neck secondary to atlantoaxial instability and cervicomedullary compression which may be present.

Nasopharyngeal intubation is often necessary. When endotracheal intubation is difficult or when sedation is required for brief procedures, laryngeal mask airway may be indicated.

The risk of airway complications may continue following successful surgery. Extubation may be difficult because laryngeal edema, which has been reported up to 27 hours post surgery, may prevent maintenance of a proper airway [Hopkins et al 1973]. Breathing a helium-oxygen mixture during extubation has been reported to relieve obstruction and improve outcome [Grosz et al 2001].
Significant secondary complications of HD include the following:

The complications typically observed with any individual requiring long-term supportive care

The side effects associated with various pharmacologic treatments. Drug side effects are dependent on a variety of factors including the compound involved, the dosage, and the individual; but with the medications typically used in HD, side effects may include depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dyskinesia. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms; such individuals would benefit from being removed from the treatment, having the dose reduced, or being 'rested' regularly from the treatment. Current medications used to treat chorea are particularly prone to significant side effects. Individuals with mild to moderate chorea may be better assisted with non-pharmacologic therapies such as movement training and speech therapy.

Depression. Standard treatment is appropriate when indicated [Paulsen et al 2005b, Phillips et al 2008].
Eculizumab has a greater efficacy than plasma therapy in the prevention of thrombotic microangiopathic events, with earlier intervention associated with a greater clinical benefit [Legendre et al 2013]. Eculizumab can be used as a prophylactic treatment to prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence in those at moderate to high risk of recurrence, as defined below [Nester et al 2011, Weitz et al 2011, Krid et al 2012, Zuber et al 2012b]:

Individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFB, and CFH or those who have the CFH-CFHR1 hybrid allele are at high risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b].

Individuals with anti-CFH antibodies, pathogenic variants in CFI, variants of unknown functional significance, and/or no identified pathogenic variants are at moderate risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b].

The major adverse effect of eculizumab is the increased risk for meningococcal infection [Rother et al 2007].

Vaccination against Neisseria meningitides (tetravalent vaccine A, C, Y, W135) is mandatory two weeks before administration of eculizumab.

In those who are not vaccinated two weeks prior to therapy with eculizumab, daily prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., oral penicillin or a macrolide) should be administered for two weeks following vaccination.

Since currently available vaccines do not cover all N meningitidis strains, a few countries require continuous antibiotic prophylaxis throughout eculizumab treatment.

In children treated with eculizumab, vaccination against Streptococcus pneumonia and Haemophilus influenza type B infections is also required.
Because persons with HCM who develop atrial fibrillation are at increased risk for thromboembolic complications, anticoagulation should be strongly considered in those with persistent or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Affected individuals with obstructive physiology have traditionally been considered at moderate risk for infective endocarditis, and previous guidelines have recommended antibiotic prophylaxis for this subgroup. Official guidelines have been revised and decision making should be individualized [Wilson et al 2007].
Iron stores should be replenished as needed to treat iron deficiency (an unrelated condition) if it is present.
General anesthesia. Opioids or depolarizing agents such as potassium, anticholinesterases, and succinylcholine can aggravate a myotonic reaction and induce masseter spasms and stiffness of respiratory muscles. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be impaired. Also, alterations of serum osmolarity, pH, and hypothermia-induced muscle shivering and mechanical stimuli can exacerbate the myotonic reaction.

An induction sequence incorporating inhalation of oxygen, cricoid pressure, thiamyal or thiopental, and two times the ED95 dose of an intermediate or short-action non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, followed by intubation, is a reasonable approach to securing the airway in persons with myotonia. Alternatively, inhalational induction may be a possibility for hyperkalemic paralysis and is well tolerated in those undergoing elective surgery.

Following administration of general anesthesia, the affected individual may develop respiratory distress in the recovery room resulting from weakness of respiratory muscles in addition to generalized weakness lasting for hours. The weakness is aggravated by drugs that depress respiration and by the hypothermia induced by anesthesia.

To prevent such attacks, glucose should be infused, a normal body temperature maintained, and serum potassium kept at low level [Klingler et al 2005, Mackenzie et al 2006, Jurkat-Rott & Lehmann-Horn 2007, Barker 2010].

Note: Because the generalized muscle spasms associated with such attacks may lead to an increase in body temperature, individuals with hyperPP have been considered to be susceptible to malignant hyperthermia. Most likely, anesthesia-related complications suggestive of a malignant hyperthermia crisis result from severe myotonic reactions [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004, Klingler et al 2005].
Although primary treatment is not possible, management of symptoms can improve the care of these patients. A multidisciplinary approach is advisable to prevent:

Spasticity: pharmacologic agents, physical therapy

Ataxia: rehabilitation

Seizures: anticonvulsants

Cognitive developmental delay: tailored approach at school or at work

Orthopedic: prevention/treatment of orthopedic problems, such as contractures and scoliosis

Feeding: swallowing surveillance and gastrostomy if needed
The following are appropriate:

Standard management of frequent middle ear infections

Consideration of surgery if neurologic status is affected by spinal cord compression
Management in the newborn period is aimed at reducing the risk of infection of blisters using standard medical management: not rupturing sealed blisters, keeping the areas clean while they are healing, and careful monitoring for excessive inflammation and signs of systemic involvement.

The parents should be instructed about the possibility of retinal detachment particularly in children younger than age seven years; any apparent changes in vision or any evidence of acquired strabismus should be evaluated promptly. Head trauma may precipitate retinal detachment; therefore, any evaluation for head trauma should include a thorough eye examination.
Vigilance is required during illnesses and surgeries to prevent adrenal crisis.
A rehabilitation program including physical therapy and orthopedic management should be initiated early in the disease course to prevent contractures when the individual is permanently nonambulatory.

Body temperature monitors may be required for individuals with progressive autonomic involvement to identify dangerous fluctuations in core body temperature.
Tumor size, surgery, and/or radiotherapy can cause hypopituitarism, which needs careful expert follow up.

Persons on glucocorticoid replacement therapy need to increase their steroid dose when ill or stressed.
Patients with autoimmune neutropenia or recurrent infections resulting from severe eczema may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic therapy to decrease the risk of severe infectious complications.

Aggressive management of dermatitis with topical steroids and anti-inflammatory agents can help to prevent infections from pathogens that enter as a result of the poor barrier function of the skin.
HRT prevents the development of osteoporosis.
Special precautions during anesthesia are necessary because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008].
Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.
To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa doses should not exceed the levels required for satisfactory clinical response.
When present, anemia may be improved by polypectomy or surgery.
As with many cases of congenital heart disease, prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be indicated prior to and during any procedure (e.g., dental work) that could lead to bacteremia.
The potential complications of the disease treatment are those related to AED use.
The most worrisome complications in SBMA result from bulbar weakness, as these complications (asphyxiation and aspiration pneumonia) can be life threatening. Individuals with bulbar weakness must be counseled in the importance of carefully cutting their food into small pieces for eating and avoiding items that may be difficult to chew and then swallow.
Monitor for secondary iron-deficiency anemia.
Optimal calcium and vitamin D intake should be encouraged and specific treatment for decreased bone mass with bisphosphonates should be considered depending on the degree of bone mineralization (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis).
Antioxidants may ameliorate damage from reactive oxygen species (ROS).

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) may improve nutritional intake and prevent aspiration pneumonia in individuals with severe dysphagia.
Physiotherapy is recommended.
The following are appropriate:

Physiotherapy and orthopedic follow-up to address bone health including Vitamin D and calcium supplementations and management of spasticity to prevent joint contractures and dislocation

Attention to pulmonary care, including the use of measures to address chronic lung disease from recurrent aspiration events

Yearly influenza immunizations
Because the myoclonus associated with LD may be drug resistant, overmedication may be a risk in individuals with LD .

Placement by percutaneous endoscopy of a gastrostomy tube for feeding can be helpful in decreasing the risk of aspiration pneumonia in individuals with advanced disease.
Individuals found to have esophageal varices should be placed on nonspecific beta-blockers to reduce the risk of bleeding; beta-blockers have not been shown to prevent the formation of esophageal varices.
Rehabilitation and physical therapy are helpful in the prevention of secondary complications, such as contractures and scoliosis.
Children should be discouraged from repeatedly poking and pressing on their eyes, although attempts to alter such behavior are not always successful.
The following are appropriate:

Prevention of secondary cellulitis in areas with lymphedema, particularly as cellulitis may aggravate the degree of edema. Prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily) are recommended for recurrent cellulitis.

Prompt treatment of early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics (See the British Lymphology Society Consensus Statement for information on appropriate antibiotics.) It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously if there is severe systemic upset.

Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema by treatment with appropriate creams/ointments
Age-appropriate developmental assessment and neuropsychiatric evaluations could potentially result in the initiation of therapies to prevent developmental and behavioral complications.
Anesthesia can potentially aggravate respiratory symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure; thus, careful consideration should be given to its use and to monitoring the individual prior to, during, and after its use [Shear & Tobias 2004, Niezgoda & Morgan 2013].
No special preventative care is recommended. Follow-up care is personalized based on the physical impairments found in the individual.
For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, certain physical activities may be curtailed in order to reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death.

For individuals diagnosed in infancy, early intervention may limit the extent of intellectual and developmental disabilities.
The following measures are appropriate:

Prevention of infection in the newborn (pivotal to outcome)

Prevention of dehydration

Maintenance of body temperature; prevention of overheating

Prevention of corneal drying

High caloric diet

Release of collodion membrane on digits, when necessary, to prevent reduced circulation leading to loss of digits

Prevention of chest constriction resulting from tautness of membrane to assure adequate respiration
Persons with a TP53 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid radiation therapy whenever possible in order to limit the risk for secondary radiation-induced malignancies [Evans et al 2006]. However, when radiation is considered medically necessary to improve the chance of survival from a given malignancy, it may be used at the discretion of the treating physician and patient. The concern regarding radiation carcinogenesis is based on older data. There is interest in examining risks associated with more modern techniques, which may be less carcinogenic.

Data on possible sensitivity to the carcinogenic effects of modern chemotherapy regimens are considerably more limited. In rare cases, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants have developed myelodysplastic syndrome and/or acute myeloid leukemia after treatment with radiation or chemotherapy for a prior tumor [Hisada et al 2001, Kuribayashi et al 2005, Talwalkar et al 2010].
Adjustment of the dose of allopurinol is required to minimize the complication of nephrolithiasis. Virtually any reduction of hyperuricemia will prevent urate nephropathy.
Use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis should be considered for individuals with connective tissue disorders and documented evidence of mitral and/or aortic regurgitation undergoing dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria.

Because of a high risk of cervical spine instability, an x-ray of the cervical spine should be performed prior to intubation or any other procedure involving manipulation of the neck.
The onset and the clinical course of the secondary complications, such as lung and renal involvement, seem to be poorly influenced by early treatment.

Efforts to minimize the risk of respiratory infections should be promoted.

An individual with LPI without previous history of chickenpox or varicella zoster should be vaccinated or, if exposed to varicella, treated as an immune-compromised person.

Some individuals with LPI may respond poorly to polysaccharide-containing vaccines. Therefore, revaccination may be required if specific antibody titers are non-protective.
Prevention of recurrent acute pancreatitis decreases the risk of developing diabetes mellitus. Fat malabsorption is very rare.
The most common complication from L-dopa therapy is dyskinesias, for which deep-brain stimulation has proven helpful [Aasly et al 2005, Gosal et al 2005, Hernandez et al 2005, Goldwurm et al 2006, Ishihara et al 2006, Tomiyama et al 2006].

Other preventions for L-dopa induced dyskinesias include constant drug delivery/stimulation (CDD/CDS) [Jenner 2008], reduction of levodopa doses [Goetz et al 1982] and the use of dopamine receptor agonists [Holloway & Frank 2004, Holloway et al 2004].
Immunize against respiratory infections (influenza, Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influenza).

Passive immunization for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) with palivizumab may be considered during the RSV season.
Physical therapy can help to prevent contractures.
Judicious use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is indicated for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria in the presence of mitral or aortic valve regurgitation.
Recent long-term outcome studies revealed that persons treated for MCAD deficiency are prone to excessive weight gain [Derks et al 2006]. Accordingly, follow up should include weight control measures such as regular education about proper nutrition and allowed physical exercise.
Transfusion hazards secondary to anti-Kx antibody production resulting from previous exposure to Kx antigens during homologous blood transfusion must be considered in:

All males with the McLeod blood group phenotype [Russo et al 2000b], in particular males with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease resulting from a contiguous gene deletion of CYBB and XK (see Diagnosis, Contiguous Gene Rearrangements) [Holland 2005]; and

Carrier females with the McLeod blood group phenotype.

Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.
Valproate levels are affected by a number of drugs. Serum valproate concentration should be closely monitored to ensure proper levels. If consistent side effects such as nausea, vomiting, hair loss, or tremor are reported, consider switching to an extended-release formulation which allows for more stable serum levels.
Physical therapy with attention to stretching exercises can help maintain joint range of motion and prevent secondary contractures, thus prolonging the ability to walk.

Respiratory problems require early intervention.
Because febrile illnesses may trigger acute exacerbations, individuals with MELAS should receive standard childhood vaccinations, flu vaccine, and pneumococcal vaccine.
Postoperative hypoparathyroidism. Measurement of serum concentration of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on the first day following subtotal or total parathyroidectomy may be a good predictor of residual parathyroid function [Debruyne et al 1999, Mozzon et al 2004]. Repeated measurements of serum calcium concentration are also useful and less expensive than measurement of the serum concentration of PTH [Debruyne et al 1999].

After autotransplantation of the parathyroid glands, the serum concentration of PTH should be assessed no earlier than two months post-operatively and once a year thereafter; serum concentration of PTH should be measured simultaneously in separate blood samples, one from the arm without a parathyroid autotransplant and one from the arm with the parathyroid autotransplant. This procedure allows the physician both to assess the function of the transplanted parathyroid tissue and monitor for possible recurrence of hyperparathyroidism.

Intraoperative hypertensive crisis. Although pheochromocytoma occurs rarely in MEN1 syndrome, it is appropriate to measure urinary catecholamines prior to surgery to diagnose and treat a pheochromocytoma to avoid dangerous and potentially lethal blood pressure peaks during surgery.
Prior to any surgery, the presence of a functioning pheochromocytoma should be excluded by appropriate biochemical screening in any individual with MEN 2A or MEN 2B. In a prospective study of at-risk family members with the pathogenic variant, 8% had pheochromocytoma detected at the same time as MTC [Nguyen et al 2001].

If pheochromocytoma is detected, adrenalectomy should be performed before thyroidectomy to avoid intraoperative catecholamine crisis [Lee & Norton 2000].
Antibiotic prophylaxis may be necessary to prevent bladder infection.
Pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator placement for individuals with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.
Secondary cellulitis is prevented through the following measures:

Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema

Prompt treatment for early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics. It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously.

Prophylactic antibiotics in recurrent cases (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily)
Stretching exercises to prevent contractures are indicated.
Recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis of the vaginal orifice are the most common complications in individuals with MKS following surgical drainage of the HMC [Slavotinek & Biesecker 2000].

Care should be taken with anesthesia in the neonatal period if severe hydrometrocolpos causing diaphragmatic compression is present. Gastric decompression and preoxygenation prior to tracheal intubation were used in the anesthetic management of one neonate with severe hydrometrocolpos compressing the diaphragm [Tekin et al 2003].
Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care. Children with ML II are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched children is necessary. Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management. Extubation may also be challenging in ML II.
Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensivists. Individuals with ML III alpha/beta are small and have a narrow airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary. Fiberoptic intubation must be available.

Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management, especially in older individuals. Functional decline of lung parenchyma is likely due at least in part to slowly progressive degeneration of soft connective tissue in the extracellular matrix, a phenomenon insufficiently studied but concomitant to the osteopenia in bone. As subclinical cardiac failure may become overt during anesthesia, any surgical intervention should be preceded by a thorough cardiologic evaluation Extubation may also be a challenge.
Anesthesia. As with all storage diseases, anesthesia in ML III gamma must be well planned. Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care physicians.

The anesthetic team should be aware of the following issues:

Persons with ML III gamma are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary.

Fiberoptic intubation must be available.

Persons with ML III gamma have short necks and atlanto-axial instability has been reported [Umehara et al 1997].

Jaw and neck movement can be limited

Abnormalities of the spine and ribs can limit the individual’s capacity to breathe and fully expand the lungs.

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Persons with valvular involvement should be given antibiotic prophylaxis before minor and major surgical procedures (including dental procedures) to prevent bacterial endocarditis.
Physical therapy and rehabilitation can help prevent permanent joint contractures.

An iron preparation such as oral ferrous sulfate is indicated for treatment of iron deficiency anemia resulting from poor absorption of dietary iron.
Minor head trauma may lead to temporary motor deterioration or (rarely) to coma. Wearing a helmet should be considered for situations involving increased risk of head trauma.
Prevention of joint contractures by maintaining joint mobility facilitates nursing care in the later stages of the disorder.

Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. The pediatrician or general care physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans.
Frequent monitoring of plasma amino acids is necessary to avoid deficiencies of essential amino acids (particularly isoleucine, valine, and methionine) as a result of excessive protein restriction and the development of acrodermatitis-enteropathica-like cutaneous lesions in methylmalonic aciduria, as in other organic acidurias (glutaric aciduria-I) and amino acid disorders (maple syrup urine disease) [De Raeve et al 1994].

Low plasma amino acids can reflect low natural protein intake, imbalanced intake of branched chain amino acid from use of metabolic formulas, or effects of chronic acidosis on branched chain amino acid metabolism [Manoli et al 2016b].
Annual influenza and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory infections is critical.
Establishing the correct diagnosis of MNGIE disease may help avoid unnecessary exploratory abdominal surgeries, risks associated with anesthesia, and inappropriate therapies.

The approximately 20% of individuals with MNGIE disease who have hepatopathy may be at increased risk for worsening hepatic dysfunction caused by medications metabolized by the liver and as a result of total parenteral nutrition. Therefore, medications that are primarily metabolized in the liver should be used with caution.

Attention to swallowing abnormalities associated with oropharyngeal muscle dysfunction may help decrease the risk for aspiration pneumonia.

Early attention to diverticulosis can help prevent complications such as ruptured diverticula and fatal peritonitis.
Individuals with monosomy 7 and certain underlying bone marrow failure syndromes including Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita, and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome have increased sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiation doses used in conventional ablative BMT approaches, and therefore require reduction in conditioning intensity. For individuals with monosomy 7 but without these above conditions, data remain too limited to determine whether standard protocols for ablative therapy prior to BMT should be modified.
Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is advised for individuals with cardiac abnormalities [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Individuals with MPS I present major anesthetic risks, including death [Moores et al 1996]. It is appropriate for affected individuals to undergo general anesthesia in centers staffed by anesthesiologists experienced in managing individuals with a mucopolysaccharidosis [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. The following are important considerations:

Dysostosis multiplex can lead to instability of the spine, including the atlanto-axial joint. Careful positioning and avoidance of hyperextension of the neck are necessary.

Induction of anesthesia for any purpose can be difficult because of the difficulty of maintaining an adequate airway. Smaller than anticipated endotracheal tubes may be required for endotracheal intubation because the trachea may be narrowed and the vocal cords thickened.

Intubation may require fiber-optic laryngoscopy.

Recovery from anesthesia may be slow and postoperative airway obstruction is a common problem.
Anesthesia. Procedures requiring anesthesia require considerable planning and are best performed in a facility in which anesthesiologists are experienced with the airway issues of MPS IVA, such as abnormal anatomy and GAG accumulation, unstable cervical spine, and progressive pulmonary disease (both restrictive and obstructive). Theroux et al [2012], who published the largest cohort of children with Morquio syndrome undergoing anesthesia, made specific recommendations for care during anesthesia.

Preoperative assessment should include history of response to anesthesia and any evidence of airway obstruction; cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and echocardiography; evaluation of respiratory function (spirometry and polysomnography); and airway fluoroscopy [Muhlebach et al 2011, Tomatsu et al 2011].

Endotracheal intubation likely includes use of a video laryngoscope, fiberoptic bronchoscope with or without a laryngeal mask airway, and a smaller endotracheal tube than expected for age or size. Although nasal intubation is an option, GAG deposits can lead to narrowing of the nasal passages and increased propensity to bleeding [Aziz et al 2011, Muhlebach et al 2011, Walker et al 2013].

Postoperative narcotic management should be judicious; multimodal analgesics and non-narcotic medications are preferable to avoid exacerbating preexisting respiratory issues, such as sleep apnea.

Postoperative complications including pulmonary edema have been described [Morgan et al 2002].

Surgery. Because subacute spinal stenosis and/or dynamic spinal stenosis could lead to spinal cord injury, procedures involving cervical spine manipulation, prone positioning (including spinal surgery), and/or prolonged time under anesthesia (e.g., exceeding 45 minutes), should be considered for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM). IONM uses somatosensory and motor evoked potentials (SSEPs or MEPs) to monitor spinal cord function [Solanki et al 2013, Walker et al 2013]. Note: While spinal infarct during surgery was reported in a few individuals with skeletal dysplasia [Tong et al 2012, Pruszczynski et al 2015], data demonstrating consistent improvement of outcome with this monitoring technology are limited [Solanki et al 2013].

Immunizations. Due to increased risk for pulmonary infection, all affected individuals should receive influenza and pneumococcal immunizations as well as routine immunizations.

Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for those at high risk, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].
Nutritional deficiencies, for example of fat-soluble vitamins, can be prevented by ensuring adequate intake and frequent assessment by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.
Hormone replacement therapy in individuals with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and reduced physical activity can prevent osteoporosis.
Any trauma care or surgical procedures should be approached in consultation with a metabolic specialist.
Because of the risks for bleeding during or following surgery, clotting parameters should be examined prior to any surgical procedures. (Note, however, that clotting studies in two individuals were normal prior to a lethal bleeding event associated with surgery.)
Early surgical reconstruction for craniosynostosis may reduce the risk for complications including sequelae related to increased intracranial pressure (e.g., behavioral changes).
Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive measure: The literature suggests increased risk of proliferative fibrosis following otherwise uncomplicated endotracheal intubation and surgical procedures. When possible, alternative noninvasive approaches should be pursued during diagnosis and management [Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015].

Extreme care with intubation and use of an endotracheal tube without a cuff (or careful monitoring of pressures with a cuff) may help prevent airway stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Minimize abdominal and pelvic procedures as extensive adhesions may develop postoperatively [Lindor et al 2012].

Hysterectomy should be an option of last resort for treatment of menorrhagia as post-surgical fibrosis is highly likely.
As self-treatment with alcohol is common, proper treatment and counseling regarding alcohol abuse may decrease alcohol-related toxicities, particularly in adolescents.
The major secondary complications are those attributable to rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria, including renal failure and hyperkalemia. Management is similar to that for other causes of rhabdomyolysis including monitoring of renal and electrolyte status, maintenance of intravascular volume and urinary output, urine alkalinization, and institution of dialysis when needed [Malinoski et al 2004].
Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed the anesthetic management of individuals with DM1. Choice of induction agents, airway care, local anesthesia, and neuromuscular blockade were found to minimize complications during surgery in individuals with DM1. Avoid using succinylcholine. Propofol-induced pain can induce myotonia. Sevoflurane has been used uneventfully.

Cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-defibrillators may prevent life-threatening arrhythmias [Wahbi et al 2012, Facenda-Lorenzo et al 2013].

Gagnon et al [2013] presented evidence that obesity, tobacco smoking, physical inactivity and alcohol/illicit drug consumption are lifestyle risk factors associated with more severe DM1 phenotypes.
Anesthetic risk may be increased in those with DM2; therefore, careful assessment of cardiac and respiratory function before and after surgery are recommended [Veyckemans & Scholtes 2013].

Increased weakness in individuals with DM2 has been associated with hypothyroidism; thus, some strength may return if hypothyroidism is treated.
Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition

Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated

Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy is appropriate as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia.

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners are indicated to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications.
Prevention or reduction of serious renal, ureteral, or bladder dilatation may be achieved by reduction of urine production by drug therapy and voiding at two-hour intervals.
Preoperative assessment of pulmonary function is essential to ensure optimal timing of surgical procedures and to minimize anesthetic risk.

Anesthetics are generally well tolerated in individuals with NM. Ryan et al [2001] reviewed the outcome of 130 affected individuals who underwent one or more surgical procedures. None developed malignant hyperthermia. However, five developed unexpected postoperative respiratory failure (following scoliosis repair in 4 individuals and fundoplication in 1), necessitating prolonged ventilation in three individuals and resulting in the death of another.
Annual influenza vaccination is indicated for patients with CKD. Other vaccinations (e.g., pneumococcal vaccine and hepatitis B) should follow local practice guidelines [KDIGO 2013].

For measures to prevent secondary cardiovascular complications, see KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text).
Dietary assessment is helpful; affected individuals should maintain caloric intake.

Physiotherapy helps to maintain mobility and prevent contractures.
Treatment concentrates on prevention of secondary complications. Prevention of substantial handicap from the disease can be achieved by appropriate expert treatment of tumors:

A cervical spinal scan should be performed before cranial surgery to prevent complications from manipulation under anesthesia [Evans et al 2005a].

Spinal tumors may make epidural analgesia difficult; therefore, lumbosacral imaging should be performed before regional analgesia is given [Sakai et al 2005, Spiegel et al 2005].
Patients on sodium benzoate should have plasma carnitine concentration monitored. Those with free carnitine below the lower limit of normal should receive supplementation to maintain normal plasma concentrations.
Screening and treatment of hypothyroidism can prevent the systematic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.

Early and aggressive medical intervention for respiratory infections and asthma can prevent respiratory distress, intubation and/or death.

Early intervention for motor development delays with physical therapy and/or medication for the treatment of chorea can improve function.

Annual screening for pulmonary and thyroid cancer can reduce morbidity and mortality associated with malignancy with NKX2-1 related disorders.
Liver function needs to be monitored in individuals receiving medications with known hepatotoxicity (e.g., statins for treatment of hypercholesterolemia).
Chest physical therapy with aggressive bronchodilation and antibiotic therapy for intercurrent infection appears beneficial, although no systematic study has been performed.

Individuals whose mobility is compromised should have a regular bowel program to prevent severe constipation, which may present as increased seizure frequency or increased spasticity in some impaired individuals with NPC.

Physical therapy is indicated to maintain mobility as long as possible.

Swallowing must be monitored to allow consideration of gastrostomy tube placement when aspiration or nutritional compromise is imminent.
Individuals with OCA4 should stay out of the sun from an early age, as cumulative ultraviolet exposure is a major risk factor for skin cancers (see Skin Cancer Risk).

Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, socks) and sunscreen with a high SPF number (total blocks with SPF 45-50+). There is no scientific evidence to indicate how high an SPF value is enough; individuals with OCA4 should use sunscreen with higher SPF values (45-50+) to lessen as much as possible the cumulative effect of ultraviolet to their skin.
Special attention should be paid to anesthesia concerns including proper positioning on the operating room table, for which egg crate foam is recommended.
Mask ventilation in the infant and young child is strongly discouraged. Mask ventilation is not adequately stable as a life-sustaining support, with risk for repeated hypoxemia and neurocognitive compromise in the infant and young child. If mask ventilation is used, an actual ventilator is needed as the traditional Bi-PAP machine is not approved for life-sustaining support. Also, close longitudinal follow up by specialists with craniofacial and dental expertise is essential as the potential for doing harm with facial deformation is an important consideration and may necessitate midface advancement in the teen years.
Anesthetists should be aware of the associated laryngeal stenosis, if intubation and ventilation are required [Leggett 1988, Mehta & Schou 1988].
Antireflux pharmacologic therapy minimizes the risk for aspiration until laryngeal competence is assured.
The major complications of OPMD are aspiration pneumonia, weight loss, and social withdrawal because of frequent choking while eating. To reduce the risk for these complications:

Annual flu vaccination is recommended for elderly affected individuals

Consultation should be sought promptly for a productive cough because of the increased risk for lung abscesses.

Dietary supplements should be added if weight loss is significant.

When eating in social settings, affected individuals should either avoid eating or choose foods that are easy to swallow.

General anesthesia is not contraindicated even though individuals with OPMD may respond differently to certain anesthetics [Caron et al 2005].
The following are recommended:

Avoid over-restriction of protein/amino acids, a common cause of hyperammonemia and poor growth. Gastrostomy tube feedings help avoid malnutrition in affected individuals who self-restrict protein intake and object to the taste of the essential amino acid formulas used for the treatment of urea cycle disorders.

Minimize risk of respiratory and gastrointestinal illnesses through hand hygiene.

Give immunizations on the usual schedule, including annual flu vaccine.

Provide multivitamin and vitamin D supplementation.

Use antipyretics appropriately. Note: Ibuprofen is preferred in the home setting over acetaminophen because of the potential liver toxicity of acetaminophen.

See also Therapies Under Investigation regarding the use of hypothermia as neuroprotective therapy to prevent intellectual disability, a complication of hyperammonemia.
Prevention of retinal detachment in those with congenital optic nerve abnormalities includes close follow up with an ophthalmologist and use of protective lenses.
Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize complications related to mass effects, catecholamine hypersecretion, and malignant transformation.
Longer-surviving affected individuals should be monitored for hyperoxaluria, which can lead to stone formation and renal failure.
During prolonged periods of high fever, electrolytes, creatine kinase concentration, hydration status, and urine production should be monitored and sufficient fluid should be given to prevent dehydration to avoid rhabdomyolysis.
Infection of the skin and nails following grooming or trauma is the most common secondary complication seen in PC.

Pre- and post-grooming hygiene and use of clean instruments minimizes this complication.

Antibiotics may be indicated when infection occurs.

A simple ‘bleach bath’ regimen using a mild bleach solution can help prevent infections.
Appropriate preventive measures:

Routine immunizations (including influenza vaccine and pneumococcal vaccine) to prevent respiratory infections

Education about infection control including attention to hand washing, avoidance of sick contacts, proper cleaning/disinfecting respiratory devices, and early use of antibiotics for respiratory illnesses (directed by prior respiratory cultures)
Individuals with PC deficiency are very brittle metabolically. Intensive medical support is indicated proactively to prevent dehydration, hypotension, hypoglycemia and increasing metabolic acidosis. Hospitalization is indicated for the management of fever, infection, dehydration or trauma. The ketogenic diet is an absolute contraindication, shown to worsen the acidosis into a life-threatening range.
The overuse of pyridoxine must be avoided, as a reversible sensory neuropathy (ganglionopathy) caused by pyridoxine neurotoxicity can develop. While primarily reported in adults who have received "megavitamin therapy" with pyridoxine, sensory neuropathy has been reported in two persons with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy [McLachlan & Brown 1995, Rankin et al 2007], one of whom was an adolescent who developed a secondary cause of epilepsy and received a pyridoxine dose of 2 g/day [McLachlan & Brown 1995].
In consultation with a reproductive endocrinologist, estrogen replacement treatment should be combined with progesterone to reduce the risk for endometrial cancer.
Adequate caloric intake must be ensured to prevent weight loss.
The following are recommended:

Prevention and prompt treatment of acute exacerbations

Treatment of coexisting comorbidities if appropriate including:

Pulmonary hypertension

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

Pulmonary embolism

Lung cancer

Coronary artery disease

Respiratory infections

Pneumothorax

Aspiration
Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation is a key aspect of the management of the cholestasis seen in ATP8B1 deficiency. Vitamin supplementation is necessary to alleviate malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins. Vitamin K administration in the newborn period is of critical importance.

Medium chain triglyceride based formulas may be useful in the prevention and/or treatment of growth failure.
Secondary complications may arise as a result of systemic oxalosis. Table 4 lists the broad range of tissues and organs that suffer consequences of oxalosis.

Regular dental care and ophthalmologic follow up should be part of patient management.
Control of blood pressure is important to reduce the risk for cardiovascular and renal disease and stroke.
Only under the most unusual circumstances should a hypothalamic hamartoma be removed or even biopsied because the complications of surgery and the need for lifelong hormone supplements postoperatively generally outweigh the benefits.

Use of stimulants for attention deficit disorder should be considered carefully in persons with a CNS lesion that predisposes to seizures (e.g., hypothalamic hamartoma).
To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa dosage should not exceed the level required for satisfactory clinical response. Dopamine agonists should be employed if not contraindicated to possibly delay the onset of motor fluctuations, as affected individuals often require several decades of treatment.
Recurrent tongue biting from severe orobuccolingual dystonia is a specific challenge that is difficult to manage in PKAN. Customized bite-lock orthodontic appliances can be made and cemented in place to prevent tongue lacerations. Every effort should be made to avoid full dental extraction.

Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally due to dysphagia or respiratory complications, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated.

In later stages of classic disease, tracheostomy may also be indicated.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol or Actigall®) is a bile acid that can be used to increase the amount and flow of bile and/or to reduce the development of gallstones in individuals with ARPKD who have significant hepatobiliary disease.

With severe portal hypertension and splenic dysfunction, immunization against encapsulated bacteria (pneumococcus; H. influenza type B; meningococcus) is indicated.

Updated guidelines advise that palivizumab (Synagis®) be administered to at-risk children younger than age 24 months who have chronic lung disease and/or a history of prematurity [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2009].

Although the role of chronic antibiotic prophylaxis in all children with ARPKD remains controversial, prophylaxis with antibiotics is recommended for persons with ARPKD who are at high risk of developing ascending cholangitis, including those who have experienced an episode of ascending cholangitis in the past.
Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendency are often associated with the progression of the disease [Ilonen et al 2012]. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder [Hakola 1990b].
Proper wheelchair seating and physical therapy may help prevent scoliosis. Speech and swallowing evaluations can help prevent or reduce aspiration and identify patients who may need a feeding tube for safer and/or adequate nutrition and hydration.
Daily physical therapy is recommended to maintain and improve coordination, muscle strength, and gait; reduce spasticity; and prevent contractures.
The following are appropriate:

Education of parents about common seizure presentations

Supportive measures, particularly for individuals with cerebral palsy, which may help to prevent the development of secondary complications such as joint contractures and decubitus ulcers
Progression of renal disease may be prevented to some degree by controlling hypertension.
Fluid balance. Fluid retention is a common complication and requires vigilant management and interaction with health care team.

Patients should weigh daily and chart their weights, and be instructed about what threshold to call for change in therapy.

Exercise regimen. A regular exercise regimen is desirable, and is tailored to the patient depending on their stage of disease. Exercise is valuable for restoration and maintenance of physical conditioning, but at the same time is a monitor for change in status of the PAH indicating need for a change in therapy.

Nutrition management. Many of the medications are associated with side effects of anorexia or nausea, so careful attention to nutritional status is needed to maintain overall health.

Infusion pump management. Maintaining and troubleshooting of continuous infusions of vasoactive medications requires extensive training and disaster preparation of both the patient and a care support person. Initial training requires 20 hours of in-person teaching per patient, and meticulous attention to detail is essential for therapy to be successful.

Central venous catheter. Maintaining and troubleshooting catheters requires meticulous attentive care to be done safely.
Similar to the non-genetic forms of prion disease, some genetic forms of prion disease can also be environmentally transmitted to others. Therefore, caution is advised for any affected individual undergoing a surgical procedure (e.g., endoscopy, brain biopsy): surgical instruments used must be properly decontaminated or discarded to reduce the possibility of transmission of prion disease to other persons.
Those who have undergone splenectomy should be appropriately immunized and treated promptly with antibiotics at the first sign of infection.

Antibiotic prophylaxis should also be considered in the appropriate setting.
Regular monitoring by a biochemical geneticist and a dietitian is necessary to avoid insufficient or excessive protein restriction. Many factors should be taken into account to guide protein restriction: age, gender, severity of PA, nutritional status, and presence of other factors such as intercurrent illness, surgery, level of physical activity, and growth spurts. The effects of excessive protein restriction can include impaired growth, essential amino acid deficiencies, and metabolic decompensations.

Acrodermatitis enteropathica, hair loss, and cutaneous Candida infections in patients with PA managed with medical foods can be caused by essential amino acid deficiency and require a re-appraisal of the nutritional management.

Psychotic episodes in patients with PA have been infrequently reported [Dejean de la Bâtie et al 2014]. Similar to other inborn errors of metabolism, care should be exercised when using antipsychotic medications as they can mask clinical signs of encephalopathy or cause adverse effects.
By analogy to individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, who also have marked purine overproduction, xanthine oxidase inhibition with allopurinol or febuxostat may result in the formation of xanthine urinary tract stones. These radiolucent stones can be confused clinically with uric acid stones. If residual symptoms of urolithiasis occur in PRS superactivity despite the achievement of goal serum urate concentrations, a stone should be isolated for analysis and/or urinary xanthine concentration should be measured. Management of this pharmacologically induced complication includes reduction in daily allopurinol or febuxostat dosing, with the possible need to accept serum urate concentrations higher than the usual goal range (<6.0 mg/dL; 360 μmol/L).
The articular cartilage of individuals with pseudoachondroplasia is likely to be severely disrupted; therefore, directing the individual toward physical activities that do not accelerate joint degeneration will be beneficial.
Diabetes mellitus rarely occurs in the absence of obesity.

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are probably beneficial, as low-calorie diets are often low in dairy products and osteoporosis has been documented in the majority of older children and adults with PWS.

If osteoporosis develops, consider treatment with a bisphosphonate.

Although no formal study exists, individuals with PWS tend to be very sensitive to medications of all kinds. Starting with lower doses is recommended.
Individuals with PXE who have coexistent mitral valve prolapse should have antibiotic prophylaxis for dental, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary procedures.
When dystonia is present, physical therapy to prevent contractures in the hands and feet is appropriate.
Poor feeding and recurrent aspiration necessitate the placement of a gastrostomy tube. Note: Improved nutrition does not enhance linear growth.

Individuals with RCDP1 require good pulmonary toilet and careful attention to respiratory function. Influenza vaccine and RSV monoclonal antibody should be provided.

Low plasmalogen levels can be associated with low levels of docosohexanoic acid (DHA). DHA can be measured in plasma; oral supplementation should be provided if levels are low.
Treatment of hypertension may help in delaying cardiomyopathy, which inevitably leads to arrhythmias. It is probably better to avoid amiodarone as an anti-arrhythmic drug, because of the risk of hyperthyroidism, which results in catabolism and increased phytanic acid release from tissues if not recognized in time. This complication was observed in one individual [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication].

Once cardiomyopathy has become difficult to treat, cardiac transplantation can be life-saving. One individual with PHYH-related Refsum disease and one with PEX7-related Refsum disease have successfully received a donor heart [BP Leroy 2007 & 2015, personal observations].
If possible, any radiation (including x-ray, CT scan, and external beam radiation) should be avoided to minimize the lifetime risk of developing late-onset second cancers. Such tests should only be used if absolutely necessary in essential health care.
Ambylopia prevention therapy is indicated following surgical intervention to treat vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment, or in cases of severe retinoschisis or hypermetropia [Medscape, accessed 8-21-14].
Osteopenia may be avoided with careful attention to nutrition, particularly calcium intake.
Hyperparathyroidism is associated with treatment for XLH. Rarely, hyperparathyroidism is present at the time of diagnosis; most often it occurs secondary to high phosphate doses and may proceed to tertiary hyperparathyroidism. In order to monitor for these complications, intact parathyroid hormone, serum calcium concentrations, and TmP/GFR should be measured quarterly (see Surveillance).

If secondary hyperparathyroidism is identified, either the calcitriol dose may be increased or the phosphate dose decreased. A small clinical trial and several case reports have investigated the use of cinacalcet in adults with XLH who have secondary hyperparathyroidism [Alon et al 2008]. No long-term studies have been conducted. The clinical trial (comprising 8 individuals ages 6-19) involved in-patient monitoring of phosphate, iPTH, and Tmp/GFR after a single dose of cinacalcet; results showed a decrease in iPTH and an increase in phosphate and TmP/GFR.

If tertiary hyperparathyroidism is identified, surgical evaluation is warranted.

Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria may also complicate long-term treatment for XLH and is associated with high calcitriol doses. Serum calcium concentrations and urine calcium/creatinine ratio should be monitored quarterly (see Surveillance). If hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria is detected, the calcitriol dose should be decreased.

Nephrocalcinosis, reported in persons medically treated for XLH, may occur independent of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria detected on laboratory evaluation. A baseline renal ultrasound examination should be performed at the start of treatment. The frequency of renal ultrasound examination to monitor for the development of nephrocalcinosis is not established; one- to five-year intervals have been recommended [Carpenter et al 2011, Sabbagh et al 2014].
The perioperative management of individuals with Robinow syndrome should include [MacDonald & Dearlove 1995, Lirk et al 2003, Sleesman & Tobias 2003]:

Preoperative radiologic assessment of the vertebrae and ribs because of the risk for respiratory complications;

Preoperative cardiac evaluation for the presence of congenital heart defects;

Awareness that endotracheal intubation may be difficult as a result of the midface hypoplasia.

Because growth hormone therapy can exacerbate scoliosis, progression of the spinal curve needs to be monitored during the course of therapy.
Individuals with RSTS can be difficult to intubate because of the easy collapsibility of the laryngeal wall. An anesthesiologist comfortable with managing complex pediatric airway problems should therefore administer general anesthesia when needed. Because of these problems, individuals with RSTS may require earlier intubation and later extubation than other individuals undergoing similar procedures.
Avoidance of excessive sun exposure and use of sunscreens with both UVA and UVB protection are recommended to prevent skin cancer. Calcium and vitamin D supplements may also be warranted in individuals with osteopenia or a history of fractures.
Examine the past medical history for asthma, orthostatic hypotension, depression, and diabetes mellitus because these disorders may be exacerbated by treatment with beta blockers.

Although the incidence of arrhythmias during elective interventions such as surgery, endoscopies, childbirth, or dental work is low, it is prudent to monitor the ECG during such interventions and to alert the appropriate medical personnel in case intervention is needed.
Annual influenza vaccine and other respiratory infection-related immunizations are advised.

Lower respiratory tract infections should be treated aggressively when they occur.
Certain manifestations indirectly related to the disease such as spasticity, depression, and pain may require appropriate pharmacotherapy.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.
No dietary factor that curtails symptoms has been documented; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly for those with poor nutritional status.

Falls and aspiration are two major threats to individuals with ataxia, including those with SCA10. Walking aids and proactive plans for feeding strategies are useful.
Weight control can help to facilitate ambulation.
A safe home environment can minimize the risk of injury from falls.
No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation.
No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Later, risk of falls can be reduced via appropriate gait aids and home modifications; if falls are frequent, a personal alarm system may be required.

To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present.
The side effects of psychotropic medications and AEDs (e.g., depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dsykinesia) can be major secondary complications in persons with SCA17. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms of the disease; such individuals may benefit from total or intermittent discontinuation of the treatment or reduction in dose.
No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease.

Later, prevention of falls via appropriate gait aids and home modifications, and (if falls are frequent) a personal alarm system may be required. To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
Psychological support helps affected individuals cope with the consequences of the disease.

Weight control can facilitate ambulation.

To avoid complications such as aspiration pneumonia, thickened feeds or gastrostomy should be considered.
Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Regular physical activity is recommended to help retain gait and coordination in the setting of a progressive degenerative disease.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

General anesthesia may be problematic; experience with local anesthesia has been reported [Teo et al 2004].
No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.
Early referral to a craniofacial center with expertise in the management of SCS can minimize the secondary effects of craniosynostosis and other functional deficits. Referral to early intervention services if there are concerns for developmental delay is appropriate to improve outcome.

Tympanostomy tubes are appropriate for children with cleft palate or other causes of persistent middle ear effusion and/or otitis media.

Cervical spine radiograph to evaluate for segmentation defects is appropriate before initiating activities that put the spine at risk (e.g., gymnastics, football, soccer).
Frequent dental visits to monitor tooth development and oral health are recommended to reduce the incidence of mouth ulcers and gingivitis. Home care should include aggressive dental hygiene with topical fluoride treatments to help prevent dental decay.

Prophylactic antibiotics and G-CSF may be especially helpful when interventions such as complex dental procedures or orthopedic surgery are being considered.
Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to any surgical procedure involving general anesthesia to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.
Appropriate antibiotics to prevent secondary bacterial super-infection in the upper/lower airways are indicated.
Routine pre- and post-surgical preparation and monitoring for individuals with congenital heart disease and/or conduction defects
Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is recommended for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria for individuals with cardiac complications.
Newborn screening has made presymptomatic diagnosis possible, allowing for early, aggressive education on management issues, such as management of fevers. The use of prophylactic penicillin, immunization, and education emphasizing access to healthcare have significantly decreased morbidity and mortality in children, primarily by reducing deaths from sepsis.

Penicillin prophylaxis prevents 84% of life-threatening episodes of childhood Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis [Gaston et al 1986]:

By age two months, all infants with SCD should receive penicillin V potassium prophylaxis, 125 mg orally, twice a day.

At age three years, the dose is increased to 250 mg orally, twice a day, and then continued until at least age five years.

Prophylaxis for those allergic to penicillin can include erythromycin or azithromycin but care should be taken to avoid medications that alter metabolism and increase the risk of prolonged QTc syndrome [Gerber et al 2009].

Immunizations. Timely administration of vaccines is essential. Clinicians should follow the recommended vaccine schedule for functionally asplenic individuals, which includes additional vaccines such as the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, and an altered schedule for meningococcal vaccines. Persons with sickle cell are considered high priority for annual influenza vaccine [Yawn et al 2014].

Folic acid supplementation should be considered to support the increased RBC synthesis secondary to the high RBC turnover in sickle cell.

Iron overload. Individuals receiving prophylactic as well as chronic transfusions are at risk for iron overload and should be monitored closely, initially by tracking the amount of blood transfused and monitoring serum ferritin concentration. Those with high exposures or documented iron overload should have an assessment of organ iron accumulation. With its increasing availability and safety and the ability to assess iron in multiple organs while avoiding sampling bias, quantitative radiographic evaluation such as T2*-weighted MRI is increasingly replacing biopsy [Wood 2007]. The noninvasive nature of monitoring iron overload via MRI or SQUID has led to significant improvements in the outcome of individuals with iron overload [Coates 2014]. Both oral or subcutaneous iron chelation therapy are recommended for those with documented excessive tissue iron deposition, with patient acceptance and use of medications being the main limiting factor [Coates & Wood 2017].
Individuals with severe early-onset disease are best vaccinated according to the protocol for other T-cell immunodeficiencies (i.e., only inactivated vaccines should be used with avoidance of all live-attenuated vaccines).

Because of the increased risk of opportunistic infection, prophylaxis (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or atovquone) against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is usually recommended.

If recurrent oral herpetic infections or shingles occur, prophylactic acyclovir may reduce the morbidity.
Consider influenza vaccine, prophylactic antibiotics, and chest physiotherapy for patients prone to chest infections especially during winter months
In severely affected individuals, treatment with stress steroids in doses customarily used for children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see 21-Hydroxylase-Deficient Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia) is recommended during periods of illness, stress, or prolonged decrease in oral intake [Bianconi et al 2011].

Anesthetic problems including muscular rigidity and malignant hyperthermia have been reported [Choi & Nowaczyk 2000]. Airway management during anesthesia may be challenging; use of a laryngeal mask airway has been successful [Leal-Pavey 2004, Matveevskii et al 2006].
Standard precautions against infection are appropriate.
Comprehensive care for individuals with SMA should be provided according to the published Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007]. See Treatment of Manifestations.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in individuals with vesicoureteral reflux.
Many neonates can have an adequate MRI without general anesthesia using the “feed and wrap” method. In this case, assess morning cortisol levels prior to any subsequent anesthetic if this MRI reveals pituitary hypoplasia. If an anesthetic is required before adequate intracranial imaging is available, an endocrinologic evaluation is indicated.
Follow up of sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction and infection.

Early regular physiotherapy helps to prevent contractures.
Early regular physiotherapy can prevent contractures to a certain extent.
Provide good nursing care and physiotherapy during disease progression; monitor for dysphagia to reduce risk of aspiration.
Musculoskeletal abnormalities including muscle tendon contractures, scoliosis, and foot deformities are the secondary complications most likely to occur, resulting from long-standing spasticity and weakness. Intense and regular therapy for spasticity, including physiotherapy, can delay and minimize the appearance of these complications. The higher incidence of orthopedic problems in patients with SPG3A may be related to early age of onset and these patients should be followed by an orthopedist if problems are present.

Urinary bladder incontinence can be a secondary complication of a neurogenic bladder and urologic care may be needed.

Patients with advanced disease may experience falls with a risk of traumatic injury. A walking aid (cane, walker, or wheelchair) may need to be considered in patients experiencing falls.
Follow-up of the sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction.

Early regular physiotherapy can prevent contractures to a certain extent. Intensive and early physiotherapy delays the development of symptoms related to spasticity and prolongs the ability to walk [Author, personal observation]. In children orthopedic treatment and botulinum toxin injections may also contribute to better ambulatory function. More systematic studies are, however, needed to confirm these observations.
Bladder function should be routinely monitored to avoid urinary tract infections.
The most significant secondary complication is chronic respiratory failure caused by reduced lung capacity, which can result in pulmonary hypertension and cardiac failure. Expert management of these clinical problems is indicated.
Physical, occupational, and speech therapy may improve or maintain function.
Individuals with mitral valve prolapse may need antibiotic prophylaxis for certain surgical procedures.
Anesthesiologists should be aware of the diagnosis given the difficulty of endotracheal intubation and management in some affected individuals as a result of anatomy and gingival thickening [Pollard et al 2008, Qasem et al 2012]. Significant complication with anesthesia has been reported [El-Kamah & Mostafa 2009].
Frequent transfusion with platelets can lead to alloimmunization and increased risk of infection. It is therefore recommended that platelet transfusion in older individuals not be done until platelet counts fall below a particular threshold (10/nL). Note: The threshold for platelet transfusion in newborns is unknown.
Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement.

Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures.

Early initiation of noninvasive ventilation has been shown to prolong survival [Farrero et al 2005].
As the child with the acute infantile form (Tay-Sachs disease) becomes more debilitated and disabled, good bowel management becomes essential. Good hydration, food additives, stool softeners, laxatives, and other measures should be employed to avoid severe constipation.
Cardiac pacing for persons with familial TTR amyloidosis with conduction block helps prevent sudden death.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Braces to prevent joint contractures and orthopedic surgery, if necessary

Diet restrictions to prevent aspiration
Additional side effects associated with peak-dose levodopa include gastroesophageal reflux, vomiting, or significant suppression of appetite leading to poor growth. Although these problems may be most evident in the first few weeks of onset of levodopa treatment, close monitoring of symptoms and ongoing adjustment of levodopa dosing in conjunction with appropriate supportive intervention as needed help in management.
Anesthesia is a known trigger for cardiac arrhythmia in individuals with Timothy syndrome. Therefore, any surgical intervention must be performed under close cardiac monitoring. Because clinical experience with Timothy syndrome is scarce, all compounds used for general anesthesia should be regarded as potentially dangerous.

Prevention of extracardiac complications (including use of appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis/therapy before surgical intervention) must always be considered.
Because choline is essential in the fetus and in young infants for nerve and brain development, it should not be over-restricted in infants, children, and pregnant or lactating women. Large amounts of choline are transferred to the fetus via the placenta and to the newborn infant via the mother's milk, thus potentially depleting maternal choline reserves. Dietary restriction of choline increases the requirement for folate, a methyl donor.

Dietary regimens should be planned and monitored to ensure that the daily intake of choline and folate meet recommendations for the age and sex of the individual [Institute of Medicine National Academy of Sciences USA 1998, Cashman et al 2003]. For adults, adequate daily intake of choline is 550 mg for males and 425 mg for females.
Complications secondary to poor glycemic control for diabetes or chronic anemia may occur. Ongoing management of the primary disease is essential.
The following recommendations – based on consensus – have been developed for all leukodystrophies [Van Haren et al 2015].

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation as required to prevent osteoporosis

Skin care and frequent repositioning to help prevent pressure sores in individuals with decreased mobility

Annual flu vaccination

Fall prevention strategies, adaptive equipment (e.g., wheelchairs and walkers), and physical therapy (to increase strength) to help prevent secondary injury
For those on vigabatrin therapy, visual field testing at the onset of therapy, at three-month intervals for the first 18 months, and every six months afterward is recommended because of the risk for peripheral visual field restriction [Willmore et al 2009].
Because carnitine deficiency secondary to the renal tubular Fanconi syndrome can cause skeletal muscle weakness, serum concentration of carnitine should be measured so that carnitine deficiency, if identified, can be treated [Nissenkorn et al 2001].

Osteoporosis and rickets resulting from renal tubular damage are treated by correction of acidosis, restoring of calcium and phosphate balance, and administration of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D.
Acute rhabdomyolysis is treated with ample hydration and alkalization of the urine to protect renal function and to prevent acute renal failure secondary to myoglobinuria.
If VMCM is associated with localized intravascular coagulopathy (LIC) (D-dimer level greater than twice the normal range), treatment with low molecular-weight heparin should be initiated before any surgery in order to avoid perioperative decompensation of LIC into disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).
Some evidence suggests that treatment of immunodeficiency early in VODI may reduce the risk for development or recurrence of hVOD.
Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group.

Individuals with VWD should be vaccinated for hepatitis A and B [Nichols et al 2008, Castaman et al 2013].

Prevention of chronic joint disease is a concern for individuals with type 3 VWD; however, controversy exists regarding the specific schedule and dosing of prophylactic regimens. An international trial that investigated prophylactic treatment for symptoms including joint bleeding, nosebleeds, and menorrhagia concluded that rates of bleeding within individuals during prophylaxis were significantly lower than levels prior to prophylaxis [Berntorp et al 2010, Abshire et al 2013].
Timely treatment of otitis media secondary to eustachian tube dysfunction related to cleft palate is indicated to prevent secondary hearing loss. Some individuals may have pressure-equalizing tubes placed.

Evaluations by a speech-language pathologist can aid in determining if speech therapy or other interventions are appropriate for a child with secondary hearing loss.
Airway management during anesthesia can be difficult in persons with WMS because of stiff joints, poorly aligned teeth, and maxillary hypoplasia [Dal et al 2003, Karabiyik 2003, Riad et al 2006].
To prevent secondary complications:

Lifestyle counseling for smoking avoidance, regular exercise, and weight control to reduce atherosclerosis risk

Excellent skin care, trauma avoidance, and examination to treat problems early
Prevention of diabetes mellitus related complications is through optimization of glycemic control following established guidelines.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for vesicoureteral reflux.

Intravenous Ig infusions or continuous antibiotics may be indicated for those with antibody deficiencies.
The following are indicated:

Exercise and a balanced diet to avoid insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus

Range of motion exercises to prevent or ameliorate joint contractures

Because of the increased risk for myocardial insufficiency in individuals with biventricular outflow tract obstruction, especially during induction of anesthesia [Horowitz et al 2002] and because there is an increased risk for adverse events with sedation or anesthesia in WS, anesthesia consultation for surgical procedures. Guidelines for sedation and anesthesia risk assessment and anesthetic management for WS have been published [Burch et al 2008, Matisoff et al 2015, Latham et al 2016]. Electrocardiogram prior to surgery.

Awareness of the risk for myocardial insufficiency and cardiac arrest; for surgical procedures, use of a center equipped for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Monitoring of patients under therapy should include routine assessments of treatment efficacy by biochemical testing and clinical evaluation:

Insufficient therapy, underdosage, or malcompliance could lead to reaccumulation of copper and development of new symptoms.

Adverse events related to medical treatment (especially under D-penicillamine treatment) should be evaluated.

Excessive long-term treatment could result in copper deficiency, leading to immobilization of iron (as observed in aceruloplasminemia) and to neurologic symptoms of copper deficiency [Horvath et al 2010, da Silva-Júnior et al 2011].
Saliva substitutes and optimal fluoride exposure may be helpful in preventing dental caries in those individuals having a marked reduction in salivary flow. Other dental caries preventive approaches such as pit and fissure sealants can be beneficial as well.
Appropriate education for sun-protective lotions and clothing (preferably by an informed dermatologic consultant) is indicated to moderate the cumulative lifelong effects of solar radiation.
The secondary complications are those associated with prolonged seizure medication usage.
Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells (presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells), chronic warts, lymphocyte dysregulation, and rarely, malignancy. All individuals have some degree of immunodeficiency, especially during the first six to 12 months following transplantation. PJP, viral and encapsulated organism prophylaxis should be applied per transplantation protocols. IVIG prophylaxis should be considered to maintain serum IgG levels above 400mg/dL. Prompt evaluation of illness should occur until the individual is deemed immunologically competent. Individuals with primary immunodeficiency post transplantation will require bacteriophage testing off all immunosuppressive therapy to determine eligibility for re-vaccination. Only CMV-negative, irradiated blood products should be used. Avoid breast feeding and exposure to young children to prevent CMV transmission to babies with X-SCID.
The secondary complications of significant dysphagia and immobility are usually related to progression of dystonia.

Swallowing evaluation, especially in those with subjective dysphagia, can guide diet modification and use of swallowing techniques that minimize the risk for aspiration pneumonia.

Physical therapy, coupled with maximal medical and surgical therapy, may help delay the bedridden state and its complications.

Although traditional neuroleptics may initially help focal or segmental dystonia, they may eventually exacerbate the underlying parkinsonism in individuals with lubag and also lead to tardive dystonia with chronic use. Thus, it may be difficult to determine with chronic therapy if traditional neuroleptics actually help or worsen dystonia in patients with lubag.
Children with XLA should only be given inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and not oral polio vaccine.

The sibs of children with XLA should also be given IPV rather than oral polio vaccine (in order to avoid infecting their affected sib with live virus).
In areas where cryptosporidium may be present in the water supply, only purified water should be ingested.
Antibiotic prophylaxis and vaccination to prevent pneumococcal and meningococcal infection are reasonable precautions in the rare patient with asplenia [Leahy et al 2005].
Vitamin D is produced in the skin by a reaction involving exposure to UV radiation. Active adults with XP and skin cancers received sufficient vitamin D in their diet in the past to result in normal serum concentrations of the active form (1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D) [Sollitto et al 1997]. However, children protected from sunlight very early in life have had low serum concentration of 25 hydroxy vitamin D; one child became susceptible to bone fractures [Ali et al 2009; Author, personal observation]. Dietary supplementation with oral vitamin D is recommended for persons with low serum concentration of serum vitamin D [Reichrath 2007; Author, personal communication].
The following are appropriate:

Use of irradiated, leukoreduced, cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe blood products

Delay of immunizations until immune reconstitution

Consideration for formula feeds in place of breast feeding until CMV status of mother is known. Caution should be taken to assess the quality of the water source for the infant formula.
