Most affected individuals are clinically normal at birth. Since alpha-mannosidosis can be treated with BMT, and possibly also by ERT in the future, there is a pressing need for newborn screening to identify affected individuals early, before the onset of severe, irreversible, pathology [Meikle et al 2006].
Hb Bart syndrome

Because of the severity of Hb Bart syndrome and the risk for maternal complications during the pregnancy with a fetus with this disorder, prenatal diagnosis and early termination of affected pregnancies is usually considered. Future studies on the functional outcomes of children with Hb Bart syndrome who have received chronic transfusion, intrauterine transfusions, and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, will allow physicians to improve the informed decision-making process for families weighing the risk-benefit profile of present treatment options.
No specific treatment is available for the sensorimotor neuropathy.

Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team that comprises a pediatrician or pediatric neurologist, an orthopedist, a physiotherapist, and an occupational therapist.
Zinc concentrations in these patients were decreased in the brain and visceral organs, and zinc showed opposing distributions to those for iron. Because zinc has antioxidant activity, treatment with an iron chelator accompanied by zinc may be useful in patients with aceruloplasminemia to diminish iron accumulation in the brain and body and to prevent or ameliorate systemic and neurologic symptoms [Miyajima 2015].
Prophylactic treatment aimed at reduction of attack frequency and severity can be achieved, as in other forms of periodic paralysis, with the following:

Lifestyle and dietary modification to avoid known triggers

Use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide 250-500 mg/1-2x/day or dichlorphenamide 50-100 mg/1-2x/day)

Daily use of slow-release potassium supplements, which may also be helpful in controlling attack rates in individuals prone to hypokalemia. Elevating the serum potassium concentration (>4 mEq/L) has the added benefit of narrowing the QT interval, thus reducing the risk of LQT-associated arrhythmias.

An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in individuals with tachycardia-induced syncope [Chun et al 2004]

Empiric treatment with flecainide [Bökenkamp et al 2007, Fox et al 2008, Pellizzón et al 2008] should be considered for significant, frequent ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of reduced left ventricular function [Tristani-Firouzi & Etheridge 2010]. A prospective open label study in ten individuals with ATS and a confirmed KCNJ2 pathogenic variant tested the effect of flecainide, a type 1c antiarrhythmic, for the prevention of cardiac arrhythmias [Miyamoto et al 2015]. Outcomes included a 24-hour Holter monitor before and after treatment, and a treadmill exercise test. Flecainide was found to significantly reduce the number of ventricular arrhythmias seen on Holter monitor, and to suppress exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Individuals were then followed for a mean of 23 months and no syncope or cardiac arrest was documented. The study concluded that flecainide may reduce cardiac arrhythmias in ATS; however, the ultimate benefit of flecainide for prevention of medically significant cardiac arrhythmias is still unknown.
Restoring a functional immune system is essential and can be achieved in several ways. The choice of therapy is complex and depends on a number of factors, including the affected person’s age and clinical status, the expectations and desires of the parents, and the specific experience and expertise of physicians in treating ADA-deficient SCID. A workshop held in 2008 developed consensus guidelines for therapy [Gaspar et al 2009] (full text).

Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation (BMT/SCT) from an HLA-identical healthy sib is the method of choice for treating all forms of SCID.

This can be performed without cytoreductive conditioning of the affected individual, and without depletion of donor T-cells.

Results vary among transplant centers, but the procedure is curative in approximately 70% or more of affected individuals.

The main risks are graft-versus-host disease and delayed or incomplete recovery of humoral immune function, requiring continued immunoglobulin replacement.

For the majority of individuals with ADA-deficient SCID who lack an HLA-identical related donor, the following two forms of treatment can be considered [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Candotti et al 2012, Baffelli et al 2015].

BMT/SCT from a “non-ideal” donor

Donor-derived T-cells are depleted to minimize the risk of graft-versus-host disease.

Pre-transplant cytoreductive “conditioning” of the recipient (individual with SCID) is often performed to prevent graft loss, which occurs with relative frequency in those with ADA-deficient SCID who are not conditioned.

Note: Some transplant centers do not perform conditioning of the recipient prior to a haploidentical transplant because of the risk of peri-transplant morbidity [Buckley et al 1999]. However, this latter approach has frequently been associated with a failure to achieve stable engraftment [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012].

Following a T-cell-depleted transplant, return of functional T-cells requires three to four months. B-cell reconstitution is delayed longer, or may not be adequately achieved, requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement therapy.

Note: Universal agreement regarding the best methods for performing partially mismatched BMT/SCT does not exist [Cancrini et al 2010, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012]. When considering therapeutic options, it is therefore important for parents to obtain specific information about prior experience and long-term results of transplants for ADA-deficient SCID at the center where their child will be treated.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has been used as a primary therapy in individuals who lack an HLA-identical marrow/stem cell donor when the risks associated with a partially mismatched transplant are deemed too great or when the risk of graft failure is high, as in older individuals with a delayed- or late-onset phenotype.

Polyethylene glycol-modified bovine adenosine deaminase (PEG-ADA) is composed of purified bovine ADA covalently linked to multiple strands of PEG (average mass: 5 kd) in order to prolong circulating life and reduce immunogenicity. It is administered by intramuscular injection once or twice a week (~15-60 U/kg per week).

By maintaining a high level of ADA activity in plasma, PEG-ADA eliminates extracellular Ado and dAdo, preventing the toxic metabolic effects that interfere with lymphocyte viability and function and that may injure other organs (liver, lung, brain) [Hershfield et al 1987, Hershfield & Mitchell 2001, Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

ERT is not curative; PEG-ADA must be given regularly and at a sufficient dose to maintain a non-toxic metabolic environment.

PEG-ADA has also been used as a secondary therapy in affected individuals who have failed to engraft following an unconditioned BMT/SCT, or in whom an acceptable recovery of immune function has not been achieved following experimental gene therapy.

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA recover partial immune function that is sufficient to prevent opportunistic infections and other clinical manifestations of SCID. A lag of approximately two to four months occurs before T-cell function appears, but B-cells often increase earlier than after BMT/SCT. Lymphocyte counts and in vitro lymphocyte function usually increase during the first year of ERT, but beyond the first year or two most PEG-ADA-treated individuals remain lymphopenic and in vitro lymphocyte function fluctuates widely. Most individuals remain clinically well, but over time both T and B lymphocytes gradually decline in number and display various functional abnormalities [Chan et al 2005, Malacarne et al 2005, Serana et al 2010, Brigida et al 2014]. Approximately half of those maintained on ERT were continuing to receive immunoglobulin replacement.

More than 300 affected individuals have received PEG-ADA. Survival of PEG-ADA-treated individuals beyond five years and through approximately ten years is approximately 75%-80%, comparable or superior to that achieved with BMT/SCT (i.e. in individuals who lack an HLA-identical donor). Most deaths occurred during the first six months of treatment, with the majority in the first month due to life-threatening infections present at diagnosis.

Lymphoproliferative disorders have developed in eight individuals who received PEG-ADA for eight to 22 years [Hershfield 2004; Chan et al 2005; Kaufman et al 2005; Husain et al 2007; Author, unpublished data]. Hepatocellular carcinoma developed in one affected individual after 13 years of ERT, and was present in another at the time ERT was initiated following an unsuccessful stem cell transplant. A third affected individual died of hepatoblastoma after 2.5 years of ERT; the tumor was thought to have been present but undetected prior to ERT. Several other affected individuals have developed persistent hemolytic anemia, which in some cases began in association with a viral infection or with central catheter sepsis [Hershfield 2004, Lainka et al 2005].

The limitations of PEG-ADA therapy include primary failure to recover protective immune function, the development of neutralizing antibodies that reduce or eliminate efficacy, immune dysregulation (particularly in the first few months of therapy), and a risk that immune function will eventually (i.e., beyond 10-15 years) decline to an inadequate level. Approximately 20% of affected individuals have discontinued ERT in order to undergo BMT/SCT. In most of these cases, the transplant had been intended at the time of diagnosis but not performed because a suitable donor was not available or the affected individual had been too ill to undergo the procedure. In a minority of individuals, the transplant was performed because of declining immune function while receiving PEG-ADA. Overall, approximately half of these secondary transplants have been successful [Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA for longer than a year develop antibodies that bind specifically to bovine ADA and are detectable by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); these are of no clinical significance. Neutralizing antibodies that inhibit catalytic activity and enhance clearance of PEG-ADA (and which do compromise efficacy) have developed in fewer than 10% of treated individuals [Chaffee et al 1992, Hershfield 1997]. No allergic or hypersensitivity reactions to PEG-ADA have occurred, and the treatment has generally been well tolerated.

Gene therapy, while still technically experimental, is still another treatment option for those who have failed all other options (see Therapies Under Investigation).
To prevent acute attacks patients are advised on the potential triggers as follows:

Assure that adequate nutrition is provided by a normal balanced diet. Avoid unsupervised calorie restriction diets, particularly those that exclude carbohydrate completely.

Avoid drugs and chemicals known to exacerbate porphyria, particularly prescribed medication and over the counter medication. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Seek timely treatment of systemic illness or infection.

Avoid excessive alcohol consumption and smoking.
Although several therapeutic modalities have been investigated, no preventive or curative treatment is available. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Maintaining joint range of motion through moderate non-weight-bearing exercise such as swimming may have beneficial effects.

Younger individuals with alkaptonuria should be directed toward non-contact and lower-impact sports.
Bone marrow (hematopoietic stem cell) transplantation (BMT/HSCT) is currently the only curative treatment for ALPS. Because of the risks associated with BMT, it has so far been performed mostly in individuals with ALPS with severe clinical phenotypes, such as those with homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in FAS, those with severe and/or refractory autoimmune cytopenias, those with lymphoma, and those who have developed complications from (often long-term) immunosuppressive therapy. It is likely, however, that individuals with undiagnosed forms of ALPS, including ALPS-FAS, have been transplanted.

Successful (reported) BMT in several individuals indicates that defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not pose a barrier to this treatment option [Benkerrou et al 1997, Sleight et al 1998, Dowdell et al 2010].
Routine childhood illnesses should be managed to minimize the acidosis associated with acute illnesses. Many affected infants in the Lancaster Amish population have died during metabolic exacerbations associated with an intercurrent infectious illness.
The efficacy of androgen therapy in preventing manifestations such as gynecomastia is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Women with CAIS have decreased bone mineral density, regardless of timing of gonadectomy [Oakes et al 2008]. However, women with PAIS who choose not to undergo gonadectomy do not appear to be at high risk for decreased bone mineral density [Bertelloni et al 2010].

In addition to estrogen replacement therapy, supplemental calcium and vitamin D are recommended.

Regular weight-bearing exercises are encouraged to maintain bone health.

Bisphosphonate therapy may be indicated for those individuals with evidence of decreased bone mineral density and/or multiple fractures.
Adequate treatment of APRT deficiency with allopurinol (or febuxostat in those who are allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol) prevents kidney stone formation and the development of CKD in most, if not all, individuals with the disorder [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010, Harambat et al 2012]. Therefore, all affected individuals should receive lifelong treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat).
The goal should be maintenance of plasma arginine concentration as near normal as possible, consistent with the individual's tolerance for the following interventions:

Restriction of dietary protein through use of specialized formulas. In the best of circumstances, the affected individual should be on the minimal protein intake needed to maintain protein biosynthetic function, growth, and normal or near-normal plasma amino acid concentrations. Half or more of dietary protein should be an arginine-free essential amino acid mixture.

Administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate/glycerolphenylbutyrate at a dose of 350-600 mg/kg/day in patients weighing less than 20 kg, or 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day in larger patients. The medicines are to be taken in equally divided amounts with each meal or feeding (i.e., 3-6x/day) [De Deyn et al 1997, Iyer et al 1998, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium].

Liver transplantation eliminates the hyperargininemia and presumably the risk for hyperammonemia.
Dietary restriction of protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays of long-term management.

Diet. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for dietary protein is higher than the minimum needed for normal growth and, hence, most children with a urea cycle disorder (UCD) can receive less than the RDA of protein and still maintain adequate growth. To achieve this end [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]:

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, branched chain amino acids, and arginine should be maintained within normal ranges.

Serum plasma total protein and prealbumin levels should be maintained within the low normal ranges.

Plasma glutamine concentration should be maintained at less than 1000 µmol/L if possible [normal range for individuals ages two to 18 years is 266-746 µmol/L].

Some of the correlations between compliance with the prescribed diet and outcome are contradictory. Although in some patients dietary therapy along with arginine supplementation have been shown to reverse the abnormalities of hair, to improve cognitive outcome, and to reverse abnormalities on EEG [Coryell et al 1964, Kvedar et al 1991, Ficicioglu et al 2009], in many dietary therapy has not been shown to influence the outcome of liver disease or cognitive impairment [Mori et al 2002, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010].

Arginine base supplementation. The doses of arginine base routinely recommended are 400-700 mg/kg/day in persons weighing less than 20 kg and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day in those weighing more than 20 kg. Supplementation with arginine base helps replenish this amino acid (which is deficient in persons with ASL deficiency) and promote excretion of nitrogen through the urea cycle as argininosuccinate. Arginine base is preferred for long-term chronic treatment as the chronic use of arginine hydrochloride may lead to hyperchloremic acidosis.

Arginine base supplementation has been shown to reverse the hair changes; however, its efficacy in preventing the chronic complications is not known. While evidence suggests that arginine base supplementation may prevent metabolic decompensations in those with severe early-onset disease, long-term follow up of persons identified through newborn screening programs did not detect a difference in outcomes between those who were supplemented with arginine base and those who were not [Batshaw et al 2001, Ficicioglu et al 2009, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. As the renal clearance of argininosuccinic acid is high, increasing its production through arginine supplementation effectively increases waste nitrogen disposal, thereby decreasing the risk of hyperammonemia. However, because of the theoretic risk of argininosuccinic acid toxicity on hepatocytes, reducing the amount of supplemental arginine by initiating nitrogen scavenging therapy may have merits.

Oral nitrogen scavenging therapy. Patients who have had frequent metabolic decompensations or episodes of elevated ammonia despite being on a protein-restricted diet and arginine base supplementation are candidates for oral nitrogen scavenging therapy, an alternative pathway therapy in which sodium benzoate and sodium phenyl butyrate stimulate the excretion of nitrogen in the form of hippuric acid and phenylacetylglutamine, respectively [Batshaw et al 2001]. The dose of sodium phenyl butyrate is 400-600 mg/kg/day for persons weighing up to 20 kg and 9-13 g/m2/day for those weighing more than 20 kg; the dose of sodium benzoate is 250-500 mg/kg/day.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Long-term correction of ASL deficiency in the liver can be accomplished by OLT [Lee & Goss 2001] which has resulted in “biochemical cure” [Robberecht et al 2006, Marble et al 2008, Newnham et al 2008]. However, OLT does not correct the arginine deficiency or elevation of argininosuccinic acid at the tissue level, two abnormalities thought to account for the long-term complications of ASL deficiency. Thus, the authors have recommended OLT only in patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations that are resistant to conventional medical therapy, or in patients who develop cirrhosis with associated metabolic decompensations [Author, personal observations].
Prospective randomized trials have not been conducted in ARVC for the prevention of arrhythmias. Management relies on personalized recommendations based on clinical assessment.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). Observational studies support that ICD placement is effective in reducing the risk for sudden cardiac death in ARVC. ICD placement should be considered in anyone with a clinical diagnosis of ARVC. Corrado et al [2010] reported results of ICD implantation in 106 individuals with ARVC who met task force criteria. Device placement was based on the presence of arrhythmia risk factor defined as syncope, family history of sudden death, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and whether ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation was inducible in an electrophysiology done at the time of device implant. Over the follow-up interval of 58 months, 24% of subjects had an appropriate ICD discharge. Syncope was found to predict appropriate ICD discharge. The advisability of placing an ICD for primary prevention remains a question of debate [Zorzi et al 2016].

The ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, which are based on experience and previously published reports recommend as a Class I indication (i.e., procedure/treatment should be performed) ICD implantation for prevention of sudden cardiac death in individuals with documented sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation who have a reasonable expectation of survival with good functional status for more than one year. Class II indications (i.e., it is reasonable to perform procedure/treatment) for ICD implantation include extensive disease (e.g., left ventricular involvement), family members with sudden death, or undiagnosed syncope when ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia cannot be excluded as the cause of syncope while the individual was on optimal medical therapy [Tracy et al 2013, Priori et al 2015].
With the exception of AVED, Refsum syndrome, CTX and CoQ10 deficiency, no specific treatments exist for hereditary ataxia.If vitamin E treatment is initiated in presymptomatic individuals (e.g., younger sibs of an index case), the symptoms of AVED do not develop [Amiel et al 1995, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].
Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of the disease, allows early appropriate treatment and monitoring.
Uveal melanoma. Arc welding has been associated with risk of uveal melanoma and this should be avoided if possible.

Sunglasses with high UVA and UVB protection can reduce risk of cancer on the eyelids, but data regarding the benefit of sunglasses for uveal melanoma are lacking.

Malignant mesothelioma. As with all individuals, asbestos exposure and smoking should also be avoided.

Cutaneous melanoma. Primary prevention is limited to those measures typically used to reduce the risk for cutaneous melanoma, including limiting of sun exposure, regular use of sunscreen and protective clothing, and regular dermatologic examinations.
Affected individuals should cover up exposed skin by wearing long sleeves, high collars, and hats; complete sunblock should be used.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Prompt administration of biotin and thiamine early in the disease course (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Avoidance of triggers/stressors including trauma and surgery
No preventive or curative treatment is available for BHDS. However, development of renal cell carcinoma has the strongest positive association with cigarette smoking [Moore et al 2005].
All individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency (<10% mean normal enzyme activity), even those who have some residual biotinidase enzyme activity, should be treated with biotin independent of their genotype [Wolf 2003]. Note: Although Möslinger et al [2003] stated that children with greater than 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may not need treatment, a child with 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may be just as likely to develop symptoms as one with total loss of enzyme activity [Wolf 2002]. It is therefore strongly recommended that all children with profound biotinidase deficiency, regardless of the residual biotinidase enzyme activity, be treated with biotin.

Note: Because genotype/phenotype correlations in biotinidase deficiency are not well established, decisions regarding treatment should be based on the results of enzyme activity rather than molecular genetic testing.

Biotinidase deficiency is treated by supplementation with oral biotin in free form as opposed to the bound form. Children with biotinidase deficiency identified by newborn screening will remain asymptomatic with compliance to biotin therapy.

All symptomatic children with biotinidase deficiency have improved after treatment with 5-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin is usually dispensed as a tablet or a capsule (most of which is filler: the quantity of biotin is minute relative to the quantity of filler). To administer biotin to an infant or young child, the tablet can be crushed or the contents of the capsule can be mixed with breast milk or formula in a spoon, medicine dispenser, or syringe. Note that the contents of the tablet or capsule should not be put into a bottle because the mixture will stick to the bottle and/or fail to pass through the nipple, thus delivering inconsistent doses.

Although biotin occasionally is dispensed as a solution or syrup, these liquid preparations are not recommended because the mixture – which is a suspension – tends to settle (especially upon refrigeration) and to grow bacteria upon storage. The liquid preparations usually do not provide a consistent dose and should not be added to milk in a bottle.

The biochemical abnormalities and seizures rapidly resolve after biotin treatment, followed by improvement of the cutaneous abnormalities. Hair growth returns over a period of weeks to months in children who have alopecia. Optic atrophy and hearing loss may be resistant to therapy, especially if a long period has elapsed between their onset and the initiation of treatment. Some treated children have rapidly achieved developmental milestones, whereas others have continued to show delays.

Only a few anecdotal reports exist regarding symptoms in children with partial biotinidase deficiency who were not treated with biotin. Because there is no known toxicity for biotin, children with partial deficiency are usually treated with 1-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin therapy is lifelong. There are no known adverse side effects from pharmacologic doses of biotin. In fact, the major problem is the lack of treatment or non-compliance with prescribed treatment.

More data are required to determine the dosage of biotin that is necessary for older children with either profound or partial biotinidase deficiency, but essentially all children have tolerated 10 mg/day of oral biotin with no side effects. Anecdotally, two girls with profound biotinidase deficiency developed hair loss during adolescence that resolved following increase of their biotin dosages from 10 mg per day to 15 or 20 mg per day.

A protein-restricted diet is not necessary.
Otologic manifestations of disease can often be surgically corrected with correction of the cupped-ear malformation and occasionally improvement in the conductive component of the hearing loss.

Branchial arch anomalies can be surgically corrected.
Breast cancer

Consider prophylactic bilateral mastectomy

Given the conflicting data on the degree of risk reduction of breast cancer associated with prophylactic oophorectomy, consider discussing the risks and benefits of this approach with a genetics specialist.

Chemoprevention. In a retrospective study tamoxifen reduced the risk for breast cancer by 62% among healthy women with a BRCA2 germline variant [King et al 2001]. The sample size, however, was extremely small. In a nested case-control study, tamoxifen use was associated with a 41%-50% reduction in the risk of developing contralateral breast cancer [Narod et al 2000, Metcalfe et al 2005]. There have been no prospective randomized trials of tamoxifen as a chemoprevention agent in women with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants.

Breast feeding for a cumulative total of more than one year reduced the risk for breast cancer [Jernström et al 2004].

Ovarian cancer/fallopian tube cancer

Consider prophylactic oophorectomy, recognizing that completion of childbearing may factor into this decision. Several studies have documented a significant (80%-96%) risk reduction in ovarian cancer following risk-reducing oophorectomy [Kauff et al 2002, Rebbeck et al 2002, Rutter et al 2003].

Salpingectomy. Recent advances in understanding the molecular events preceding ovarian cancer have established the fallopian tube as the origin of the majority of high-grade serous ovarian cancers, leading to the consideration of salpingectomy with ovarian retention until the age of natural menopause as the first step in primary prevention. This approach is likely to reduce the health hazards of premature menopause, but its adoption will require prospective data to establish its safety and efficacy [Daly et al 2015].

Tubal ligation. A meta-analysis of 13 studies showed a reduction in risk for ovarian cancer of 34% in the general population after tubal ligation [Cibula et al 2011]. A meta-analysis of modifiers of risk of cancer in individuals with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 found a reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer in females with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, although study design issues limit the impact of these findings [Friebel et al 2014].

Oral contraceptive use has been associated with a reduction in ovarian cancer risk of 14% among women who had ever used oral contraceptives and 38% among long-term users [Whittemore et al 2004a].

Note: There is no evidence that use of current (after 1975) oral contraceptive formulations increases the risk for early-onset breast cancer for women with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.
Quinidine (1-2 g daily) has been shown to restore ST segment elevation and decrease the incidence of arrhythmias [Belhassen et al 2004, Hermida et al 2004, Probst et al 2006].
Dietary restriction of total fat intake may prevent hypertriglyceridemia (see Treatment of Manifestations).
There is no evidence to date that use of a special diet and/or cofactor (zinc) treatment during periods of wellness prevents metabolic decompensations.
There are no preventive measures for stroke or vascular dementia.

Migraine attacks can be treated symptomatically and prophylactically according to migraine care standards.
Salt-wasting crisis. Newborn screening programs aim to identify infants with classic 21-OHD CAH in order to initiate glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid treatment prior to a potentially life-threatening salt-wasting crisis.

See Treatment of Manifestations, Glucocorticoid replacement therapy and Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy.
The only preventive measure in an asymptomatic individual is surgical removal of a heart tumor (cardiac myxoma) prior to the development of heart dysfunction, stroke, or other embolism.
Early institution of therapy may reduce but not completely prevent primary manifestations.

To prevent metabolic decompensations, patients should be advised to avoid situations that result in catabolism, such as prolonged fasting and dehydration. Of note, during an intercurrent illness patients may be treated with glucose-containing IV fluid.

Flu prevention (i.e., immunization) should be a routine part of health maintenance.
MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib), characterized by hepatic-intestinal disease, is the most common type of CDG for which therapy exists. Because so few individuals have been treated and the natural history of this disorder is variable, careful monitoring and discussion among physicians treating these individuals are warranted [Jaeken et al 1998, Niehues et al 1998, de Lonlay et al 1999, Hendriksz et al 2001, de Lonlay & Seta 2009]:

In the first reported case, mannose normalized hypoproteinemia and coagulation defects and rapidly improved the protein-losing enteropathy and hypoglycemia [Harms et al 2002]. One gram of mannose per kg body weight was given per day, divided into five oral doses.

In two children with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) treated from infancy with mannose, protein-losing enteropathy and vomiting improved significantly; however, the two children were recently reported to have progressive liver fibrosis [Mention et al 2008].

Recurrent episodes of thromboembolism and consumptive coagulopathy did not recur in an individual with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) treated with mannose [Tamminga et al 2008].

For some individuals with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib), heparin therapy can be an alternative to mannose in the treatment of the enteropathy [de Lonlay & Seta 2009].

A woman age 28 years with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) developed progressive liver fibrosis despite mannose treatment and heparin therapy and had a successful liver transplant with resolution of her symptoms for at least two years post transplant [Janssen et al 2014].
Maintaining appropriate plasma carnitine concentrations through oral L-carnitine supplementation (see Treatment of Manifestations) and preventing hypoglycemia (with frequent feeding and avoiding fasting) typically eliminate the risk of metabolic, hepatic, cardiac, and muscular complications.

Note: Hospitalization to administer intravenous glucose is recommended for individuals with CDSP who are required to fast because of medical or surgical procedures or who cannot tolerate oral intake because of an illness such as gastroenteritis.
Initiation of steroids prior to the onset of proximal muscle weakness and/or sclerotic bone changes has not been reported. Because of the variable symptomatology and decreased penetrance, treatment of asymptomatic individuals cannot be recommended.
See Treatment of Manifestations.

Breast-feeding had been thought to exert a protective effect against the development of celiac disease in early childhood; however, this was not shown to be the case in two recent clinical trials [Lionetti et al 2014, Vriezinga et al 2014].

Earlier studies comparing breast-fed children with children who were not breast-fed found that breast-fed children who then developed celiac disease were more likely to have:

A later age of onset of symptoms;

Fewer classic symptoms such as diarrhea, growth disturbance, vomiting, abdominal pain, or distention [Ivarsson et al 2002];

A higher rate of “non-classic” symptoms [D'Amico et al 2005].
Strict avoidance of sunlight and protection from light are indicated.
Antibacterial prophylaxis. No randomized prospective clinical trials of antibacterial prophylaxis in persons with CGD have been performed; however, several retrospective studies suggest that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective in preventing bacterial infections. Lifelong daily antibacterial prophylaxis with oral TMP-SMX is recommended at 5 mg/kg up to 320 mg administered in two divided doses. Note: In liquid TMP-SMX the concentration of TMP is 40 mg / 5 mL and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg / 5 mL; the therapeutic dose of TMP-SMX is determined by the TMP component.

Alternatives to TMP-SMX for patients allergic to sulfonamides include trimethoprim as a single agent, dicloxacillin, cephalosporins, and fluroquinolones.

Antifungal prophylaxis. The use of azole antifungal drugs has markedly reduced the frequency and severity of fungal infections in CGD. Lifelong antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole 5 mg/kg oral solution to a maximum of 200 mg once daily is recommended [Gallin et al 2003].

In a randomized trial, 39 patients were assigned to receive either placebo or itraconazole (100 mg/day in patients age 5-12 years; 200 mg/day in those age >13 years and weight >50 kg); only one person receiving itraconazole had a serious fungal infection compared to seven in the placebo group [Gallin et al 2003].

For those unable to tolerate itraconazole, posaconazole has been studied in the oncology setting and is likely to be effective in CGD as well [Segal et al 2005].

Of note, the primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts.

Immunomodulatory therapy. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) has become part of the prophylactic regimen in most centers in the United States; however, opinions differ on its use as primary prophylaxis and in the treatment of acute infections. The exact mechanism of IFN-gamma in CGD is not known, adding to the debate over its utility.

An international multicenter randomized prospective placebo-controlled trial showed a decrease in the rate of serious infections in the group receiving IFN-gamma (22%) versus placebo (46%) after a follow-up period of 8.9 months. This improvement was independent of age, CGD genotype, or concomitant use of other prophylactic antibiotics. Three prospective Phase IV trials showed decreased rates of infections ranging from 0.13 to 0.4 per patient year. However, one prospective study comparing treatment with TMP-SMX and itraconazole alone versus addition of IFN-gamma showed no difference in the rates of infection [Martire et al 2008].

Some practitioners use IFN-gamma only in the setting of acute infection, rather than as primary prophylaxis. The data for this are anecdotal and unimpressive. The authors typically discontinue IFN-gamma during acute infection, as its utility is unclear and the exacerbation of malaise and fever can confuse the clinical picture and alter decision making [Holland 2010].

Administration by injection, cost, and lack of familiarity with cytokine therapy all affect the use of IFN-gamma in CGD. The authors use IFN-gamma in addition to antimicrobials as prophylaxis [Holland 2010]. Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA). For BSA >0.5/m2 the dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously 3x/week; for BSA ≤0.5/m2 the dose is 1.5 μg/kg subcutaneously 3x/week. Fever, myalgias, and malaise are the most common side effects but can be alleviated with concurrent administration of acetaminophen.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is the only known cure for CGD. Historically, HSCT has been associated with high morbidity and mortality and thus reluctantly offered. However, the use of non-myeloablative conditioning regimens has greatly decreased the risk of regimen-related toxicity as well as allowing for transplantation in the setting of active infection; recent reports place transplant survival at greater than 90% [Güngör et al 2014] with roughly equal survival among patients with matched related, matched unrelated, and umbilical cord blood donors.

The issue of which individuals with CGD should undergo HSCT remains complex. While transplant-related mortality rates have fallen dramatically and successful cure has risen, issues of long-term risk, sterility, graft-versus-host disease, donor matching, expense, center experience, availability, and insurance coverage all strongly influence family and physician choices regarding transplantation. Levels of residual superoxide production have correlated well with overall survival [Kuhns et al 2010]; that is, individuals with very low superoxide production had worse long-term survival than those with higher levels of residual superoxide production, suggesting that this latter group could benefit more from transplantation. However, even within this group some patients do relatively well for long periods.

Patients with CGD may experience behavioral, emotional, and learning difficulties as a consequence of chronic disease, recurrent hospitalization, and limitations of activity. Older children and adolescents are especially likely to be non-compliant with respect to prophylaxis and risk avoidance, increasing their risk for CGD-related complications. The inflammatory bowel disease present in up to 50% of persons with X-linked CGD may result in discomfort and growth impairment, and may require colostomy or colectomy. Overall quality of life is reduced in children with CGD, whereas patients with CGD who have undergone transplant report quality of life comparable to healthy children [Cole et al 2013]. Thus, with improved outcomes HSCT presents an increasingly reasonable alternative and the possibility of a normal life.

As HSCT becomes safer, more reliable and more available it will likely be an early and initial choice for the management of CGD. Currently, many centers offer HSCT after the first life-threatening infection, but with advances in the technique, the availability of donors, especially for minority populations, and the availability of experienced centers, that equation and timing may change. Even without HSCT the majority of persons with CGD will live into adulthood. There is currently very little difference in overall survival over the first decades of life between medical and transplant management. However, the significant mortality in medical management begins to accrue after age 20 [Kuhns et al 2010]. Aggressive prophylaxis and infection management increase the likelihood of doing well.

The European Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Working Group 2011 statement [EBMT Working Group 2011] recommends allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CGD in the case of unavailability of reliable specialist medical care, non-compliance with long-term antibiotic/antifungal prophylaxis, one or more life-threatening infections, severe granulomatous disease with progressive organ dysfunction (e.g., lung restriction), steroid-dependent granulomatous disease (e.g., colitis), or ongoing therapy-refractory infection (e.g., aspergillosis).
See Treatment of Manifestations.
To prevent hyperammonemia and improve growth, a diet rich in protein and lipids and low in carbohydrates is recommended [Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006, Dimmock et al 2007, Saheki et al 2008, Dimmock et al 2009].

High-carbohydrate meals and alcohol should be avoided.

Arginine administration may be effective in preventing hyperammonemic crises.
ARO

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Since the defective osteoclasts in osteopetrosis are of hematopoietic origin, allogeneic HSCT can be curative. Most manifestations (bone sclerosis, bone marrow failure, and extramedullary hematopoiesis) can be prevented or reversed by HSCT.

Secondary neurosensory impairments caused by nerve compression may be prevented by early transplantation, but not reversed when they are already present.

Primary neurologic problems and retinal degeneration developing in the neuronopathic form of ARO, however, are independent of the bone disease and therefore cannot be improved or prevented by HSCT. Persons with ARO resulting from CLCN7 pathogenic variants who do not develop neurologic complications have been reported [Pangrazio et al 2010; A Schulz and U Kornak, unpublished results].

It is highly important but difficult to exclude individuals with the neuronopathic form from this invasive treatment. On the other hand, HSCT should be performed as soon as possible in the majority of those without primary neurologic sequelae to prevent irreversible secondary complications, including visual impairment. The evaluation of affected individuals and treatment by HSCT should therefore be performed in experienced pediatric centers after multidisciplinary evaluation to assess the severity of the disease and individual prognostic factors.

The outcome of HSCT in ARO has been analyzed in a retrospective survey of the European Society of Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and the European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) [Sobacchi et al 2013]. The five-year disease-free survival was estimated at 88% for genoidentical transplants, 80% for matched unrelated transplants, and 66% for haploidentical transplants [Sobacchi et al 2013]. In a recently published report of 193 patients transplanted in various centers by a cyclophosphamide-based regimen, the five-year probabilities of survival were 62% after HLA-matched sib transplantation and 42% after alternative donor transplantation [Orchard et al 2015]. A further improved outcome was most recently reported from three large transplant centers using a fludarabine-based conditioning regimen [Natsheh et al 2016; Schulz and Moshous, personal communication].

Note: Because TCIRG1 pathogenic variants are more often the cause of ARO than are CLCN7 pathogenic variants, the majority of HSCTs have been performed in infants with TCIRG1 rather than CLCN7 pathogenic variants. However, there appears to be no significant difference in treatment outcome between individuals with TCIRG1 and CLCN7 pathogenic variants [A Schulz et al, unpublished results].

The incidence of severe complications post-HSCT is high, particularly when alternative stem cell sources are used. Complications include rejection, delayed hematopoietic reconstitution, venous occlusive disease, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercalcemic crisis [Steward et al 2004, Corbacioglu et al 2006, Shroff et al 2012].

Cranial nerve dysfunction (visual impairment caused by optic nerve atrophy) is irreversible in most cases. In the authors' series including about 30 individuals, about two thirds of affected individuals were visually impaired after successful transplantation [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Progressive neurologic sequelae, developmental delay, and repeated seizures occur in a subset of individuals after successful HSCT [Steward 2003]. Severe neurologic manifestations other than visual impairment have been seen in about 10% of individuals in the authors' series [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Other. Conservative treatment strategies include stimulation of host osteoclasts with calcium restriction, calcitriol, steroids, parathyroid hormone, and interferon [Kocher & Kasser 2003]. Since evidence for a favorable outcome in severe osteopetrosis is limited and because side effects are severe (particularly in infants), these drugs may be administered in special situations only.
Sudden respiratory insufficiency or apneic attacks provoked by fever or infections are common in individuals with pathogenic variants in CHAT or RAPSN, even if the myasthenic symptoms are mild between crises. These individuals should receive prophylactic anticholinesterase therapy. Note: Less frequently, acute respiratory events may also occur in other CMS subtypes. Parents of infants are advised to use apnea monitors and be trained in CPR.
No treatment reverses or slows the natural progression of CMT.
No treatment that reverses or slows the natural process of CMT exists.
Avoidance of anticoagulant exposure and activities that involve an increased risk for head trauma may decrease the risk for intracerebral hemorrhage.
Early CoQ10 supplementation may prevent the onset of manifestations of primary CoQ10 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations).
A high-carbohydrate diet (70% of calories) that is low in fat (<20% of calories) is generally recommended to provide a constant supply of carbohydrate energy, particularly during illness. Restriction of dietary fat intake is somewhat controversial when affected individuals are well. If the physician chooses to recommend a low-fat diet when the affected individual is well, supplementation with essential fatty acids is necessary.

Provision of approximately one third of total calories as medium-chain triglycerides is recommended during periods of illness. C6-C10 fatty acids do not require the carnitine shuttle for entry into the mitochondrion.

Frequent feeding is recommended, particularly for infants, given their limited glycogen reserves. Cornstarch feedings given overnight provide a constant source of slow-release carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycemia during sleep.

Older children should not fast for more than 12 hours and for a shorter time if evidence of a febrile or gastrointestinal illness exists.

Adults should be aware of the risks of fasting and they and their primary care physician should be aware of the risks during surgery when both metabolic stress and fasting occur.

Brief hospital admission for administration of intravenous dextrose-containing fluid should be considered in individuals with known CPT1A deficiency who are required to fast more than 12 hours because of illness or surgical or medical procedures.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Infusions of glucose during intercurrent infections to prevent catabolism

Note: Oral glucose cannot achieve this effect.

High-carbohydrate (70%) and low-fat (<20%) diet to provide fuel for glycolysis

Frequent meals and avoidance of extended fasting

Avoidance of prolonged exercise and other known triggers
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Prevention of hyperammonemia is achieved through lifelong protein restriction, nitrogen scavenger therapy, and possible liver transplantation based on metabolic control (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Cystine depletion therapy with cysteamine bitartrate (Cystagon®) has revolutionized the management and prognosis of people with nephropathic cystinosis. Cysteamine is now the worldwide treatment of choice for cystinosis. This free thiol can deplete cystinotic cells of more than 90% of their cystine content [Kleta & Gahl 2004]. Wilmer et al [2011] found that cysteamine also increased intracellular glutathione levels and restored the glutathione redox status of cystinotic cells.

Cysteamine therapy should be considered for all affected individuals, regardless of age and transplantation status [Gahl et al 2007]. With early, diligent treatment many individuals with cystinosis have survived into their twenties without the need for renal transplantation [Gahl et al 2002].

Regular and diligent cysteamine therapy prevents or delays end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [Markello et al 1993] and hypothyroidism, enhances growth, and depletes muscle parenchyma of cystine [Gahl et al 2002].

It is critical to initiate cysteamine therapy immediately after diagnosis to allow for kidney growth and acquisition, rather than loss, of renal function [Kleta et al 2004a].

Cystagon® is taken orally every six hours at 60 to 90 mg of free base per kg per day (1.3 to 1.95 g/m2/day). The recommended adult dose is 500 mg free base every six hours; however, for both children and adults, the dose is titrated to reduce, if possible, leukocyte cystine concentration (measured 5-6 hours after a dose) to below 1.0 nmol half-cystine/mg protein [Belldina et al 2003, Kleta & Gahl 2004, Kleta 2006].

Procysbi® (cysteamine bitartrate) is a delayed-release capsule intended for affected individuals age six years and older. Procysbi® is taken every 12 hours. Blood testing showed Procysbi® was noninferior to Cystagon® in controlling cystine levels [Langman et al 2012].

Side effects of cysteamine treatment include nausea and vomiting, in part because of its unpleasant odor and taste [Schneider 2004]. Cysteamine increases gastrin synthesis and gastric acid production. Omeprazole may be of benefit for oral cysteamine treatment [Dohil et al 2003].

With long-term cystine-depleting therapy most late complications of cystinosis can be avoided.

Despite diligent oral cysteamine therapy, cysteamine hydrochloride eye drops or CYSTARAN™ (cysteamine ophthalmic solution) 0.44% are required to achieve sufficient tissue concentration to dissolve corneal crystals [Gahl et al 2000]. Cysteamine eye drops are given ten to 12 times per day as a 0.55% solution with benzalkonium chloride 0.01% as a preservative [Tsilou et al 2007]. With good compliance photophobia is relieved within weeks (Figure 1b, 1c) [Kaiser-Kupfer et al 1987, Gahl et al 2000]. Systemic cysteamine treatment ameliorates or postpones retinal deterioration [Tsilou et al 2006].
Early treatment with CDCA in presymptomatic individuals appears to prevent clinical manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Beta-blockers are indicated for primary prevention in all clinically affected individuals (see Treatment of Manifestations) and in individuals with pathogenic variants in the genes associated with CPVT who have a negative exercise stress test (class IIa). Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day). For symptomatic individuals with CPVT, the maximum tolerated dosage should be maintained. Flecainide can be added for primary prevention of cardiac arrest when beta-blockers alone cannot control the onset of arrhythmias during exercise stress test.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is effective in elevating blood neutrophil counts in both congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia. G-CSF treatment ameliorates the symptoms and problems of infections in almost all affected individuals. (Although both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used to treat ELANE-related neutropenia, G-CSF is much more effective and associated with fewer adverse effects than GM-CSF.)

In cyclic neutropenia, G-CSF shortens the periods of neutropenia as well as the length of the neutropenic cycle. Treatment is known to be effective at least as early as age six months to one year. Studies indicate that treatment is effective with no adverse effects on growth, development, or pregnancy outcome with follow-up to age 18 years [Dale et al 2003; Dale, unpublished observations].

Treatment of cyclic neutropenia requires daily or alternate-day injections of G-CSF, normally in a dose of approximately 2 µg/kg/day. Individuals with congenital neutropenia often require higher doses (e.g., 5-10 µg/kg/day).

Common side effects of G-CSF include bone pain and headache, splenomegaly, and osteoporosis. Vasculitis, rashes, arthralgias, and glomerulonephritis have been infrequently reported [Dale et al 2003].

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)

For affected individuals with a well-matched donor, HSCT may be the preferred treatment option [Choi & Levine 2010, Oshima et al 2010].

HSCT is the only alternative therapy for individuals with congenital neutropenia who are refractory to high-dose G-CSF or who undergo malignant transformation.
Droxidopa can improve the orthostatic hypotension and symptoms, but these recur if treatment is stopped.
Whenever a child presents with progressive sensorineural hearing loss and progressive ataxia, with or without neurologic or cutaneous symptoms, biotinidase deficiency should be considered, with initiation of treatment as early as possible to prevent irreversible sequelae.
For individuals with TS-NSAN:

Prevent febrile episodes.

Avoid the level of exercise and/or ambient conditions that would cause body temperature to rise.

Treat febrile episodes as quickly as possible to return body temperature to normal.

Educate individuals and their caregivers that the onset of hearing loss may be the first sign of a pyretic/infectious event requiring treatment [Starr et al 1998]. Appropriate precautions including avoidance of potentially dangerous or noisy situations should be encouraged.
Physical therapy may prevent early joint contractures.
No compelling evidence exists for the prevention of acute episodes, despite multiple attempted dietary strategies and medications. The frequency of acute episodes decreases with age in most patients with DLD deficiency.

Although no specific therapy exists to prevent the neurologic dysfunction and/or the hepatic manifestations of DLD deficiency, avoidance of precipitating factors is recommended. As such, empiric recommendations include the following:

Provide protein intake at or around RDA and titrate based on growth and plasma amino acid values. See MSUD for the recommended intake and target levels of leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

Supplement with levocarnitine if deficient.

Avoid fasting, catabolic states, and extremes of dietary intake until dietary tolerance/stressors are identified.

Avoid liver-toxic medications.
As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of GTPCH1-deficient DRD; levodopa therapy from infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations.
In addition to the pharmacologic treatments mentioned above, behavioral measures such as avoidance of stress, abrupt movements, loud noises or caffeine intake may be used to reduce disease manifestations in either a symptomatic or an asymptomatic person.
Treatment with acetazolamide does not appear to prevent the progression of interictal symptoms [Baloh & Winder 1991]. It is not clear how acetazolamide prevents attacks of EA2, although Yue et al [1997] speculated that the mechanism involves a decrease in pH, thus inhibiting ion permeation through open calcium channels. Acetazolamide could stabilize channels that fail to properly inactivate. Acetazolamide may not work in some individuals, particularly if the pathogenic variant distorts the pore region of the channel, altering the stabilizing effect of H+ ions.

To date no data regarding whether 4-aminopyridine can prevent the progression of interictal symptoms are available.
New blister formation can be minimized by wrapping and padding of extremities; use of soft and properly fitted clothing and footwear; and avoidance of: contact with adhesives, contact sports, and other activities that create friction.
Age-appropriate play involving activities that cause minimal trauma to the skin is encouraged.

Dressings and padding are needed to protect bony prominences from blister-inducing impact.

If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of DEB, cesarean delivery may reduce trauma to the skin during delivery.
In the following studies, small sample sizes limit the statistical validity and generalizability of the results; however, given the lack of effective treatments for EBS, these potentially helpful treatments should be considered on a case-by-case basis:

20% aluminum chloride applied to palms and soles can reduce blister formation in some individuals with EBS, presumably by decreasing sweating.

A case report [Abitbol & Zhou 2009] and small study [Swartling et al 2010] suggest that injection of botulinum toxin into the feet is effective in reducing blistering and associated pain. The mechanism of action is unclear, but likely relates to reduction of sweating and subsequent maceration of the skin.

In one study of a limited number of individuals with EBS-gen sev, cyproheptadine (Periactin®) reduced blistering. This may result from the anti-pruritic effect of the medication, but the true mechanism is not clear [Neufeld-Kaiser & Sybert 1997].

In another study, tetracycline reduced blister counts in two thirds of persons with EBS-loc [Weiner et al 2004]. A recent study evaluated three months of oral erythromycin therapy in six children ages one to eight years with EBS-gen sev, and showed the medication was well tolerated and improved blistering in three children [Chiaverini et al 2015]. An anti-inflammatory mechanism, rather an anti-microbial mechanism, is proposed for the effect of antibiotics in the treatment of EBS.

Other. Use of keratolytics and softening agents such as urea for palmar plantar hyperkeratosis has some benefit in preventing tissue thickening and cracking. In addition, soaking the hands and feet in salt water helps soften hyperkeratosis and ease debridement of the thick skin.
Very young children with pronounced skin fragility can wear protective pads or bandages over the forehead, knees, and shins in order to avoid skin tears. Older children who are active can wear soccer pads or ski stockings with shin padding during activities.

For recommendations on prevention of primary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising but has no effect on the primary findings of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, and joint hypermobility. In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults, with proportionally reduced doses for children; however, there is no limitation.
Improved joint stability may be achieved by low-resistance exercise to increase muscle tone (subconscious resting muscle contraction), as opposed to muscle strength (voluntary force exerted at will). Emphasis should be placed on both core and extremity muscle tone. Examples include walking, bicycling, low-impact aerobics, swimming or water exercise, and simple range-of-motion exercise without added resistance. Core toning activities, such as balance exercises and repetitive motions focusing on the abdominal, lumbar, and interscapular muscles, are also important. Progress should be made by gradually increasing repetitions, frequency, or duration, not resistance. It often takes months or years for significant progress to be recognized.

Wide-grip writing utensils can reduce strain on finger and hand joints. An unconventional grasp of a writing utensil, gently resting the shaft in the web between the thumb and index finger and securing the tip between the distal interphalangeal joints or middle phalanges of the index and third fingers (rather than using the tips of the fingers), results in substantially reduced axial stress to the interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, and carpometacarpal joints. These adjustments frequently result in marked reduction of pain in the index finger and at the base of the thumb.
Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. Note: When indicated, splenectomy is curative; however, it can have potential life-threatening complications (see Treatment of Manifestations). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).
Sun avoidance is the only effective means of preventing primary manifestations.
Avoidance of triggers (warmth, prolonged standing) may reduce the number or severity of episodes.
Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination should be initiated at age nine years in order to reduce the risk of gynecologic cancer in females, and possibly reduce the risk of oral cancer in all individuals.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The two ERTs using recombinant or gene-activated human α-Gal A enzyme that have been evaluated in clinical trials are Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and Replagal™ (agalsidase alfa 0.2 mg/kg every 2 weeks). Both were approved in 2001 by the European Agency for Evaluation of Medical Products; only Fabrazyme® was approved by the FDA for use in the United States.

The following is a summary of some of the clinical trials for each drug:

Single-center double-blind placebo-controlled studies of agalsidase alfa have shown a beneficial effect of ERT on neuropathic pain [Schiffmann et al 2001] and left ventricular hypertrophy [Hughes et al 2008]. Data from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) suggest that ERT with agalsidase alfa improves pain and quality of life, reduces the natural rate of decline of renal and cardiac function in males and females with Fabry disease [Mehta et al 2009] and may improve life expectancy [Beck et al 2015]. The enzyme is safe in children [Ramaswami et al 2006]. In persons with advanced renal disease, weekly administration of 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa may be associated with a slower decline in renal function [Schiffmann et al 2007, Schiffmann et al 2015].

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of agalsidase beta demonstrated increased clearance of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) from the endothelial cells of the kidney, heart, and skin among treated subjects [Eng et al 2001].

A Phase IV extension study showed that the risk of major clinical events (a combination of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, development of ESRD, or a 33% increase in serum creatinine concentration) was reduced by 53% with agalsidase beta treatment after adjustment for baseline proteinuria (P=0.06) [Banikazemi et al 2007]. In a ten-year follow up of these individuals, with additional data from the Fabry Registry, Germain et al [2015] reported that 49 of 52 were alive and 42/52 (81%) did not experience any severe clinical events during the ten-year treatment interval. Disease progression was most likely to be observed in those individuals who initiated treatment after age 40 years and/or had advanced renal disease at baseline. A study of cardiac outcomes from the Fabry Registry of 115 males treated with agalsidase beta for at least two years reports that treated individuals fared better than 48 untreated males. Left ventricular mass fell at a slope of -3.6 g/year in 31 males aged 18-30 years but rose by 9.5 g/year in 15 males who were not treated [Germain et al 2013].

The largest comparative study is the Canadian Fabry Disease initiative. Sirrs et al [2014] have reported five-year follow-up data on 362 subjects for a composite endpoint (death, neurologic or cardiovascular events, development of ESRD, or sustained increase in serum creatinine of 50% from baseline). Ninety-two of 178 individuals treated with ERT were randomly allocated to either agalsidase alfa or agalsidase beta. No differences were found with regard to the clinical efficacy of the two medications, and individuals who switched from agalsidase beta to agalsidase alfa during the time of Fabrazyme® shortage were stable. In comparison with the placebo group in the Banikazemi study individuals treated with ERT had a significant reduction in clinical events, which occurred at an older age. The eight-year follow-up data continued to suggest that the two medications are equivalent at their standard doses [M West, personal communication].

Antibody formation has been reported with both agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta in males, but not females [Linthorst et al 2005, Wilcox et al 2012]. Lenders et al [2015] reported that 40% of 68 males with Fabry disease on ERT have evidence of serum-mediated inhibition of agalsidase activity. They further reported that inhibition-positive individuals have worse clinical outcomes and higher levels of lyso-Gb3 than inhibition-negative individuals. There appeared to be no difference between agalsidase alfa and beta with regard to the development of serum inhibitors. The impact of antibody formation on the overall efficacy of treatment is currently unknown.

During 2009-2012, a shortage of agalsidase beta resulted in the substitution of agalsidase alfa for agalsidase beta in several cohorts of affected individuals. Reports thus far have not indicated any significant difference in clinical parameters as a result of this transition [Smid et al 2011, Tsuboi & Yamamoto 2012, Pisani et al 2013, Goker-Alpan et al 2016].

Lubanda et al [2009] have shown in a small study of 21 individuals that those who have been ‘stabilized’ with agalsidase beta at 1 g/kg can thereafter be safely treated with a maintenance dose of 0.3 g/kg every other week. A study of lower-dose agalsidase beta has been conducted in children (FIELD study [Wijburg et al 2015]); it will be interesting to observe if lower doses of agalsidase beta are equally efficacious in children.

There is an emerging consensus that ERT has, at best, a limited impact on the long-term outcome of Fabry disease. Studies of consecutive affected persons from individual centers suggest that cardiac, renal, and cerebrovascular outcomes are comparable among treated and untreated cohorts [Rombach et al 2013, Weidemann et al 2013]. A recent Cochrane review has also highlighted the generally poor quality of evidence in favor of ERT for Fabry disease.

Despite these emerging data, a panel of physician experts have recommended that ERT be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease, including children and those with ESRD undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation, and in heterozygous females with significant disease [Desnick et al 2003, Eng et al 2006] because all are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and neurologic complications including transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The treatment initiation guidelines from a group of European physicians are generally more conservative [Biegstraaten et al 2015]. They emphasize the need to start ERT before the advent of irreversible complications and suggest that initiation of ERT after irreversible organ damage has occurred is to be avoided. ERT should be discontinued if it is making no impact on organ function in an individual; and compliance should be closely monitored.
In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele because the 1%-3%/year risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated less than 1%/year risk for thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation. Because the initial thrombosis in factor V Leiden heterozygotes occurs in association with other circumstantial risk factors in 50% of cases, a short course of prophylactic anticoagulation during exposure to hemostatic stresses may prevent some of these episodes.

Prophylactic anticoagulation should be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for all asymptomatic carriers.

Decisions regarding prophylactic anticoagulation should be based on a risk/benefit assessment in each individual case. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in consensus guidelines [Geerts et al 2008].

Pregnancy. No consensus exists on the optimal management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are similar to those for individuals who are not pregnant [Kujovich 2004b, Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Until more specific guidelines are defined by prospective trials, decisions about anticoagulation should be individualized based on the thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis. These women should be warned about potential thrombotic complications, counseled about the risks and benefits of anticoagulation during pregnancy, and offered a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation after delivery, as the greatest thrombotic risk is in the initial postpartum period [Bates et al 2008].

Is recommended for women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of unprovoked VTE. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin should be given during pregnancy, followed by a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation post partum [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for heterozygous women with a prior estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for asymptomatic women with homozygous factor V Leiden or double heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or with other combined thrombophilic defects, especially those with circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Barbour 2001, Bates et al 2008].

Graduated elastic compression stockings are recommended for all women with a prior DVT [Bates et al 2008].
Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms.

Weighted gloves can sometimes be used to assist with dysmetria.

Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be debilitating. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following:

Oral trihexyphenidyl, baclofen, tizanidine, benzodiazepines, and/or dantrolene

Intramuscular botulinum toxin targeting abnormal co-contraction of selected muscle groups

Ablative pallidotomy or thalamotomy. Dystonia may return despite this aggressive measure [Justesen et al 1999]. (For discussion of deep brain stimulation [DBS] see Therapies Under Investigation.)

It is important to help affected individuals to maintain independence whenever possible.

Affected individuals should be referred to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the visually impaired (if optic atrophy is present), and special education.

As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids such as a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities and augmentative communication devices.
Colectomy is advised to reduce the risk for colorectal cancer in FAP. For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals, the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient to prevent colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy can therefore be utilized for surveillance, as well as prevention of colorectal cancer.

To reduce the risk for duodenal/periampullary adenocarcinoma, endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas should be considered if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms.
The arc of peripheral retinal avascularity, thought to be an aberration of retinal development, is not preventable using current treatments.
Colchicine

Homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. Individuals who are homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val or compound heterozygous for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele should be treated with colchicine as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed to prevent both the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Colchicine is given orally, 1-2 mg/day in adults. Children may need 0.5-1 mg/day according to age and weight. Affected individuals should receive colchicine for life.

Individuals who do not have the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant and who are only mildly affected (those with infrequent inflammatory attacks) should either be treated with colchicine or be monitored every six months for the presence of proteinuria.

Continuous treatment with colchicine appears to be less indicated for individuals who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Glu148Gln. Colchicine should only be given to these individuals if they develop severe inflammatory episodes and/or proteinuria as a result of amyloidosis.

Heterozygotes. The presence of a single MEFV pathogenic variant together with clinical symptoms is sufficient to warrant the initiation of a trial of colchicine; therefore, manifesting heterozygotes should be treated [Booty et al 2009]. However, for asymptomatic heterozygotes there is no indication for treatment.

Complications of colchicine use occasionally include myopathy and toxic epidermal necrolysis-like reaction.

Treatment of affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine. Some individuals appear to be unresponsive to colchicine treatment. In one study this was associated with inadequate colchicine concentration in mononuclear cells, possibly resulting from a genetic defect underlying FMF [Lidar et al 2004] or from poor compliance.

Canakinumab is an anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody that binds human IL-1β and neutralizes its pro-inflammatory effects. Canakinumab has been recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of CAPS. Canakinumab differs from anakinra and rilonacept in that it has high specificity for IL-1β, it has a longer half-life than anakinra (26 days), it can be administered every two months, and its effectiveness lasts longer. In one individual with FMF with longstanding destructive arthritis, canakinumab, given as a first-line agent, induced a complete clinical remission [Mitroulis et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Mitroulis et al 2011, Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Canakinumab was effective in an individual with FMF who was unresponsive to colchicine and anakinra [Hacihamdioglu & Ozen 2012]. Alpa & Roccatello [2015] reported continued efficacy after two years of treatment.

Rilonacept, an IL-1 receptor fusion protein, reduced the fever episodes by 76%, and improved quality of life [Hashkes et al 2012], but failed to reduce the duration of the attacks. Results were confirmed in a subsequent study extended to 14 colchicine-resistant individuals [Hashkes et al 2014]. Hentgen et al [2013b] recommended that rilonacept, which is a long half-life molecule, should be considered only if anakinra, a short half-life molecule, has been proven to be effective.

Anakinra, an IL-1-receptor inhibitor with a short half-life, has been shown to have a therapeutic advantage in persons with FMF who are resistant to colchicine. Several reports indicate that this offers a relatively safe and effective treatment (100 mg daily or every other day) for persons who do not respond to colchicine [Belkhir et al 2007, Bhat et al 2007, Gattringer et al 2007, Kuijk et al 2007, Calligaris et al 2008, Roldan et al 2008, Moser et al 2009, Petropoulou et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Ozen et al 2011, Ozturk et al 2011, Hentgen et al 2013b]. Anakinra has been found to stop the attacks in 75% of individuals who did not respond to colchicine. Anakinra is expensive and has mild side effects, such as painful local reactions at the site of injections and possible risk of bronchopulmonary infection, especially in persons with other risk factors for pulmonary infections. Further studies are needed to investigate the long-term effects of this drug if it is to be taken continuously as required in severely affected individuals with FMF. Anakinra treatment should be considered in the presence of secondary amyloidosis, in candidates for renal transplantation due to end-stage renal amyloidosis, individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine, and individuals developing major side effects from colchicine.

Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), was studied in a few individuals and found to be effective in the treatment of one individual with FMF who was resistant to colchicine, resulting in the complete remission of febrile abdominal episodes [Ozgocmen et al 2006]. In another individual, infliximab ameliorated the proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis and the recurrent attacks of arthritis and abdominal pain [Metyas et al 2004].

Weekly intravenous colchicine (1.0 mg) to supplement oral colchicine resulted in a 50% reduction (except joint attacks) in attack frequency in one study of 13 individuals [Lidar et al 2003]. This is not a long-term solution.

Thalidomide has been used successfully in sporadic cases [Seyahi et al 2002, Seyahi et al 2006] but is not frequently used.

Etanercept, a TNF dimeric fusion protein, has been shown to decrease the disease severity in colchicine-resistant individuals; three of the 14 individuals included in the study had adverse effects and switched to IL-1-receptor inhibitor [Sakallioglu et al 2006, Seyahi et al 2006, Mor et al 2007].

Interferon alpha is another therapeutic agent that has shown signs of promise in a few reports for affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine [Tunca et al 2004, Tweezer-Zaks et al 2008, Vandecasteele et al 2011]. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that included 34 individuals given interferon alpha or placebo, the authors could not demonstrate a definitive effect. Interferon alpha was effective in suppressing the acute inflammation of FMF only if administered at the earliest phase [Tunca et al 2004]. The possibility of interferon alpha side effects (e.g., chills and fatigue) should also be considered.

Sulphasalazine. The use of sulphasalazine has been reported in a girl age eight years with a five-year history of typical FMF attacks. She was homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val and for several months had had arthritis of one knee that was unresponsive to NSAIDs or colchicine. Resolution was achieved after the addition of sulphasalazine at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day [Bakkaloglu et al 2009].
Infants diagnosed by genetic testing before signs and symptoms appear should be treated immediately to prevent the onset of folate deficiency and the metabolic and clinical consequences of the disorder.
The diaphragmatic defects in Fryns syndrome may be amenable to surgical repair in the prenatal period. Survival in a controlled trial of open hysterotomy-guided fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion versus conventional care was not improved; an experimental, minimally invasive approach called percutaneous fetal endoluminal tracheal occlusion is still being evaluated [Losty 2014].
There are no recognized therapies to ameliorate or reverse the metabolic abnormalities resulting from decreased activity of fumarate hydratase. A brief therapeutic trial of a low-protein diet in one mildly affected individual with fumarate hydratase deficiency did not alter urinary excretion of fumaric acid or improve clinical signs [Kimonis et al 2012].
Dietary intervention. Immediate dietary intervention is indicated in infants whose erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is ≤10% of control activity and whose erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate concentration is >10 mg/dL.

Because 90% of the newborn’s carbohydrate source is lactose and human milk contains 6%-8% lactose, cow’s milk 3%-4% lactose, and most proprietary infant formulas 7% lactose, all of these milk products must be replaced immediately by a formula that is free of lactose (e.g., Isomil® or Prosobee®). Such soy formulas contain sucrose, fructose, and galactose-containing oligosaccharides that cannot be hydrolyzed in the small intestine.

Elemental formulas that contain small amounts of galactose such as Alimentum®, Nutramigen®, and Pregestimil® made with casein hydrolysates have been employed in the past without obvious side effects. A formula (Neocate®) that contains neither free nor bound galactose has been used without any side effects [Zlatunich & Packman 2005].

Dietary restrictions on all lactose-containing foods including cow’s milk and other dairy products should continue throughout life; however, managing the diet becomes less important after infancy and early childhood, when milk and dairy products are no longer the primary source of energy. It is debated how stringent the diet should be after infancy [Berry et al 2004, Bosch et al 2004a, Schadewaldt et al 2004], as endogenous galactose production is an order of magnitude higher than that ingested from foods other than milk. Until more prospective evidence-based medicine studies have been performed with a large number of subjects, parents should be educated about the lifelong need for dietary restriction of cow’s milk and dairy products.
In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia dietary restriction of galactose/lactose prevents early feeding problems, vomiting, poor weight gain, hepatic dysfunction, and cataracts.

The challenge in treating an asymptomatic newborn with epimerase deficiency galactosemia is that it may take months to obtain the results of tests used to distinguish peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia from intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Additional Testing); furthermore, such tests may not be available. The most conservative approach, therefore, is to advise dietary restriction of galactose/lactose for all infants with epimerase deficiency galactosemia, relaxing the restriction as warranted once a more accurate diagnosis has been confirmed.
The only definitive cure for GATA1-related cytopenia is bone marrow transplantation.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been undertaken in individuals with severe GD, primarily those with chronic neurologic involvement (type 3 GD). Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver volume. In a few individuals, stabilization of neurologic and bone disease has occurred. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT limit its use in individuals with type 1 and type 3 GD. Therefore, this procedure has been largely superseded by enzyme replacement therapy (see ERT).

Individuals with chronic neurologic GD and progressive disease despite ERT may be candidates for BMT or a multi-modal approach (i.e., combined ERT and BMT).

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is based on the provision of sufficient exogenous enzyme to overcome the block in the catabolic pathway and effect the clearance of the stored substrate, GL1.

Global availability may differ, but there are three recombinant glucocerebrosidase enzyme preparations currently available. All are based on the human gene sequence, but are distinguished according to the cell type involved in their production: imiglucerase (Cerezyme®) generated in Chinese hamster ovary cells; velalglucerase alfa (VPRIV®) from human fibroblast-like cell line; and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso®) from a carrot cell line. Each formulation is modified to expose the alpha-mannosyl (carbohydrate) residues for enhanced uptake by the macrophage.

Regular intravenous infusions of the recombinant enzymes imiglucerase and velaglucerase have been demonstrated to be safe and effective in reversing those features resulting from hematologic and visceral (liver/spleen) involvement [Weinreb et al 2002, Zimran et al 2010]. Experience with taliglucerase alfa appears comparable [Zimran et al 2011, Ben Turkia et al 2013].

It is likely that end-stage histologic changes (e.g., fibrosis, infarction) influence the response to ERT. Thrombocytopenia may persist in individuals with residual splenomegaly and/or the presence of splenic nodules [Stein et al 2010].

ERT is well tolerated. Approximately 10%-15% of individuals develop antibodies to infused imiglucerase; whereas antibody formation has been reported in 1% of persons receiving velaglucerase. In most cases these individuals remain asymptomatic [Rosenberg et al 1999, Starzyk et al 2007]. Adverse effects (e.g., pruritus, hives) are relatively well controlled with premedication using antihistamines.

Individuals with type 1 GD report improved health-related quality of life after 24-48 months of ERT [Damiano et al 1998, Masek et al 1999, Weinreb et al 2007]. After prolonged treatment, ERT reduces the rate of bone loss in a dose-dependent manner [Wenstrup et al 2007], improves bone pain, and reduces bone crises [Charrow et al 2007].The effectiveness of ERT for the treatment of neurologic disease remains to be established, although a few reports have suggested some benefit [Poll et al 2002].

Individuals with type 2 GD and pyramidal tract signs are not likely to respond to ERT, perhaps because the underlying neuropathology is cell death rather than lysosomal storage of GL1 [Takahashi et al 1998]. These individuals and those with hydrops fetalis are not appropriate candidates for BMT, ERT, or substrate reduction therapy (SRT) [Campbell et al 2003, Migita et al 2003].

Individuals with type 3 GD appear to derive some benefit from ERT, although long-term prognosis remains to be defined for this heterogeneous group [Vellodi et al 2001]. Onset of progressive myoclonic seizures while on ERT appears to indicate a poor prognosis [Frei & Schiffmann 2002]. Brain stem auditory evoked responses have deteriorated in individuals with type 3 GD on ERT [Campbell et al 2003]. SRT used in combination with ERT for type 3 GD with progressive neurologic disease does not appear to alter ultimate prognosis.

Consensus recommendations exist for ERT and monitoring of children with type 1 GD [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). The optimal dose and frequency of recombinant enzyme administration is not certain, mostly because of limited information regarding tissue half-life and distribution and the limitations associated with the modalities used for assessing clinical disease course. Intravenously infused enzyme may not reach adequate concentrations in certain body sites (e.g., brain, bones, and lungs). In the majority of individuals, treatment is initiated with a dose of 15-60 units of enzyme per kg of body weight administered intravenously every two weeks. The enzyme dose may be increased or decreased after initiation of treatment and during the maintenance phase, based on response – i.e., hematopoietic reconstitution, reduction of liver and spleen volumes, and stabilization or improvement in skeletal findings [Pastores et al 2004].

Affected individuals may require assistance with insurance-related issues and reimbursement because of the high cost of ERT.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT). SRT aims to restore metabolic homeostasis by limiting the amount of substrate precursor synthesized (and eventually subject to catabolism) to a level that can be effectively cleared by the mutant enzyme with residual hydrolytic activity [Dwek et al 2002]. A potential concern regarding the use of SRT is its nonspecificity; i.e., the substrate whose production is blocked or limited is a precursor in the formation of other glycosphingolipids (ganglio- and lacto- series).

Miglustat, the first oral agent for the treatment of individuals with mild to moderate Gaucher disease for whom ERT is not a therapeutic option (e.g., because of constraints such as allergy, hypersensitivity, or poor venous access). Miglustat has been approved in Canada, countries of the European Union, Israel, Switzerland, and the US. In at least three studies, involving more than 30 individuals with GD type 1, miglustat treatment resulted in a significant decrease in liver and spleen volume after six to 18 months, with clinical improvement noted over 24 months. Bone involvement and platelet and hemoglobin values remained stable or were modestly improved [Cox et al 2000, Elstein et al 2004a, Pastores et al 2005]. An increase in bone density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck was reported to occur as early as six months after the initiation of miglustat monotherapy [Pastores et al 2007]. The most common adverse reactions noted in the clinical trials were weight loss (60% of individuals), and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea (80%), which resolved or diminished with longer use of the product.

Eliglustat, an alternative inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthetase recently approved by the FDA, has been shown in clinical trials to be a safe and effective treatment for individuals with Gaucher disease type 1 who are not on any therapy as well as those previously treated with ERT.

In a placebo-controlled phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients not previously on any therapy, those who were given eliglustat for nine months showed a 28% decrease in spleen volume and a 7% decrease in liver volume as well as a 1.2 gm/dL increase in hemoglobin level and 42% increase in platelet count [Mistry et al 2015].

In a separate phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients previously on ERT, eliglustat demonstrated outcomes similar to imiglucerase for the composite primary endpoint of stability in spleen and liver volume, hemoglobin level, and platelet count from baseline to 12 months [Cox et al 2015].

An effect on GD-related bone disease was suggested by a significant increase in lumbar spine T-scores (mean of -1.6 to -0.9) in 19 patients enrolled in the pivotal phase 2 study who were on eliglustat therapy for up to four years [Kamath et al 2014].

Note: (1) Reported side effects of eliglustat were generally mild. (2) The use of eliglustat requires cytochrome P450 2D6 genotyping and avoidance of drugs that may interact through this metabolic pathway. (3) Drug distribution studies indicate that eliglustat, a P-glycoprotein ligand, is not transported across the blood-brain barrier and, thus, not indicated for neuronopathic forms of GD. Preclinical studies involving analogs that may be efficacious for primary CNS involvement are ongoing [Larsen et al 2012].
Clinical observations suggest that early diagnosis and treatment with a ketogenic diet is associated with improved neurologic outcome by nourishing the immature brain during this critical period of growth and development [Alter et al 2015].
See Treatment of Manifestations.
CRIM Status

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it may be appropriate to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce cross-reactive immunologic material (i.e., who are CRIM-negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment course, optimally before the first infusion [Winchester et al 2008, Kishnani et al 2010, Messinger et al 2012]. Multiple immunomodulation protocols are in use, most of which use rituximab with additional drugs (including mycophenylate mofetil, methotrexate, and sirolimus) [Messinger et al 2012, Elder et al 2013].

Geographic areas in which CRIM-negative status is common include the US and the Middle East [Messinger et al 2012].

Two ways to determine the CRIM status of an individual with Pompe disease are:

Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation performed by an antibody-based method in cultured fibroblasts;

Molecular genetic testing to determine if the pathogenic variants result in total absence of enzyme activity (i.e., are CRIM-negative) [Bali et al 2012].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Myozyme® (alglucosidase alfa) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for IOPD infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Lumizyme® was approved by the FDA in 2010 for use in individuals older than age eight years with LOPD. Age restrictions on Lumizyme were removed in 2014.

Myozyme® and Lumizyme® are administered by slow IV infusion at 20-40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks. Many individuals are now treated with the higher dose.

Complications of ERT

Infusion-associated reactions. In clinical studies, infusion reactions were observed in half of those treated with Myozyme®.

The majority of treated children developed IgG antibodies to Myozyme® within the first three months of treatment. Infusion reactions appear to be more common in individuals with IgG antibodies. Some affected individuals with high sustained IgG titers may have a poor clinical response to treatment (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation).

Development of IgE antibodies is less common but may be associated with anaphylaxis requiring life support measures.

Most infusion-associated reactions can be modified by slowing the rate of infusion or administration of antipyretics, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids. For these reasons – and because many individuals with IOPD have preexisting compromise of respiratory and cardiac function – initiation of therapy in centers equipped to provide emergency care is recommended.

Other. Children with IOPD may have difficulty with anesthesia for procedures related to placement of devices for venous access.

Prognosis

IOPD. The rationale for newborn screening (NBS) is that cardiac status and motor development in infants with IOPD treated early with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are better than in controls [Chien et al 2009]; initiation of ERT before age two weeks is associated with significantly improved gross motor function at age 12 months [Yang et al 2016]. Long-term follow-up data are not yet available on this cohort.

In those in whom ERT was initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory assistance, a majority had improved survival, improved ventilator-independent survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor skills compared to an untreated cohort.

Longer-term survivors who underwent early ERT may show sustained improvement in cardiac and motor function [Prater et al 2012]. ERT reduces cardiac mass to varying degrees and improves the ejection fraction, although there may be a transient decrease in the ejection fraction after the first several weeks of ERT [Levine et al 2008]. ERT results in an increase of the PR interval and a decrease in the left ventricular voltage [Ansong et al 2006].

While the long-term prognosis is as yet unknown, available studies suggest better cognitive outcomes than had been predicted. Of note, assessment of cognitive abilities is difficult in children younger than age five years with IOPD; typical assessment tools frequently underestimate the cognitive abilities of these children [Kishnani et al 2009, Nicolino et al 2009, Ebbink et al 2012]. Estimates of cognitive abilities at age 24 months using the Bayley scales showed preservation of cognitive abilities in infants ascertained by NBS and treated early with ERT [Lai et al 2016].

Pivotal trials of ERT on IOPD show convincing delay in the onset of dependence on ventilator support, but most patients who are ventilator dependent remain so . This finding is consistent with experimental evidence demonstrating relative resistance of skeletal muscle (especially type II fibers) to effective glycogen depletion with administered alpha glucosidase. Predictors of a poor response to ERT include increase in muscle glycogen during therapy, high IgG titers to alpha glucosidase, and CRIM negativity.

LOPD. The major morbidities are motor disability and respiratory insufficiency. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of 90 affected individuals age eight years and older who were ambulatory and free of invasive ventilatory support at baseline, those receiving the active agent had better preservation of motor function and forced vital capacity at the 78th week evaluation point [van der Ploeg et al 2010]. Similar findings were demonstrated in an open-label trial [Strothotte et al 2010].

Quality of life, assessed with the Rand Corporation 36-Item Short Form Survey Instrument (SF-36), had declined in adults with LOPD before initiation of ERT and improved in the first two years of ERT [Güngör et al 2016].

Note: Although the timing of initiation of ERT in infants predicted to have LOPD who have been ascertained by newborn screening is not well established, the Taiwan group uses clinical severity to identify those for whom ERT is warranted before age three years [Chien et al 2015].
Most of the primary manifestations of GSD III can be diminished or avoided with good metabolic (dietary) control.

When euglycemia is maintained and ketosis is avoided, hepatomegaly regresses and other abnormal laboratory values (e.g., elevated AST and ALT, increased serum concentration of triglycerides) normalize or come close to baseline [Bernier et al 2008].

Myopathy and cardiomyopathy may be partially avoided by good dietary control. New evidence suggests that skeletal muscle metabolism is impaired during exercise in GSD III. Consumption of fructose or sucrose prior to exercise may improve exercise tolerance, but does not completely prevent exercise-induced damage [Preisler et al 2015].
See Treatment of Manifestations and Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.
Hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia may be prevented by administration of uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) one to three times a day.
Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia. Frequent feedings high in complex carbohydrates and protein are given to prevent hypoglycemia. In some individuals, no additional treatment is required to prevent hypoglycemia. However, some persons with liver PhK deficiency have severe and recurrent hypoglycemia which can be prevented by ingestion of uncooked cornstarch (range of cornstarch dose 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg) one to four times per day, depending on the severity of the condition. Some individuals may require cornstarch only before bedtime. Requirements for cornstarch tend to lessen with age.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Little published information is available on prevention of primary manifestations in individuals with muscle PhK deficiency; however, regular moderate aerobic exercise may be beneficial. Intense exercise should be avoided as it may promote rhabdomyolysis and muscle cramping.
Prevention of acute attacks

involves the following:

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives to identify those heterozygous for the CPOX pathogenic variant identified in the proband

Education of CPOX heterozygotes regarding circumstances that may trigger an acute attack (See Clinical Description.)

Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are risky and not recommended. The recommended method of birth control for HCP heterozygotes is an IUD plus a barrier (diaphragm and/or condom).

A copper-eluting IUD is theoretically the safest in porphyria.

The hormone-eluting variety may also be safe because the systemic increase in hormone is quite small; however, little information exists.

Suppression of menses using a GnRH agonist. Leuprolide, nafarelin, and other GnRH agonists may help CPOX heterozygotes who experience monthly exacerbations.

CPOX heterozygotes undergoing surgery are at increased risk for an acute attack because of the routine preoperative fast and the (former) use of barbiturate (thiopental) induction of anesthesia. Adherence to the following recommendations greatly reduces the risk of an acute attack:

Minimizing the preoperative fast as much as possible and providing intravenous glucose (10% dextrose in half-normal saline) in the perioperative period

Anesthesia induction using non-barbiturate agents that have little or no P450-inducing activity (e.g., propofol, ketamine, short-acting benzodiazepines). Inhalation agents (isoflurane) and muscle relaxants also appear to be low-risk for triggering an attack.

Prevention of acute attacks

does not

involve the following:

Use of glucose. Because glucose is used to treat acute attacks, its use in preventing attacks has been suggested, and is in fact touted in lay discussions of porphyria; however, there is no evidence that heterozygotes can protect themselves by overeating or adopting a high-carbohydrate diet, and they risk becoming obese. Heterozygotes should adhere to a healthful diet with the usual balance of protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Weight loss is possible but only by incremental restriction of calories combined with exercise. Extreme diets (e.g., all bacon, all brown rice, starvation) are risky and should be avoided.

Liver transplantation. Because the vast majority of attacks respond to hematin and other supportive measures, liver transplantation has no role in prevention of acute attacks in a CPOX heterozygote.
No known treatment stops or slows the progression of HDL2.
Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hemophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusions of factor VIII concentrate three times a week or every other day to maintain factor VIII clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002, Feldman et al 2006]. Newer modified recombinant products with longer half-lives allow less frequent infusions.

Factor VIII concentrate infusions given prophylactically in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds can nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007].

The greatest benefit is seen in affected individuals who start therapy before age 2.5 to three years. Routine prophylaxis begun later in childhood or in adults significantly decreases bleeding episodes [Valentino et al 2012, Manco-Johnson et al 2013, Mondorf et al 2013].

"Secondary" prophylaxis, started after some joint damage has occurred, can be given on a long-term basis or around periods of increased activity or surgical procedures. An increasing number of adults with hemophilia are on long-term prophylaxis and clinical benefit is being documented in short- and long-term studies.
Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hæmophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusion of factor IX concentrate twice weekly or every other day to maintain factor IX clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002]. Also, some individuals will require troughs higher than 1% to prevent bleeding. Longer-acting factor IX concentrates that extend the half-life three- to fivefold are now available. Choice of product should be individualized based on clinical factors and activity levels. Initiation of prophylactic infusions of factor IX concentrate in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds has been shown to nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007]. Prophylaxis in adults is standard of care in many countries and has been shown to decrease bleeding and improve joint function and quality of life [Josephson 2013, Manco-Johnson et al 2013]
See Treatment of Manifestations.
The following measures are recommended:

Protection from sunlight because of the high risk for severe skin damage and possible mutilation

Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) . See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Avoidance of drugs and agents that induce the hepatic P450

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B
Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is necessary for the treatment/management of HFI (Table 3).

Specific ingredients to avoid include fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, agave syrup, inverted sugar, maple-flavored syrup, molasses, palm or coconut sugar, and sorghum.

In addition, medicines and formulas in which fructose/sucrose may not be listed as a primary component, examples of which include syrups, enema solutions, some immunoglobulin solutions, and many infant and pediatric nutritional drinks. When ingredients are listed, the terms “sugar,” “table sugar,” “natural flavorings” and even in some cases “sugar-free” or “no added sugar” (with no further clarification on the type of carbohydrate used) should raise suspicion for the presence of fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Table 3. 

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Food Category

Foods Permitted

Foods Prohibited

Dairy

Any milk, cheese, eggs

Milk products w/added sugar (sweetened yogurt, fruit yogurt, milkshake, chocolate milk)

Meat

Beef, veal, lamb, pork

Ham, bacon, hot dogs, processed meats; any other meat where sugar is used in processing

Fish

All fish

None

Poultry

Chicken, turkey

None

Cereal

Cooked or ready-to-eat cereals (except sweetened & sugar-coated cereals)

Sweetened/sugar-coated cereals

Fruit

None

All fruits, fruit juices, including squashes & cordials, & fruit extracts prohibited

Vegetables

Asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, green beans, green peppers, lettuce, nuts, onions, potatoes, spinach, wax beans

All other vegetables, including sweet potatoes

Bread

Breads prepared w/out fructose, sucrose, sugar, or sorbitol; soda crackers & saltines

Any breads or crackers prepared w/fructose/sucrose/sugar/sorbitol

Fat sources

Butter, margarine, oil, mayonnaise / mustard prepared w/out sugar

Mayonnaises, mustards, & salad dressings made with sugar

Desserts and sweeteners

Dietetic jello, dietetic ice cream, dietetic puddings; natural yogurt; glucose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose & zero-calorie sweeteners

All desserts containing sugar (cake, pie, cookies, candy, jello, ice cream, sherbet, honey, fruit juice); sugar, sucrose, sorbitol, fructose

Miscellaneous

Vegetable juices, coffee, tea, salt, pepper, broths/soups from permitted vegetables; some sugar substitutes; some dietetic beverages; pasta; rice; cinnamon, garlic, poppy seeds; peanut butter (when pure & w/out added sugars)

Ketchup & any other sauces / condiments containing sugar, jam, jelly, preserves, carbonated beverages / soda; peanut butter if prepared w/added sugars; chewing gum w/sorbitol

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

During hospitalizations special caution should be taken to avoid use of fructose-containing intravenous fluids. A number of reported accidental and iatrogenic fructose infusion-related deaths have prompted greater awareness of HFI [Locher 1987, Sachs et al 1993, Curran & Havill 2002, Müller et al 2003]; however, with a rare disorder such as HFI and in circumstances in which specific dietary (and infusion) restrictions may not be adequately disclosed, the danger of exposure in a hospital setting remains [Cox 1993]. The following are recommendations:

During any hospitalization, all members of the care team should be aware of the diagnosis of HFI and the patient is advised to wear at all times a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace that provides information about the diagnosis of HFI.

‘Red flags’ should be placed in the patient’s chart or medical record to alert practitioners to the HFI diagnosis and to medical risks associated with exposures to foods and/or medications (oral or parenteral) containing fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Specific medicines known to contain fructose or fructose-like substances should be avoided.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should be utilized and medications should be cleared for use on a case-by-case basis.

Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a favorable approach to diagnosis of HFI.

Dietary restriction should be strictly followed and maintained, especially in infancy. Although some have suggested that after age two years dietary restrictions can be relaxed somewhat [Steinmann & Santer 2011], currently, there are no specific guidelines regarding dietary fructose limits in any age group.

Tolerance of dietary fructose probably depends on an individual’s residual enzyme activity. Furthermore, because actual fructose content in foods may be unreliably reported or difficult to ascertain, adherence to complete dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol may be difficult attain and unrealistic for some patients with HFI.
Biopsy-proven diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended if a biopsy shows diffuse-type gastric carcinoma [Chun et al 2001, Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Heterozygotes for a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant. The importance of identifying the genetic basis of cancer susceptibility in families with HDGC has been underscored by the observation of early gastric cancers in prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) samples obtained from individuals with a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant [Chun et al 2001, Huntsman et al 2001, Norton et al 2007]. These findings suggest that currently prophylactic total gastrectomy, rather than endoscopic surveillance, is the best preventive measure for individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant.

Prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) involves D-2 dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy and obtaining proximal margins to ensure removal of the gastric mucosa [Norton et al 2007].

In a young, healthy individual, the risk of mortality with PTG in an experienced surgeon’s hands is less than 1% [Lynch et al 2005]. However, the morbidity from prophylactic gastrectomy is high. All individuals have long-term morbidity related to both immediate post-surgical complications as well as long-term complications including rapid intestinal transit, dumping syndrome, diarrhea, eating habit alterations, and weight loss [Caldas et al 1999, Lewis et al 2001]. In addition, the risk for malabsorption increases after total gastrectomy; malabsorption accounts for the increased incidence of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and malnutrition described in persons with gastric cancer [Liedman 1999].

In light of these possible complications, it is recommended that a multidisciplinary team including a surgeon, gastroenterologist, and dietician provide preoperative and postoperative care for an individual undergoing PTG. The multidisciplinary team members can counsel candidates for PTG on the risks and benefits of the surgery. In making the decision to undergo PTG, the affected individual and his/her physicians should consider the following:

The age-specific risks of gastric cancer. Due to nutritional implications, PTG is not generally recommended until the individual’s growth period is complete. In families in which gastric cancer is early onset, PTG should be considered on a case by case basis [Blair et al 2006]. In these individuals, regular endoscopic screening may be begun prior to the consideration of PTG.

The 100% morbidity of gastrectomy and the 1% risk of mortality following the surgery

The risk in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant of developing extragastric cancers (e.g., lobular breast cancer and colorectal cancer) and the screening recommendations for these cancers

Breast cancer. Referral to a high-risk breast clinic is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Prophylactic mastectomy may be considered in women heterozygous for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. The authors are aware of only a handful of women who have to date undergone prophylactic mastectomy for this reason. It is important to note that prophylactic mastectomy can have psychological effects; appropriate counseling should include the possible altered perception of the body and sexual relationships [Lodder et al 2002, Brandberg et al 2008].
Depending on their age, individuals with HHH syndrome should be maintained on a protein-restricted diet. For infants and children the dietary protein needs to be restricted to control hyperammonemia, but sufficient for normal growth and development.

Dietary supplementation with Cyclinex®-1 (infants and children) or Cyclinex®-2 (adult) formulas that provide only essential amino acids and other nutritional supplements have been helpful for some affected individuals.

Citrulline supplementation at 0.17 g/kg/day or 3.8 g/m2/day is preferred to arginine because citrulline accepts an aspartate (via the arginosuccinate synthase reaction) and therefore eliminates two amino groups per cycle. Moreover, there may be a possible association between arginine supplementation and progression of lower limb spasticity [HHH International Round Table, Roma 2006, unpublished].

Sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®) is given at 450-600 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Sodium phenylbutyrate initially is imported into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to produce phenylacetate.

Lysine supplementation is indicated when plasma lysine concentrations are low. Low plasma lysine concentrations have been associated with delayed growth and development.

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, glutamine, arginine, and essential amino acids should be maintained within the normal range. Note: (1) Although elevated plasma ornithine concentrations may decrease significantly if dietary management is followed, complete normalization of plasma ornithine concentration is rarely observed. (2) Even in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, affected individuals may continue to develop neurologic complications such as spasticity or learning disabilities. Maintaining as low a level of plasma ornithine concentration as possible by restricting protein intake could help prevent some of the progressive neurologic complications seen in these individuals.

Liver transplantation is not indicated for persons with HHH syndrome. Because SLC25A15 and the ornithine degradation pathway are expressed in all tissues (i.e., brain, kidney) and most cell types (i.e., astrocytes, fibroblasts), liver transplantation may correct the hyperammonemia, but it will not correct tissue-specific metabolic abnormalities that also contribute to the neurologic pathology.

Three individuals with HHH syndrome who had acute fulminant hepatic failure and coagulopathy rapidly stabilized after protein restriction and arginine or citrulline supplementation [Fecarotta et al 2006, Mhanni et al 2008].
See Treatment of Manifestations. Prevention is currently focused at ablating, occluding, resecting or shrinking telangiectases and AVMs to prevent associated morbidity and mortality.
Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be undertaken in children with confirmed familial HLH as early in life as possible.
Chelation therapy and iron supplementation may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Prophylactic removal of the uterus and ovaries (prior to the development of cancer) can be considered after childbearing is completed.

Because routine colonoscopy is an effective preventive measure for colon cancer, prophylactic colectomy (removal of the colon prior to the development of cancer) is generally not recommended for individuals with Lynch syndrome.
Protective pads at elbows or knees may prevent pressure and trauma to local nerves.
The principles of treatment are to correct the biochemical abnormalities ‒especially to control the elevated plasma homocysteine concentrations as much as possible, to prevent or at least reduce the complications of homocystinuria [Yap & Naughten 1998], and to prevent further complications such as thrombosis [Morris et al 2017].

The best results have been reported in those individuals identified by newborn screening and treated shortly after birth in whom the plasma free homocystine concentration is maintained below 11 µmol/L (preferably, ≤5 µmol/L) [Yap et al 2001b]. This corresponds to a plasma total homocysteine concentration below 120 µmol/L or, preferably, below 100 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017]. For B6-responsive individuals, the goal for plasma total homocysteine is below 50 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017].

These goals may need revision when very long-term data becomes available.

Measures used to control total plasma homocysteine concentration include vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy (if shown to be B6 responsive), methionine-restricted diet, and folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Betaine therapy is usually added to the therapeutic regimen; in adolescents and adults betaine may be the major form of treatment but it is preferable to remain on life-long metabolic diet. In those who have already had a vascular event, betaine therapy alone may prevent recurrent events [Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010].

Details about each aspect of treatment follow.

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy. In those who are shown to be B6 responsive, treatment with pyridoxine in a dose of approximately 200 mg/day or the lowest dose that produces the maximum biochemical benefit (i.e., lowest plasma homocysteine and methionine concentrations), as determined by measurement of total homocysteine and amino acid levels, should be given.

Pyridoxine may also be included in treatment despite evidence of B6 non-responsiveness, typically in doses of 100-200 mg daily (although some adults receive 500-1000 mg daily).

Dietary treatment. B6-non-responsive neonates or those only very poorly responsive to pyridoxine require a methionine-restricted diet with frequent metabolic monitoring. This diet should be continued indefinitely. Dietary treatment should be considered for clinically diagnosed individuals but often is not tolerated if begun in mid-childhood or later.

The majority of B6-responsive individuals also require a methionine-restricted diet for metabolic control.

The diet for homocystinuria is very complex and the skills of an experienced metabolic dietician must be utilized. Dietary treatment reduces methionine intake by restricting natural protein intake. However, to prevent protein malnutrition, a methionine-free amino acid formula supplying the other amino acids (as well as cysteine, which may be an essential amino acid in CBS deficiency) is provided. Breast feeding may be continued in combination with the methionine-free amino acid infant formula [MacDonald et al 2006]. The amount of methionine required is calculated by a metabolic dietician and supplied in natural food and special low-protein foods and monitored on the basis of plasma concentrations of total homocysteine as well as methionine.

Folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Folate and vitamin B12 optimize the conversion of homocysteine to methionine by methionine synthase, thus helping to decrease the plasma homocysteine concentration. When the red blood cell folate concentration and serum B12 concentration are reduced, folic acid is given orally at 5 mg per day; and vitamin B12 is given as hydroxycobalamin at 1 mg IM per month.

Betaine treatment. Treatment with betaine provides an alternate remethylation pathway to convert excess homocysteine to methionine (see Figure 1) and may help to prevent complications, particularly thrombosis [Yap et al 2001a, Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010]. By converting homocysteine to methionine, betaine lowers plasma total homocysteine concentrations but raises the plasma concentration of methionine.

For children the initial betaine dose is 50 mg/kg twice daily, adjusted according to response (increased weekly by 50 mg/kg increments). For adults the initial dose is 3 g twice daily. The dose and frequency are adjusted according to biochemical response. There is unlikely to be any benefit in exceeding a dose of 150-200 mg/kg/day [Morris et al 2017].

Betaine may be added to the treatment regimen in individuals poorly compliant with dietary treatment or may become the major treatment modality in those intolerant of the diet. Individuals who are pyridoxine non-responsive who were unable to attain metabolic control with diet substantially reduced their plasma homocysteine concentrations when betaine was supplemented [Singh et al 2004].

Side effects of betaine are few. (1) Some affected individuals develop a detectable body odor, resulting in reduced compliance. (2) The increase in methionine produced by betaine is usually harmless; however, cerebral edema has occurred when hypermethioninemia is extreme (>1000 µmol/L) [Yaghmai et al 2002, Devlin et al 2004, Tada et al 2004, Braverman et al 2005]. Eliminating betaine resulted in rapid reduction of the hypermethioninemia and resolution of the cerebral edema.

Note: In a murine model for homocystinuria the effect of betaine treatment diminished significantly over time [Maclean et al 2012].
Low-impact physical activity and exercise may improve general bone health. Supervision by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia is suggested.
Preventive treatment is intended to decrease the frequency and intensity of paralytic attacks. Triggering factors need to be identified and, if possible, avoided (see Table 7).

A diet rather low in sodium and carbohydrate and rich in potassium is recommended.

Potassium supplementation for prevention and treatment of attacks is an empiric but effective treatment for shortening attacks and sometimes preventing their occurrence (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Oral intake of potassium salts (10-20 mmol/dose, 3 doses/day) can prevent attacks, especially if the dose of potassium is taken some hours before the usual time of the attack (i.e., a nocturnal dose if crises occur at awakening).

Acetazolamide is generally considered the additive treatment of choice for prevention of paralytic attacks and myopathy in HOKPP. However, there is no standardized treatment regimen and no consensus as to when to start treatment with acetazolamide.

Typical dosage for acetazolamide in adults is between 125 mg/day and 1000 mg/day (usually 250-500 mg/day), divided into three doses and taken with meals; in children a dose of 5-10 mg/kg/day, divided into three doses and taken with meals, is used.

Acetazolamide treatment:

Is beneficial in approximately 50% of individuals with HOKPP;

Has no effect in 30% of affected individuals;

Exacerbates symptoms in approximately 20% (this deleterious effect may be predicted by genotype, see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations).

In some affected persons, permanent weakness may be partly reversed and muscle strength may be improved by acetazolamide treatment [Links et al 1988].

Whether acetazolamide treatment prevents or treats myopathy and the resulting fixed weakness that occurs with age is unknown.

Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect of preventive acetazolamide treatment on attack rate, severity-weighted attack rate, permanent weakness, and myopathy.

Alternatives to acetazolamide. If acetazolamide is not tolerated or if it is not effective after prolonged use, alternatives include dichlorphenamide (50-200 mg/day), triamterene (50-150 mg/day), and spironolactone (25-100 mg/day).

Other drugs have been used with limited success: lithium gluconate [Confavreux et al 1991] (though Ottosson & Persson [1971] earlier demonstrated lack of efficacy); pinacidil [Ligtenberg et al 1996]; and bumetanide [Wu et al 2013].
Prophylactic total parathyroidectomy has been suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma. However, given the rarity of parathyroid carcinoma in individuals with HPT-JT syndrome and the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not recommended.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Idursulfase (Elaprase®) is a recombinant form of human iduronate 2-sulfatase that has been approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of MPS II [US Food and Drug Administration 2006a, US Food and Drug Administration 2006b].

Clinical efficacy of ERT was shown in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of 96 patients [Muenzer et al 2006]. When compared to the placebo group after one year of treatment, persons in the weekly idursulfase group demonstrated statistically significant improvement of the primary endpoint (a composite of distance walked and lung function). Based on the better clinical response in the group in which medication was administered weekly compared to group in which it was administered every other week, idursulfase was approved in both the US and EU for the treatment of MPS II at a weekly dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Because this trial only studied individuals with the slowly progressive form of the disease, it yielded little information on outcomes in individuals younger than age five years or with early progressive CNS disease.

Results of a study on ERT in children younger than age five years or individuals with severe pulmonary compromise or severe CNS disease have been published [Muenzer et al 2012].

More recently, in a 3.5 year independent follow-up of 27 individuals with MPS II, Tomanin et al [2014] determined that:

Long-term use of ERT was safe;

ERT efficacy was similar in both a younger age group (age 1.6-12 years at the start of ERT) and an older age group (age 12-27 years at the start of ERT); and

Improvement/stabilization of findings such as GAG level, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otologic disorders, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and cardiac valve regurgitation (except mitral valve) was greater in individuals with the early progressive form compared to those with the slowly progressive form.

Since Elaprase® does not cross the blood-brain barrier, no effect on CNS disease is anticipated; however, there is reason to believe that somatic manifestations of those with severe CNS involvement would benefit from ERT. The young age is not adding any safety concerns, and patients have significant amelioration of somatic symptoms [Lampe et al 2014a].

Infusion-related reactions that may occur with use of Elaprase® ERT are comparable to similar reactions seen with other ERT products used in treatment of lysosomal storage disease and with other infused proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., infliximab). The etiology of the more severe forms of these non-allergic reactions, referred to as anaphylactoid, is unknown. Current evidence suggests that anaphylactoid (as opposed to anaphylactic) reactions are not immune mediated [Mayer & Young 2006].

Infusion reactions are generally mild and include brief, insignificant decreases or increases in heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory rate; itching; rash; flushing; and headache. Mild reactions can usually be managed by slowing the infusion rate for several treatments and then slowly returning to the prior rate.

Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines, as is often done for ERT in other conditions, is not suggested on the label for Elaprase®; however, if mild or moderate infusion reactions (e.g., dyspnea, urticaria, or systolic blood pressure changes of ≤20 mm Hg) cannot be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate, the addition of treatment one hour before infusion with diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (or ibuprofen) to the regimen usually resolves the problem. Pretreatment can typically be discontinued after six to ten weeks.

Severe non-allergic anaphylactoid reactions such as major changes in blood pressure, wheezing, stridor, rigors, or drop in oxygen saturations should be immediately addressed by stopping the infusion and giving appropriate doses of subcutaneous (SQ) epinephrine, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine, and hydrocortisone or methylpredinsolone. Subsequent infusions should then be given at a significantly reduced rate with pretreatment with prednisone 24 hours and eight hours before the infusion, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen or ibuprofen orally one hour before the infusion, and IV methylpredinsolone just before beginning the infusion.

Because of the limitation of the design of the clinical trial, it is not known at this time whether the incidence or severity of infusion-related reactions is different for patients younger than age five years with severe respiratory compromise or with severe CNS disease.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using umbilical cord blood or bone marrow is a potential way of providing sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression of the disease [Guffon et al 2009, Annibali et al 2013]; however, the use of HSCT is controversial because of the associated high risk of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, it remains unclear if treatment early in life significantly reduces the progression of neurologic disease [Mullen et al 2000], and anecdotal case reports published to date have been disappointing, quite unlike the reports of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Hurler syndrome (MPS I). Overall, the efficacy of BMT for MPS II cannot be determined until a number of children with MPS II younger than age two years with known or probable severe CNS disease undergoes transplantation, along with documentation of long-term follow up [Tanaka et al 2012]. Although this study needs to be validated, the use of HSCT is difficult to justify since HSCT and ERT have equal efficacy in restoring growth in children with MPS II [Patel et al 2014].
Plasma exchange prophylaxis has been shown to prevent disease recurrences in persons with mutation of CFH [Davin et al 2008]. Plasma exchange and eculizumab prophylaxis may prevent disease recurrences in those with mutation of circulating factors (CFH, C3, CFB, and CFI).
For individuals with familial HCM felt to be at increased risk for SCD, ICD therapy is an important consideration. ICDs are currently the best option for the prevention of SCD and have been shown to be effective in sensing and terminating ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF).

The annual rate of appropriate ICD therapies has been estimated at 2%-4% in individuals with an ICD placed for primary prevention, and 4%-11% in individuals with an ICD placed for secondary prevention [Maron et al 2007, O'Mahony et al 2012].

The potential for complications must be considered in the discussion of ICD placement. Although ICDs are generally safe, they are not benign and cumulative morbidity needs to take into account the age at implantation and duration of therapy. The rate of complications has been reported at 5% per year in persons with HCM. The rate of inappropriate shocks is roughly double the rate of appropriate therapies in persons who received ICDs for primary prevention [Maron et al 2007, Lin et al 2009, O'Mahony et al 2012].

In the absence of highly sensitive, patient-specific predictors, the decision to implant an ICD requires detailed and thoughtful evaluation, as well as the active input of well-informed patients.
Treatment with erythropoietin can reverse anemia [Zivná et al 2009].

Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol can prevent development of gout.
Diet/environment. Preventive therapy for individuals with hyperPP consists of frequent meals rich in carbohydrates and avoidance of the following:

Potassium-rich medications and foods (e.g., fruits, fruit juices)

Fasting

Strenuous work

Exposure to cold

Diuretics. It is often advisable to prevent hyperkalemic attacks of weakness by the continuous use of a thiazide diuretic or a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, such as acetazolamide or the recently approved medication dichlorphenamide. Diuretics are used in modest dosages at intervals from twice daily to twice weekly.

Thiazide diuretics are preferable because they have fewer side effects than either acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide therapy.

The dosage should be kept as low as possible (e.g., 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide daily or every other day). In severe cases, 50 mg or 75 mg of hydrochlorothiazide should be taken daily very early in the morning.

Individuals should be monitored so that the serum potassium concentration does not fall below 3.3 mmol/L or the serum sodium concentration below 135 mmol/L [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].
Preventive measures include the following:

Statin-based therapy with addition of other medications as needed

Reduced intake of saturated fat

Increased intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day

Increased physical activity

Not smoking
See Treatment of Manifestations, clonazepam.
No treatment that reverses or slows the natural history of muscle weakness in GNE-related myopathy is available.
Routine vaccinations and yearly influenza vaccinations are recommended, but caution with certain live virus vaccines may need to be observed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). No evidence exists to suggest that vaccinations cause acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) in an individual heterozygous for an RANBP2 pathogenic variant.
BMT is currently the only cure for IPEX syndrome; the degree of symptomatic remission may depend on use of BMT prior to irreversible damage to target organs such as pancreatic islet cells and thyroid.
Individuals with biochemical evidence of iron overload but without evidence of organ dysfunction or failure should be encouraged to undergo regular phlebotomies until excess iron stores are depleted to prevent the development of complications associated with excess iron stores.

Treatment by phlebotomy in presymptomatic stages can prevent organ damage.
See Treatment of Manifestations regarding prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death.
Increased awareness, education, and screening have helped successive generations benefit from early detection of JPS and cancer prevention/risk reduction.
There are currently no effective treatments to prevent development of disease manifestations in an asymptomatic individual known to possess an expanded CAG repeat after presymptomatic diagnosis.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in presymptomatic infants [Escolar et al 2005] and older individuals with mild symptoms [Krivit et al 1998] provides a benefit over symptomatic treatment only. Treated individuals show improved and preserved cognitive function; however, many show progressive deterioration of peripheral nervous system findings.

The availability of suitable donors has changed considerably with the use of umbilical cord blood for HSCT.

The identification of newborns with the potential to develop Krabbe disease by newborn screening (presently in place in New York State) facilitates the initiation of treatment before neurologic damage has occurred. Concerns remain regarding the age at which to start treatment, prediction of clinical course without treatment, and long-term consequences of treatment.

Given the significant clinical variability among individuals with late-onset forms (even those with the same genotype), evaluation of treatment effectiveness is difficult.
The implementation of hosiery prior to the development of lymphedema may be beneficial in reducing the extent of edema [P Mortimer, personal communication].
For treatment of the following disorders, see Treatment of Manifestations.

Thiamine transporter deficiency (mutation of SLC19A3)

Biotinidase deficiency (BTD)

Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis defect (PDSS2)
Primary disease manifestations can be prevented in a few of the leukodystrophies: in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, Krabbe disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy, for example, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) may be beneficial if performed early in the disease course. Patients with these disorders should be referred to specialized centers for consideration of HSCT or BMT [Eichler et al 2009].
There is evidence that raised intraocular pressure could be a risk factor triggering visual loss in individuals at risk for developing LHON. Until further evidence becomes available, it is reasonable to set a lower threshold for initiating treatment for raised intraocular pressure in individuals with a LHON-causing variant given the possible deleterious consequences of raised intraocular pressure on mitochondrial function and retinal ganglion cell survival [Thouin et al 2013].
Females with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have the option of prophylactic mastectomy to reduce the risk for breast cancer [Thull & Vogel 2004]. Recent recommendations for colonoscopy may be considered surveillance as well as primary prevention of colorectal cancer. Counseling for avoidance of sun exposure, tobacco use, and exposure to other known or suspected carcinogens is encouraged.
The overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid.
The prevention of metabolic abnormality is the goal of the treatment. Long-term management is based on protein-restricted diet and administration of citrulline (see Treatment of Manifestations).
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Medications that reduce hemodynamic stress on the aortic wall, such as beta-blockers, are routinely prescribed. This therapy should be managed by a cardiologist or geneticist familiar with its use. Therapy is generally initiated at the time of diagnosis with Marfan syndrome at any age or upon appreciation of progressive aortic root dilatation even in the absence of a definitive diagnosis. The dose needs to be titrated to effect, keeping heart rate after submaximal exercise or agitation lower than 110 in young children or lower than 100 in older children or adults.

Verapamil or other calcium channel blockers have been suggested if beta-blockers cannot be used (e.g., in individuals with asthma) or are not tolerated (e.g., prolonged lethargy, depression). Data documenting either the efficacy or safety of this approach in people with Marfan syndrome are very limited.

Yetman et al [2005] suggested that use of ACE inhibitors may be more beneficial than beta-blockers. Of note, the treatments were not randomized and the dose of beta-blocker was not titrated to effect. ACE inhibitors have been used for decades in Marfan syndrome to manage volume overload resulting from valve dysfunction, and (unlike beta-blockers) have not previously been reported to provide notable protection from progressive aortic enlargement.

There is at least some theoretic concern that reducing afterload without a concomitant reduction in inotropy (as provided by a beta-blocker) could increase hemodynamic stress in the ascending aorta. Currently, afterload-reducing agents are only commonly used in conjunction with a beta-blocker to manage volume overload in the setting of valve dysfunction.
The mainstay in the treatment of MCAD deficiency is avoidance of fasting. Derks et al [2007] studied the length of time that MCAD-deficient but asymptomatic individuals should be able to fast. Based on their findings, they recommend maximum fasting times of:

Up to eight hours in infants between ages six and 12 months

Up to ten hours during the second year of life

Up to 12 hours after age two years

To avoid excessive fasting:

Infants require frequent feedings.

Toddlers could receive 2 g/kg of uncooked cornstarch as a source of complex carbohydrates at bedtime to ensure sufficient glucose supply overnight. A relatively low-fat diet (e.g., <30% of total energy from fat) may be beneficial.

Additional consideration of the patient’s MCAD enzyme activity led Derks et al [2007] to suggest that when residual MCAD enzyme activity in leukocytes is greater than 10% of normal, prevention of fasting is not necessary for otherwise healthy individuals older than age six months [Touw et al 2013]. However, Sturm et al [2012] consider that residual MCAD enzyme activity lower than 30% requires treatment and follow up. Whether possible variability in MCAD enzyme activity assays plays a role in these different assessments is uncertain.
Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol, probenecid, or febuxostat can prevent development of gout.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.
Avoidance of excessive sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation, and limiting exposure to ionizing radiation (e.g., by computed tomography and x-ray) is recommended because of the increased predisposition for the development of basal cell carcinomas.
No specific treatment for MELAS exists.

The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].

Idebenone, an analog of CoQ10 that crosses the blood-brain barrier more efficiently, has also been reported as beneficial in anecdotal reports [Napolitano et al 2000]. A clinical trial of idebenone for MELAS is in progress [Author, personal observation].
The organs in MEN1 syndrome at highest risk for malignant tumor development — the duodenum, pancreas, and lungs (bronchial carcinoids) — are not suitable for ablative surgery.

The only prophylactic surgery possible in MEN1 syndrome is thymectomy to prevent thymic carcinoid [Brandi et al 2001]. Prophylactic thymectomy should be considered at the time of neck surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism in males with MEN1 syndrome, particularly those who are smokers or have relatives with thymic carcinoid [Ferolla et al 2005].
Prophylactic thyroidectomy is the primary preventive measure for individuals with an identified germline RET pathogenic variant [Cohen & Moley 2003, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is safe for all age groups; however, the timing of the surgery is controversial [Moley et al 1998]. According to the consensus statement from the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force, the age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is performed can be guided by the codon position of the RET pathogenic variant (Table 4, Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, these guidelines continue to be modified as more data become available.

Table 4. 

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

ATA 1 Risk Level

Pathogenic Variants 2, 3

Age of Prophylactic Surgery

Age to Begin Screening

For PHEO

For HPT 4

Level D(highest risk)

p.Ala883Phep.Met918Thrp.Val804Met+p.Glu805Lys 5p.Val804Met+p.Tyr806Cys 5p.Val804Met+p.Ser904Cys 5

As soon as possible in 1st year of life

8 yrs

NA

Level C

p.Cys634Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyr

<5 yrs

8 yrs

8 yrs

Level B

p.Cys609Phe/Arg/Gly/Ser/Tyrp.Cys611Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys618Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Cys620Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys630Arg/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Asp631Tyrp.633/9 bp dupp.634/12 bp dupp.Val804Met+p.Val778Ile 5

Consider <5 yrs; may delay if criteria met 5

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Level A

p.Arg321Glyp.531/9 bp dupp.532 dupp.Cys515Serp.Gly533Cysp.Arg600Glnp.Lys603Glup.Tyr606Cysp.635/insert ELCR;p.Thr636Prop.Lys666Glup.Glu768Aspp.Asn777Serp.Leu790Phep.Val804Leu/Metp.Gly819Lysp.Arg833Cysp.Arg844Glnp.Arg866Trpp.Ser891Alap.Arg912Pro

May delay beyond age 5 yrs if criteria met 6

20 yrs

20 yrs

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

1. 

ATA = American Thyroid Association

2. 

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

3. 

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

4. 

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

5. 

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

6. 

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

ATA = American Thyroid Association

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Thyroidectomy for C-cell hyperplasia, before progression to invasive MTC, may allow surgery to be limited to thyroidectomy with sparing of lymph nodes [Brandi et al 2001, Kahraman et al 2003].

For all individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who have not had a thyroidectomy, annual biochemical screening is recommended with immediate thyroidectomy if results are abnormal [Szinnai et al 2003].

Annual serum calcitonin screening [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] should begin at age:

Six months for children with MEN 2B

Three to five years for children with MEN 2A or FMTC

Caution should be used in interpreting calcitonin results for children younger than age three years, especially those younger than age six months [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is not routinely offered to at-risk individuals in whom the disorder has not been confirmed.
Menkes disease. In classic Menkes disease, treatment with subcutaneous injections of copper histidine or copper chloride before age ten days normalizes developmental outcome in some individuals and improves the neurologic outcome in others [Kaler et al 2008, Kaler et al 2010].

Note: Despite very early copper histidine treatment, some infants show no significant improvement relative to the natural history of untreated Menkes disease [Kaler et al 1995, Kaler et al 2008]. The type and severity of the ATP7A pathogenic variant determine the response to early copper treatment.

To maintain serum copper concentration in the normal range (70-150 µg/dL), the suggested dose of copper chloride is:

For children age <1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 2x/day

For children age >1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 1x/day

Occipital horn syndrome. Although there is no evidence that copper replacement therapy for OHS is clinically beneficial, it would be reasonable to expect even better overall neurodevelopmental and neurocognitive outcomes if individuals with OHS were identified early and treated with copper during their first three years.
The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of affected individuals with heterogeneous mitochondrial diseases, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].
Preventive measures for individuals known to be susceptible to MH or for any individual with an equivocal contracture test response (MHE) (treated clinically as MHS):

For any individual undergoing anesthesia, obtain a thorough anesthetic history to determine the possibility of the individual or a family member having experienced an MH episode. When suspicion of MHS exists, family members should not be given trigger anesthetic agents, i.e., potent volatile anesthetic agents such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane, and isoflurane or the depolarizing agent succinylcholine.

In general, individuals undergoing general anesthetics that exceed 30 minutes in duration should have their temperature monitored using an electronic temperature probe. Skin liquid crystal temperature sensors are not recommended as they have been found to be unreliable indicators of changing temperature during human malignant hyperthermia (MH) events.

Individuals with any form of myotonia (see Differential Diagnosis) should not receive succinylcholine.

Individuals with central core disease, multiminicore disease, nemaline myopathy, congenital fiber-type disproportion, or Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy should not receive trigger anesthetics.

Individuals with MHS should carry proper identification as to their susceptibility; identification bracelets are available through the Medic Alert Foundation, Turlock, California (www.medicalert.org).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only presently available therapy that attempts to treat the primary central nervous system manifestations of MLD [Krivit et al 1999, Peters & Steward 2003, Krivit 2004]. Not all individuals with MLD are suitable candidates for these procedures and not all families are willing to undertake the risks involved. Although identification of adequately matched donors and treatments for complications of HSCT are constantly improving, it remains controversial. Substantial risk is involved and long-term effects are unclear.

However, in the absence of alternative approaches, HSCT needs to be discussed with families. This is particularly important for families with more slowly progressing late-onset forms of MLD because family members may be diagnosed with MLD by biochemical or molecular genetic testing before symptoms occur.

A number of reports on the experience of individual centers using HSCT have appeared over the past ten years: each involves a limited number of patients and few with MLD. They reflect evolving pretreatment conditioning and improved donor matching. HSCT failures continue; nevertheless, some improvement has been seen. Even when HSCT is successful, however, MLD progresses for a substantial period before implanted cells populate the central nervous system. The best clinical outcomes are obtained when transplantation occurs before clinical symptoms have appeared.

Meuleman et al [2008] reported minimal complications in an adult who underwent reduced intensity conditioning accompanied by mesenchymal stromal cell infusion.

Although the availability of hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood enhances the chances of obtaining a suitable source of donor cells, the results reported to date indicate that considerable problems remain [Martin et al 2006].

Cartier & Aubourg [2008] concluded that “…banked umbilical cord blood is still associated with significant risks of graft failure or GVHD.”

In earlier studies, HSCT for MLD appeared to slow disease progression, but not alleviate peripheral nervous system manifestations [Koç et al 2002]. More recently, however, a 13-year follow up of an individual with juvenile MLD treated with HSCT reported slow disease progression in the two years following transplantation, but subsequent stabilization [Görg et al 2007].

Pierson et al [2008] reported three sibs with MLD who were transplanted with umbilical cord blood at different stages of disease: the oldest experienced disease progression; the two younger children had stable or improved neuropsychologic, neuroimaging, and nerve conduction evaluations over a two-year period of follow up.

Tokimasa et al [2008] evaluated the feasibility of transplants from unrelated donors using a modified preparative procedure. Two persons with MLD showed complete donor chimerism and survived more than a year after transplantation.

Smith et al [2010] followed an adult with psycho-cognitive MLD for 11 years after HSCT. “Cognitive decline, indistinguishable from the natural course of the disease…” was observed.

de Hosson et al [2011] reported treatment of five patients and reviewed the literature. They conclude that in most published cases, HSCT has not been effective for MLD.

Cable et al [2011] report five-year follow up of three sibs with juvenile MLD who were transplanted with unrelated umbilical cord blood. The disease progressed over the first two years post-transplant followed by stabilization of symptoms. The overall outcome depended on the disease status at the age of transplantation with the oldest showing typical disease progression.

In a review of outcomes of persons with MLD undergoing HCST, Orchard & Tolar [2010] concluded that persons with later-onset disease may benefit and presymptomatic children with pathogenic variants typical for late-infantile onset (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) appear to have significant cognitive benefits; however, it is unclear if progressive motor problems will improve.

Lanfranchi et al [2009] reviewed the therapeutic use of stem cells of various origins in a variety of conditions including MLD.

HSCT in a presymptomatic neonate has been reported, but complications were encountered and disease progression was not halted [Bredius et al 2007].

For further information on the specific nursing care requirements for those with MLD who undergo HCST, see Barrell [2007].
Dietary Management

Nutrition. After stabilization, nutritional management is critical. This typically includes instituting a low-protein, high-calorie diet. When available, accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure can guide dietary and caloric prescriptions and eliminate overfeeding [Hauser et al 2011].

Natural protein needs to be carefully titrated to allow for normal growth, while avoiding an excessive propiogenic amino acid load (isoleucine, valine, methionine and threonine) into the pathway. Adjustment of dietary whole (complete)-protein intake, based on clinical and laboratory findings, is needed throughout life for these patients.

The FAO/WHO/UNU report [2007] recommended that safe levels per age group should be the aim for natural protein intake [Baumgartner et al 2014]; however, the individual protein amount prescribed will depend on growth parameters, metabolic stability, stage of renal failure, and other factors. A propiogenic amino acid-deficient formula (e.g., Propimex®-1/2,, XMTVI-1/2, OA-1/2) and protein-free formula (e.g., Pro-Phree®, Duocal®) are given to some individuals to provide extra fluid and calories. As the infant grows, the total protein load is slowly reduced, based on growth, plasma amino acid concentrations, and plasma and urine methylmalonic acid concentrations.

Of note, in patients with low protein tolerance, severe restriction of propiogenic amino acid precursors (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine) can produce a nutritional deficiency state. Furthermore, an iatrogenic essential amino acid deficiency can be induced by the relatively high leucine intake through the MMA formulas that can negatively affect long-term growth and possibly other outcomes [Manoli et al 2016b]. Medical foods should be used in moderation with the relative intake of natural protein to propiogenic amino-acid deficient formula not exceeding a ratio of 1:1. Isolated valine or isoleucine supplementation should be avoided.

These dietary guidelines do not apply for patients with CblC deficiency, a separate disorder in the pathway [Manoli et al 2016a].

Hydroxocobalamin injections. 1.0-mg injections every day to every other day are usually required in individuals who are vitamin B12 responsive. The regimen of B12 injections needs to be individually adjusted according to the patient's age and, possibly, weight.

Carnitine can be given at a dose of 50-100 mg/kg/day, up to approximately 300 mg/kg/day. As a dietary supplement, carnitine may replace the free carnitine pool and enhance the conjugation and excretion of propionylcarnitine. The contribution of propionylcarnitine excretion to the total propionate load is, however, small. The relief of intracellular CoA accretion may be the mechanism by which carnitine supplementation benefits some individuals.

Antibiotics. A variety of antibiotic regimens to reduce the production of propionate from gut flora can be used:

Oral neomycin, 250 mg by mouth 4x/day, was the original regimen reported by Snyderman et al [1972].

Metronidazole at 10-15 mg/kg/day has also been reported.

The intervals at which affected individuals are treated may vary, but a typical course is one week to ten days of treatment per one to three months.

Although oral antibiotics reduce the propionate load that derives from gut flora in affected individuals, chronic antibiotic therapy is not innocuous; it introduces the risk of repopulation of the individual with resistant flora. This could pose a serious infectious threat and could be especially dangerous to individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, since most deaths are related to metabolic decompensation, often precipitated by infection.

Response to antibiotic administration should be determined in treated persons by demonstrating either a decrease in whole body output of methylmalonic acid on antibiotic therapy by a timed urine collection or a decrease in the plasma methylmalonic acid concentration compared to the baseline value for that individual.

Rotating antibiotic regimens may be considered in some persons.

Antioxidants. One individual with isolated methylmalonic acidemia who was documented to be glutathione deficient after a severe metabolic crisis responded to ascorbate therapy [Treacy et al 1996]. Several recent studies document increased oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and specific respiratory chain complex deficiencies in persons with the mut0 enzymatic subtype with methylmalonic acidemia [Schwab et al 2006, Atkuri et al 2009, Chandler et al 2009, de Keyzer et al 2009, Manoli et al 2013], suggesting a potential benefit of treatment with antioxidants or other mitochondria-targeted therapies in these patients.

A regimen of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E has been shown to prevent progression of acute optic nerve involvement in a patient with MMA [Pinar-Sueiro et al 2010] and was shown to attenuate the progression of kidney disease in a mouse model of MMA [Manoli et al 2013].

Organ Transplantation

The number of individuals who have undergone liver and/or kidney transplantation, the detailed effects on the underlying metabolic disorder, and the overall outcome in those undergoing this procedure have yet to be determined [Sloan et al 2015]. Inclusion of enzymatic and genotype information in case series of transplanted patients will allow better comparisons of the outcomes and genotype-phenotype associations that could inform decisions about the indication and timing of transplantation in individual cases.

Liver transplantation. Because most of the metabolic conversion of propionate occurs in the liver, replacing the liver could contribute enough enzyme activity to avert metabolic decompensation. Liver transplantation has been shown to largely protect against metabolic instability but is not curative, and individuals with isolated MMA remain at risk for long-term complications of MMA including renal disease, basal ganglia injury, and neurologic complications [Chakrapani et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Vernon et al 2014]. To date, more than 35 individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia have undergone living donor or cadaveric, orthotopic, or partial liver transplantation or combined liver-kidney transplantation (>20 patients) [van't Hoff et al 1998, van't Hoff, McKiernan et al 1999, Kayler et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Hsui et al 2003, Kasahara et al 2006, Morioka et al 2007, McGuire et al 2011, Niemi et al 2015].

The underlying biochemical parameters and the frequency of metabolic decompensation improved significantly in individuals undergoing liver transplantation despite persistent metabolic abnormalities [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Niemi et al 2015], probably as a result of increased extrahepatorenal methylmalonic acid production primarily from the skeletal muscle [Chandler et al 2007].

Following liver transplantation, some individuals continued to have progressive renal failure as well as high CSF concentrations of methylmalonic acid [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006].

Neurologic complications post-transplant, including globus pallidus injuries [Chakrapani et al 2002, Cosson et al 2008, McGuire et al 2011] suggest that adequate protein restriction and supportive care should be continued after the transplantation.

Earlier transplantation particularly for individuals with mut0 (who are very fragile) is gaining support as surgery techniques and outcomes improve [Niemi et al 2015, Spada et al 2015]. The choice of the kind and timing of the indicated transplant procedure remains challenging for families and treating physicians [Sloan et al 2015]. In the long term, the details regarding development of renal disease, optic nerve atrophy, and neurologic complications will be most important.

Kidney transplantation. Some individuals have received only renal allografts [Van Calcar et al 1998, Lubrano et al 2001, Coman et al 2006, Cosson et al 2008, Clothier et al 2011].

One of the first reports on isolated renal transplantation in mut0 methylmalonic acidemia was claimed to provide enough enzyme activity to normalize methylmalonic acid excretion and allow for increased dietary protein tolerance; however, it was later determined that that patient had cblA deficiency and responded to vitamin B12. Thus, this individual, who has a much milder case, is not representative of the outcomes of isolated renal transplantation in individuals with severe MMA subtypes (mut0 or cblB) [Lubrano et al 2001, Lubrano et al 2007, Lubrano et al 2013].

Elective kidney transplantation, even before the onset of renal disease, has been advocated as a form of “cell therapy” to help stabilize individuals with mut0 MMA [Brassier et al 2013]. However, one patient died after developing hepatoblastoma, neurologic deterioration accompanied by CSF lactic acidosis, and multiorgan failure; a second patient developed progressive neurologic symptoms; and two others developed metabolic decompensations post transplant. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if this is a safe alternative to liver transplantation or liver-kidney transplantation, especially in persons with severe mut0 MMA.
Although most treatment for DDD/MPGNII is ineffective, plasma replacement therapy in patients with pathogenic variants in CFH can control complement activation and prevent ESRD [Licht et al 2006].
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)

HSCT is considered standard of care for children with severe MPS I. Outcome from HSCT is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time of diagnosis (and thus, with the age of the patient). Due to the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with severe MPS I.

HSCT should be used only in carefully selected children with extensive pretransplantation clinical assessment and counseling in whom systematic long-term monitoring will be possible [Aldenhoven et al 2015a, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Adults have not undergone HSCT.

Pulmonary and cardiac complications in the peri-transplant period appear to be significant predictors of transplant complications [Orchard et al 2010].

In general, the outcome of children undergoing HSCT is varied and depends on the degree of clinical involvement and the child's age at the time of transplantation. It is generally recommended that HSCT be performed before age two years to maximize benefit.

HSCT has been successful in reducing the progression of some findings in children with severe MPS I [Vellodi et al 1997, Guffon et al 1998, Neufeld & Muenzer 2001, Souillet et al 2003, Staba et al 2004, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Although the heterogeneity of the disease makes the outcomes of HSCT somewhat difficult to interpret, available data show that:

Successful HSCT reduces facial coarseness, and hepatosplenomegaly, improves hearing, and maintains normal heart function;

The skeletal manifestations and corneal clouding continue to progress at the same rate in children treated with HSCT and in untreated children [Weisstein et al 2004, Taylor et al 2008];

The degree to which HSCT relieves neurologic complications other than progressive intellectual decline is not clear: a few reports suggest improvement [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Valayannopoulos et al 2010] whereas others do not [Eisengart et al 2013, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. In children undergoing HSCT before evidence of significant developmental delay (i.e., usually between ages 12 and 18 months), HSCT appears to slow the course of cognitive decline. Children showing significant cognitive impairment prior to undergoing HSCT do not show correction of existing impairment.

HSCT is not curative and does not ameliorate cardiac valvular or skeletal manifestations.

In individuals predicted to have severe MPS I based on the presence of known severe pathogenic variants, use of HSCT resulted in stabilization and improvement of myocardial function with regression of hypertrophy and normalization of chamber dimensions [Braunlin et al 2003]. In that cohort, HSCT did not appear to show significant effects on the presence and progression of valvular involvement.

In part because of increased longevity after HSCT, treated individuals develop increasing pain and stiffness of the hips and knees, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord compression, and progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis [reviewed in Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. As a result, various orthopedic procedures intended to maintain function and gait have been performed post-HSCT [Masterson et al 1996, Tandon et al 1996].

Pathophysiology. The beneficial effect of HSCT is thought to result from the replacement of deficient macrophages by marrow-derived donor macrophages (Kupffer cells; pulmonary, splenic, nodal, tonsilar, and peritoneal macrophages; and microglial cells) that constitute an ongoing source of normal enzyme capable of gaining access to the various sites of storage [Guffon et al 1998, Prasad & Kurtzberg 2010]. As existing damage is not reversed, early HSCT is critical for optimal effect.

One hypothesis regarding the failure of HSCT in treating skeletal manifestations is the relatively poor vascularity of bone tissues [Taylor et al 2008].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Laronidase (Aldurazyme®) is currently licensed in the US, Europe, and Canada for use in treating non-CNS manifestations of MPS I. The current dose regime involves premedication with an anti-inflammatory and antihistamine drugs and intravenous weekly infusion of 100 U/kg of Aldurazyme® over four hours. Note that the package insert provides details that may differ by country.

The potential effect of Aldurazyme® on the progression of somatic findings and (more importantly) the effect that Aldurazyme® may have when started very early in the treatment of an individual with attenuated disease remain to be answered. The latter is particularly important as early diagnosis is critical. Aldurazyme® does not cross the blood-brain barrier and thus is not expected to influence the CNS disease in severely affected individuals.

A Phase I open label study included ten individuals with attenuated MPS I treated with human α-L-iduronidase and studied over one year. This study showed improvement in liver size, growth, joint mobility, breathing, and sleep apnea. Increased ability to perform daily functions was reported [Kakkis et al 2001]. A six-year follow up of five of the treated individuals showed sustained improvements in joint range of motion and sleep apnea and no progression of heart disease, but evidence of progression of valvular involvement [Sifuentes et al 2007].

A Phase III double-blind placebo-controlled study included 45 individuals with attenuated MPS I treated for 52 weeks with a 26-week placebo phase [Wraith et al 2005]. This study showed statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function and a six-minute walk test and clear biologic effect with reduction in urinary GAG excretion and liver volume. Patients who had significant sleep apnea at the start of the study improved significantly.

Other case reports representing smaller numbers of treated patients show variable responsiveness to treatment. The heterogeneity of treated patients published to date complicates any conclusions that can be drawn. It appears that the ability of ERT to reverse disease symptoms in individuals with attenuated disease relates closely to the burden of disease prior to commencement of treatment.

All published reports indicate that ERT is well tolerated. Although most individuals treated in either clinical trial developed IgG antibodies, no apparent clinical effects have been reported. These antibodies may, however, hinder therapeutic benefit by promoting more rapid clearance of the enzyme. Follow up of individuals who were part of the Phase I and Phase III studies indicates that immune tolerance is eventually reached [Kakavanos et al 2003, Wraith et al 2005].

A Phase III extension trial included 40 of the individuals from the Phase III trial for an additional four years of treatment [Clarke et al 2009].

Urinary GAG levels decreased 60%-70% before the reduction rate plateaued after 12 weeks (with 15% of patients achieving normal values).

Hepatic volume normalized in 92%.

Respiratory function either improved slightly or remained constant.

Shoulder joint mobility increased gradually, with larger increases being seen in persons with more severe disease.

Timed walk measurements remained largely constant.

Quality of life index improved in most (especially with respect to pain).

Visual acuity improved in 24% although corneal clouding was unchanged.

Growth resumed in approximately 70%; although the growth rate increased with treatment, the final height was still reduced.

The most common reactions were of an immune nature; most were not serious, indicating that Aldurazyme® is generally well tolerated. IgG antibodies to Aldurazyme® were produced in 93% of patients, in inverse correlation to urinary GAG excretion levels; they were not, however, directly related to adverse immune reactions.

Other studies have shown:

Improvement in height and cranial diameter with earlier administration of Aldurazyme® (age <1 year) as compared to later administration (age ≥3 years), despite no measurable improvement in growth rate when treatment was started at age one year [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010b];

Improvement of learning performance in one of three patients and noticeable alteration of MRI profile after 3.5-4.5 years of ERT in 3/3 persons with attenuated disease [Valayannopoulos et al 2010]; however, many more individuals would need to be treated to confirm this finding.

Clear differences between early initiation (age 5 months) and late initiation (age 5 years) of ERT in sibs with attenuated MPS I [Coppa et al 2010].

Pathophysiology. The effectiveness of ERT depends on the ability of recombinant enzymes (supplied intravenously) to enter cells and to localize to the lysosome, the appropriate intracellular site [Russell & Clarke 1999].
See Treatment of Manifestations for information regarding ERT.

The experience of hematopoietic stem cell therapy is very limited and has not been well studied.
Dietary management. The goals of dietary management for newly diagnosed infants:

Normal weight gain, linear growth, and head growth

Normal psychomotor development, as assessed by serial examinations and valid developmental screening tools (e.g., Denver Developmental Screening Test II, standardized intelligence testing, validated behavioral inventories) [Muelly et al 2013]

Age-appropriate tolerance of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, with stable plasma BCAA concentrations and BCAA concentration ratios

Avoidance of essential amino acid, fatty acid, and micronutrient deficiencies

Home formula supplies include BCAA-free powder; breast milk or regular infant formula as a natural protein source; and 10-mg/mL solutions of isoleucine, valine, and leucine in distilled water. If the BCAA-free powder is not already fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010], these can be given separately as a combined powder (weight ratio 3:2). Parents maintain a record of intake of calories, leucine, isoleucine, and valine and send dried blood spots by overnight mail for monitoring of amino acid concentrations. The frequency of amino acid monitoring varies by age, metabolic stability, compliance, and regional clinical practice. For rapidly growing infants, monitoring weekly or twice weekly is recommended. Of note, the frequency of amino acid monitoring correlates directly with long-term measures of intelligence [Muelly et al 2013].

Suggested clinical parameters for the asymptomatic infant or young child include the following:

Normal age- and weight-adjusted energy intake

Protein as essential and non-essential amino acids: 2-3 g/kg/day

Appropriate leucine tolerance. The dietary requirement for BCAAs varies as a function of age, growth rate, calorie intake, illness, and residual in vivo BCKAD enzyme activity. In persons with classic MSUD (0%-2% enzyme activity), leucine tolerance in mg/kg/day is 65-85 for neonates, 20-40 for children, and 10-15 for adults (Figure 9) [Strauss et al 2010].

Isoleucine and valine supplements as needed to maintain a plasma leucine-to-valine concentration ratio (mol:mol) of 0.5 or less and a leucine-to-isoleucine ratio of approximately 2.0. Isoleucine supplements can periodically be suspended based on plasma amino acid monitoring, but continuous valine supplementation is prudent because its low affinity for the blood-brain barrier LAT1 transporter makes it especially vulnerable to competitive inhibition by leucine [Smith & Takasato 1986] and its appropriate fortification is directly related to long-term intellectual outcome [Strauss et al 2010, Muelly et al 2013].

The authors recently compiled age-specific (birth to age 4 years) nutrient intakes for Mennonite children with classic MSUD under their care. These data are presented in Table 5, which shows mean (and 25th to 75th percentile range) intakes for energy, total protein, supplemental amino acids, omega-3 fatty acids, and select minerals at different age intervals.

Goals of laboratory monitoring:

Plasma leucine concentration: 150-300 µmol/L with an age-appropriate intake

Plasma isoleucine concentration approximately equal to plasma leucine concentration

Plasma valine concentration at least twofold plasma leucine concentration

Indices of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3 essential fatty acid sufficiency

Neuropsychiatric morbidity is most effectively addressed by presymptomatic diagnosis followed by strict and consistent metabolic control [Muelly et al 2013]. Adolescents and adults with MSUD and ADHD, depression, or anxiety respond favorably to standard psychostimulant and antidepressant medications.

Thiamine treatment. The existence of "thiamine-responsive" BCKAD mutants is controversial. Nevertheless, for any person with MSUD in whom the functional consequences of the pathogenic variant(s) are unknown, a four-week trial of enteral thiamine (50-100 mg/day, divided 2x a day) is reasonable. However, it should be noted that significant changes in dietary therapy (e.g., BCAA or calorie intake) during the treatment period confounds interpretation of a specific thiamine effect.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is an effective therapy for classic MSUD, with removal of dietary restrictions and complete protection from decompensations during illness [Wendel et al 1999, Bodner-Leidecker et al 2000]. Through a collaboration between University of Pittsburgh Children's Hospital and Clinic for Special Children [Strauss et al 2006], 52 individuals with classic MSUD (age 1.9-20.5 years) underwent elective orthotopic liver transplantation between 2004 and 2013. Plasma leucine, isoleucine, and valine concentrations were normal within six hours after transplantation in all individuals and remained so on an unrestricted diet. Metabolic cure was reflected by a sustained increase in weight-adjusted leucine tolerance from 10-40 mg/kg/day to more than 140 mg/kg/day, normalization of plasma concentration relationships among branched-chain and other essential and non-essential amino acids, and metabolic and clinical stability during protein loading and intercurrent illnesses [Strauss et al 2006, Mazariegos et al 2012].

Risks associated with surgery and immune suppression were similar to those in other pediatric liver transplant populations and one person developed EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Currently, disease-free survival and graft survival are 100% in this cohort of 52 patients [Mazariegos et al 2012]; however, deaths and graft failures have been reported among individuals with MSUD transplanted elsewhere during the same time period [Mazariegos, unpublished observations].

Although liver transplantation does not reverse cognitive disability or psychiatric illness in individuals with MSUD [Muelly et al 2013], it does appear to arrest progression of neurocognitive impairment [Shellmer et al 2011] and prevent life-threatening cerebral edema associated with metabolic crisis [Mazariegos et al 2012].
MT-RNR1-related aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. Physicians can inquire about a family history of aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss prior to the administration of aminoglycosides, either systemically or locally (e.g., into the cochlea as treatment for Meniere disease). In individuals with a positive family history, alternatives to aminoglycoside treatment should be considered when possible.

In the US, aminoglycoside use is most common in the neonatal intensive care unit; however, the therapeutic imperative of treatment with antibiotics in a neonatal intensive care unit setting does not always lend itself to pre-treatment screening by molecular genetic testing.

Bitner-Glindzicz et al [2009] report a population frequency of 0.19% for the A to G change in a European cohort of children age seven to nine years who had the pathogenic variant but did not have hearing loss because they were not exposed to aminoglycosides; they make an argument for screening on demand to avoid a preventable cause of hearing loss.

In a recent commentary by Boles & Friedlich [2010], the authors suggest a prospective study into the feasibility of screening for these mitochondrial pathogenic variants (especially in busy neonatal units) in order to identify a preventable form of hearing loss.

In the Tianjin Province in China, screening of 58,000 newborns with both audiologic and genetic methods determined that 1.8% of newborns had a pathogenic mitochondrial DNA variant and only one had hearing loss [Zhang et al 2013].
Thrombocytopenia cannot be prevented; however, the risk of bleeding can be significantly reduced through education regarding drugs that affect platelet function (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Affected individuals should be prepared for surgery or other invasive procedures with platelet transfusions, desmopressin, antifibrinolytic drugs, or eltrombopag according to the individual's platelet count and history of bleeding.

Oral contraceptives are often effective in preventing or controlling menorrhagia; however, oral contraceptives increase the risk of thrombosis, which has also been described in individuals with MYH9RD. Thus, the balance between risks and benefits associated with use of oral contraceptives should be considered [Heller et al 2006, Nishiyama et al 2008, Girolami et al 2011].

Regular dental care and good oral hygiene are essential to prevent gingival bleeding.
The major management goal is to prevent episodes of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this goal may be achieved by avoiding sustained fatiguing physical exertion.
Exercise temporarily alleviates myotonia (the warm-up effect). A long-term beneficial effect of gymnastics is sometimes reported by affected individuals; the effect has not been systematically studied.
Prevention of primary manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations) is possible when the diagnosis is made promptly after birth via molecular genetic testing. A genetic diagnosis may be performed after a few days; treatment and monitoring may then start immediately.
There is no way to prevent primary manifestations of this disorder. Note: The effect of therapy in mildly affected children with pathogenic variants that result in residual enzyme activity is still under investigation.
Neonatal screening for thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine (T4) levels with appropriate thyroid replacement can prevent systemic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Variable results have been reported with HSCT. Shah et al [2005] reported successful HSCT for NPD-A. Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver and spleen volumes. However, stabilization of the neurologic component following HSCT has not been reported; therefore, any attempts to perform HSCT in individuals with clinically evident neurologic disease should be considered experimental. The morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT limit its use.

Enzyme replacement therapy. See Therapies Under Investigation.
Skin care in individuals with OCA1 is guided by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight.

For individuals with OCA1A, the white skin is completely devoid of melanin and needs to be protected whenever exposed to the sun. Sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be substantial in very sensitive individuals, and exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually substantial in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves, pants, and socks) and sun screens with a high SPF value (blocks with SPF 45-50+). Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing validity of numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

For individuals with OCA1B, the amount of skin pigmentation varies and the use of sun screen should correlate with skin pigmentation and the ability to tan. Skin that burns with sun exposure needs protection. An early (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted.
No dietary or ophthalmologic procedures or exercises will prevent or alter the clinical features of albinism.
All primary manifestations are present at birth. To date no factors that can influence their expression have been identified.
In neonatal-onset OTC deficiency diagnosed prenatally, prospective intravenous (IV) treatment with ammonia scavengers within a few hours of birth (before the ammonia level rises) can prevent a hyperammonemic crisis and coma.

Later on, prevention of hyperammonemic episodes is focused on restriction of dietary protein through low-protein diet and administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs balanced with supplementation of essential amino acids (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Antifibrinolytics should be used to prevent bleeding for surgical and dental procedures, childbirth, and other invasive procedures. Antifibrinolytics can be administered IV, PO, or topically, the latter especially during dental procedures.

Women who have heavy menstrual bleeding often benefit from continuous or intermittent prophylactic use of the antifibrinolytics tranexamic acid and epsilon-aminocaproic acid.
The ability to prevent the primary manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis (regardless of genetic cause) is limited.

The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation. If a low-fat diet is chosen, extra attention to providing fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) is needed.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals may minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]. Anti-oxidant therapy is very low risk and low cost, and thus, an appropriate first course of action [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Cessation/abstinence from smoking and alcohol, the strongest recommendation for all persons with pancreatitis. Substantial evidence shows that oxidative stress from alcohol and tobacco smoke is inherently linked to progression and pain in pancreatitis [Schoenberg et al 1995, Petrov 2010, Tandon & Garg 2011]. This observation provides a pathophysiologic link for alcohol and tobacco smoking as risk factors, and also suggests that nutrition control may be an important preventive measure. Smoking is also a major risk for pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Note: Men with one high-risk CLDN2 variant and women with two high-risk CLDN2 variants should be strongly urged to stop drinking immediately and directed to effective treatment programs.

Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels & Whitcomb 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].
For patients with known mutation of PAX2, regular monitoring of blood pressure, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, and urine analysis and serum studies of renal function are indicated to allow for early diagnosis, as more than 90% of affected patients will develop ESRD.
No curative therapy is presently available for PBD, ZSS.
There are no known effective measures to prevent the primary manifestations of PC. Consistent, regular care of the conditions is necessary. Reduction of trauma, friction, and shear forces to the skin and nails does little to reduce symptoms.
Educate parents about the factors that elicit a crisis and the early signs of decompensation.

Carry an informational statement regarding the child's disorder and the appropriate treatment in an emergency setting.

Minimize intercurrent infections as environmental stressors.
The effective treatment of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy requires lifelong pharmacologic supplements of pyridoxine; the rarity of the disorder has precluded controlled studies to evaluate the optimal dose.

The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for pyridoxine is 0.5 mg for infants and 2 mg for adults. In general, individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have excellent seizure control when treated with 50-100 mg of pyridoxine per day. Seizures in some individuals are controlled on much smaller doses and others require somewhat higher doses [Basura et al 2009, Stockler et al 2011].

Affected individuals may have exacerbations of clinical seizures and/or encephalopathy during an acute illness, such as gastroenteritis or a febrile respiratory infection. To prevent such an exacerbation in these circumstances, the daily dose of pyridoxine may be doubled for several days until the acute illness resolves.

Studies have indicated that higher doses may enhance intellectual development; it has been suggested that a dose of 15-30 mg/kg/day may be optimal [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011] and that the dosage should not exceed 500 mg/day [Stockler et al 2011].

Such therapy is required for life; affected individuals are metabolically dependent on the vitamin, rather than pyridoxine deficient. Compliance with pyridoxine supplementation is critical, as status epilepticus may develop within days of pyridoxine discontinuation.
Always maintain good hydration.

Avoid activities that potentially increase blood viscosity (e.g., mountain climbing, scuba diving, smoking).

For those at increased risk for thromboembolic events: take precautions in higher-risk situations such as long-distance airline flights.
Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation should be the primary therapy in individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency unless cirrhosis is present, in which case LTX should be considered.

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. LTX appears difficult to justify in patients with mild, intermittently manifesting ATP8B1 deficiency. The role of surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation in mild ATP8B1 deficiency is unclear.
Recommendations can all be found in Treatment of Manifestations, specifically in the sub-sections on Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation and Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis.
The main preventative treatment is to maintain adequate hydration status and to enhance calcium oxalate solubility with exogenous citrate and neutral phosphates as described in Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Some women at increased risk for breast cancer consider prophylactic mastectomy, especially if breast tissue is dense or if repeated breast biopsies have been necessary. Prophylactic mastectomy reduces the risk of breast cancer by 90% in women at high risk [Hartmann et al 1999]. Note: The recommendation of prophylactic mastectomy is a generalization for women at increased risk for breast cancer from a variety of causes, not just from PHTS.

No direct evidence supports the routine use of agents such as tamoxifen or raloxifene in individuals with PHTS to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer. Physicians should discuss the limitations of the evidence and the risks and benefits of chemoprophylaxis with each individual. In addition, the clinician must discuss the increased risk of endometrial cancer associated with tamoxifen use in a population already at increased risk for endometrial cancer.
No measures that eliminate disease manifestations in a symptomatic person or prevent them from appearing in an asymptomatic person have been identified.
Although not specifically studied in PJS, prophylactic mastectomy may be considered to manage the increased risk for breast cancer based on the family history or other clinical factors. Prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy to prevent gynecologic malignancy in women may be considered. In some disorders with a high risk for malignancy (e.g., HNPCC), evidence supports this strategy [Schmeler et al 2006].
See Treatment of Manifestations.
No therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease is known.
Prompt treatment of ACTH, TSH, GH, LH, and FSH deficiency prevents the consequences of these hormone deficiencies.
Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) is advised. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is appropriate.
Acute attack

Attacks are less likely to occur in the future if exacerbating factors are corrected or avoided.

Recurrent premenstrual attacks of acute porphyrias, including VP, can be prevented with GnRH analogues [Anderson et al 1990].

Weekly or biweekly hemin infusions may prevent frequent noncyclical attacks; however, published experience is lacking.

Photocutaneous. Prevention of the skin manifestations of VP requires protection from sunlight.
Dietary management. The mainstay nutritional intervention is modification of diet to control the intake of propiogenic substrates (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine), while ensuring normal protein synthesis and preventing protein catabolism, amino acid deficiencies, and growth restriction.

Important note: Dietary management needs to be directed by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician.

Recommended protein intake depends on age of the patient (see Table 11 in Baumgartner et al [2014]).

The ratio of natural source protein to medical foods varies depending on the individual’s clinical status, laboratory parameters, and growth trajectory [Sutton et al 2012].

Laboratory parameters useful in guiding nutritional intervention can include the following:

Pre-prandial plasma essential amino acids

Plasma albumin

Prealbumin

Hemoglobin

Plasma ammonia

Urinary ketones, plasma lactic acid, and methylcitric acid to monitor and adjust nutritional management

Plasma vitamin D

Essential fatty acid profile

Additional calories can be provided using protein-free formulas.

G-tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence in chronic management of PA.

Since the number of acute decompensations negatively correlates with the intellectual quotient in patients with PA [Grünert et al 2012], prevention and proactive management of metabolic crises can be an important point of intervention to maximize favorable clinical outcomes.

Medications

Levocarnitine. The optimal dose of levocarnitine has not been established; doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/kg per day have been reported [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

When calculating the daily dose of levocarnitine, one needs to consider the presence of this pharmaceutic compound in medical foods and the maximum daily dose in older patients.

Levocarnitine can be given enterally and intravenously.

Antimicrobial therapy. Oral metronidazole has been shown to reduce propionic acid production by intestinal gut flora [Thompson et al 1990, Mellon et al 2000]. One regimen uses a one-week-on, three-weeks-off approach [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012].

Biotin supplementation. There is no consensus regarding the use of biotin supplementation nor the optimal dose in the treatment of PA. Given biotin’s favorable profile, a short therapeutic trial may be considered [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Whether a biotin-responsive form of PA exists is not known [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Management during episodes of metabolic decompensation includes:

Avoidance of fasting (e.g., using intravenous dextrose).

Increasing calorie intake to prevent catabolism (e.g., intravenous fat emulsion).

When enteral feeding cannot be provided for a prolonged period of time, judicious use of total parenteral nutrition may include standard amino acid mixes providing age-appropriate recommended daily allowance of protein [Sutton et al 2012]. In rare circumstances, specialized amino acid mixes with reduced content of isoleucine, valine, threonine and methionine are necessary.

Organ transplantation. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) may be indicated in those individuals who, despite adequate medical treatment, still experience frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable hyperammonemia, and poor growth [Barshes et al 2006, Charbit-Henrion et al 2015].

Benefits of OLT include decrease in the frequency of metabolic decompensations, improved quality-adjusted life years, increased life expectancy, life-time cost savings [Vara et al 2011, Li et al 2015], and reversal of dilated cardiomyopathy [Yorifuji et al 2004, Romano et al 2010].

Liver transplantation has been performed from unrelated donors [Barshes et al 2006, Romano et al 2010] and from heterozygous related donors [Morioka et al 2005, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012].

Continuous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Sato et al 2009, Kasahara et al 2012], and left ventricular assist devices have been used while waiting for OLT [Ameloot et al 2011].

OLT in patients with PA is not curative. It does not completely protect against a metabolic stroke, hyperammonemia, or metabolic decompensations.

Life-long post-transplant management is recommended [Yorifuji et al 2004, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continued protein restriction and L-carnitine supplementation after OLT is advocated by several authors [Saudubray et al 1999, Yorifuji et al 2004, Kasahara et al 2012].

Sedation and perioperative management. Anesthetic aspects of perioperative management of patients with PA have been infrequently discussed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Involvement of a metabolic specialist perioperatively to ensure adequate hydration and caloric management can help minimize the risk of decompensations.

Emergency situations. Emergency letters, bracelets, and emergency information in smartphones help facilitate appropriate emergency care by healthcare providers unfamiliar with propionic acidemia.
Gout and renal lithiasis caused by chronically elevated serum and urine uric acid, the result of purine overproduction, can be reduced by a xanthine oxidase inhibitor.

Some neurologic attributes of the severe form of the disease may be preventable by early treatment with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), although this is experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).
Prevention of primary manifestations in hereditary pancreatitis is limited. The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals are recommended to minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001].
In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not recommended for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes, since the 1%-3% yearly risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated (<1%) yearly risk for thrombosis [Martinelli et al 2000a, Middeldorp & van Hylckama Vlieg 2008, Berg et al 2011].

Prophylactic anticoagulation may be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians consensus guidelines [Guyatt et al 2012] (full text).
Obesity may be prevented if the diet, exercise, and supervision program described in Treatment of Manifestations is instituted. Early diagnosis allows the clinician to begin anticipatory guidance concerning the natural history of PWS, and in particular the nutritional phases, informing the family about the risk of obesity and the need to monitor weight increase and to restrict calories beginning around 18-36 months of age.

If started at a young age, growth hormone treatment, along with good dietary control, may retard obesity and the high proportion of fat mass. It may also prevent development of the typical facial appearance and improve motor milestones.
Weight control, avoidance of smoking, and aggressive management of hypertension and lipid disorders may reduce the risk of vascular complications by reducing the risk of comorbidity resulting from atherosclerosis. However, reduction in risk resulting from these measures has not been confirmed in controlled studies.
Dietary restriction of phytanic acid to avoid the consequences of phytanic acid accumulation over time may benefit individuals with milder forms of RCDP.
No curative therapy currently exists for Refsum disease.

By restricting dietary intake of phytanic acid or eliminating phytanic acid by plasmapheresis or lipid apheresis, plasma phytanic acid concentrations can be reduced by 50% to 70%, typically to about 100 to 300 µmol/L. This reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration successfully resolves symptoms of ichthyosis, sensory neuropathy, and ataxia in approximately that order. However, it is uncertain whether treatment affects the progression of the retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and deafness [Gibberd & Wierzbicki 2000]. Although data are limited, it appears that despite strict dietary treatment the retinitis pigmentosa is very slowly progressive [BP Leroy, unpublished observations].

A high-calorie diet is necessary to avoid mobilization of stored lipids, including phytanic acid, into the plasma.

Postoperative care requires parenteral nutrition with solutions that do not contain phytanic acid, e.g., Intralipid® available in 10%, 20%, and 30% concentrations, which are all based on soybean oil and egg yolk phospholipid.
See Treatment of Manifestations, Pharmacologic treatment.
Beta blockers. Beta blockers are clinically indicated in all asymptomatic individuals, including those who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Males who have a pathogenic variant and who have been asymptomatic before 40 years are at low risk of cardiac events. In these individuals the necessity of beta-blockers can be discussed [Locati et al 1998].

ICD. In general, ICD implantation is not indicated for asymptomatic individuals with LQTS who have not been tried on beta blocker therapy. Prophylactic ICD therapy can be considered for asymptomatic individuals suspected to be at very high risk, such as asymptomatic individuals with two or more pathogenic variants on molecular testing [Priori et al 2013]. LQTS-related sudden death in a close relative is not an indication for an ICD in surviving relatives [Kaufman et al 2008].
See Therapies Under Investigation.
No therapy is known to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

No drugs have been proven to provide symptomatic relief of ataxia; however, minor tranquilizers may show some benefits in motor coordination in those persons who experience anxiety.
Management of affected individuals remains supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.
Preventive measures if necessary include avoidance of fasting longer than 12 hours (during childhood) and an age-appropriate heart-healthy diet. Age-appropriate shorter fasting periods would be required in infants and toddlers. No dietary fat restriction or specific supplements are recommended in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].
Ongoing education is essential to help minimize morbidity and mortality. Education comprises a regular review of interventions including the following:

Maintaining hydration and avoiding extremes of climate

Monitoring for signs and symptoms requiring acute medical intervention

Early detection of chronic complications

Updates on new therapies

Disease-modulating therapies are discussed in several reviews [Vichinsky 2012, Kassim & DeBaun 2013, Ware et al 2017].

Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. The initial goal of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy varies depending on indication but typically is to maintain the percentage of HbS <30% and suppress reticulocytosis. Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy may be warranted for the following [Yawn et al 2014, Howard 2016, Ware et al 2017]:

Primary prevention of stroke in individuals with an abnormal transcranial Doppler

Prevention of stroke recurrence

Treatment of chronic pain refractory to other therapies

Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic renal failure

Recurrent episodes of ACS

Severe end-organ damage

Complications of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy include: iron overload, alloimmunization, and, rarely, infection. To limit alloimmunization and transfusion reactions, extended matching of red blood cell antigens should be performed and blood products should be leuko-reduced (removal of white blood cells from the transfusion product). Red blood cells antigen matched at the full Rh locus (D, C, E) and Kell have been suggested to decrease alloimmunization rates, as well as other alleles when possible [Lasalle-Williams et al 2011]. Approaches to decrease alloimmunization in the future include obtaining a better understanding of the process of alloimmunization as well as molecular genotyping. Defining antigens molecularly has multiple benefits including the ability to type cells when serologic reagents are not available [Yazdanbakhsh et al 2012, Matteocci & Pierelli 2014].

Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea), until recently the only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, is only approved for adults. Hydroxyurea benefits individuals with SCD via several mechanisms [Platt 2008, Ware 2010] including:

Induction of HbF synthesis resulting in decreased sickling and improved red-cell survival;

Reduction of white blood cell (WBC), reticulocyte and platelet counts;

Metabolism into nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator;

Overall improvement in blood flow;

Reduction of vascular inflammation.

Multiple NIH consensus statements have noted strong evidence to support its routine use in adults [Brawley et al 2008, Yawn et al 2014]. It has been demonstrated that hydroxyurea therapy is safe to use in children as young as nine months with no decrease in immune function [Ware 2010, Rogers et al 2011, Wang et al 2011, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Lederman et al 2014]. It is now very strongly recommended that every individual with S/S and S/β0-thalassemia age nine months or older be offered treatment with hydroxyurea [Yawn et al 2014]. This early initiation decreases clinical events [Thornburg et al 2012]. In addition, use of hydroxyurea has been associated with a decrease in healthcare costs [Wang et al 2013].

Hydroxyurea can have potentially significant toxicity, including myelosuppression. Individuals treated with hydroxyurea must be monitored closely with CBCs and reticulocyte counts. In order to balance the benefits with potential toxicities of hydroxyurea, many suggest a careful titration of the drug to find a dosing for each affected person that provides an appropriate reduction in WBC count without toxicity [Ware 2010, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Yawn et al 2014].

Glutamine has just received FDA approval for the prevention of acute complications in individuals age five years and older with SCD, whether on hydroxyurea or not. Due to its antioxidant properties and in vitro activity, glutamine has long been considered of potential benefit in the treatment of SCD. Though not published, a multicenter placebo-controlled clinical trial suggests that chronic use of oral glutamine can decrease the frequency of sickle cell pain-related episodes (clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01179217). Having a second FDA-approved drug opens the door to combination therapy using multiple agents.

Stem cell transplantation from a healthy donor or one with sickle cell trait can be curative in individuals with SCD and while the number of matched-sib transplants continues to rise, there is rapid evolution in the use of alternate donors. Children with SCD receiving stem cell transplantation using a matched sib donor can expect a 92% chance of cure with an overall survival of 95%. [King & Shenoy 2014, Nickel et al 2014, Walters 2015]. These phenomenal outcomes are balanced by potential long-term consequences including chronic-graft-versus host disease and infertility. There is debate now as to who should be transplanted and when. Transplanting with a matched sib early in life can subvert a life of debilitating complications and decreasing end-organ function – the latter making transplant at a later age more difficult. Notably, pediatric providers may overly worry about the risks of transplant, while not appreciating the high morbidity of sickle cell disease manifestations in adulthood. However, the comparative long-term benefits of supportive care (including hydroxyurea and improvements in sickle cell management) versus transplantation are not yet known.

Despite the great successes associated with transplantation, it is estimated that fewer than 30% of individuals with SCD have suitable matched-sib donors, few have suitable matched unrelated donors, and transplant for adults with SCD has been far more difficult due to regime-related toxicity. The field of transplantation for SCD is currently undergoing rapid expansion. Thus, the use of alternate donors (including unrelated donors and haploidentical donors) and cord blood is an active area of research [Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016, Walters et al 2016].

Initial myeloablative regimes yielded too much toxicity for older individuals with SCD; the recent development of less toxic transplant regimens makes stem cell transplantation a more acceptable option for older individuals [Tisdale et al 2013].

While unrelated cord blood transplants are falling out of favor due to the high rate of graft failure, there is an increased use and success of haploidentical transplants, vastly broadening the number of individuals who could potentially be cured [Gluckman 2013, Tisdale et al 2013, Walters 2015, Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016].

Gene therapy. As all allogenic transplants for SCD present a risk for graft-versus-host disease, there has been an explosion of research in gene therapy for SCD. While both gene editing and gene addition approaches are being activity pursued, only viral mediated gene therapy approaches are being used in clinical trials [Goodman & Malik 2016, Cavazzana et al 2017].

The criteria, risks, and benefits of transplantation are changing rapidly; thus, it is important for families and providers to discuss the risks and benefits with a transplantation center with expertise in SCD.
Chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Currently, no treatment for BSCL2-related neurologic disorders that reverses or slows the natural disease process exists.
Avoidance of cow’s milk lessens the severity of gastroenteritis and reduces exacerbations of thrombocytopenia (in older children).
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX). The only effective therapy for the neuropathy of familial TTR amyloidosis is orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX), which removes the main production site of the amyloidogenic protein. Successful OLTX results in rapid disappearance of variant TTR protein from the serum and thus halts the progression of peripheral and/or autonomic neuropathy. It has been shown by pre- and postoperative sural nerve biopsy that myelinated nerve fibers regenerate after OLTX [Ikeda et al 1997].

Recommended clinical criteria for OLTX in individuals with TTR amyloid polyneuropathy [Takei et al 1999, Adams et al 2000] include the following:

Age younger than 60 years

Disease duration less than five years

Either polyneuropathy that is restricted to the lower extremities or autonomic neuropathy alone

No significant cardiac or renal dysfunction

As of the end of June 2010, 1913 individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis, approximately 90% of whom were heterozygous for the Val30Met variant, had undergone liver transplantation (www.fapwtr.org/ram_fap.htm) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003, Herlenius et al 2004, Stangou & Hawkins 2004]. The five-year survival rate was significantly higher in individuals with the Val30Met variant than in those with other pathogenic variants (80% vs 57%, p=0.001) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003]. The most common causes of postoperative death were cardiovascular events (29%) and septicemia (26%) [Ikeda et al 2003].

Poor outcomes of transplanted individuals based on ten years' experience [Ikeda et al 2003] include:

Poor nutritional condition (mean body mass index <600)

Severe polyneuropathy (Norris score <55/81)

Permanent urinary incontinence

Marked postural hypotension

A fixed pulse rate

OLTX is not effective in the non-neuropathic forms of familial TTR amyloidosis (i.e., cardiac amyloidosis, leptomeningeal amyloidosis, and familial oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis [FOLMA]).

Cardiomyopathy was reported to progress after OLTX in some individuals with specific pathogenic variants other than Val30Met (Ala36Pro, Glu42Gly, and Ser77Tyr) (see Table 5) [Dubrey et al 1997, Stangou et al 1998, Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. It is presumed that amyloid cardiomyopathy may accelerate after OLTX by progressive deposition of wild-type TTR on a template of amyloid derived from variant TTR [Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. Therefore, it is critical to assess the severity of cardiac amyloidosis when considering OLTX [Coutinho et al 2004, Juneblad et al 2004].

Individuals with leptomeningeal involvement may not be candidates for liver transplantation because amyloidogenic TTR variants that cause intracranial amyloid deposits are considered to be derived from the choroid plexus.

Vitreous opacities may also progress after OLTX, possibly as the result of de novo production of variant TTR in the retinal epithelium.

Note: Because liver involvement in familial TTR amyloidosis is minimal, the liver of an individual with familial TTR amyloidosis can be grafted into an individual with liver cancer or end-stage liver disease (so-called "domino" liver transplantation). Since 1995, more than 330 domino liver transplantations have been performed. Several individuals who had received a liver graft from heterozygotes with familial TTR amyloidosis developed symptomatic systemic TTR amyloidosis [Stangou et al 2005, Goto et al 2006, Barreiros et al 2010, Lladó et al 2010, Obayashi et al 2011, Adams et al 2011]
In affected individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration, prevention of primary manifestations is accomplished by weekly phlebotomy to deplete iron stores (see Treatment of Manifestations).
As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of TH-deficient DRD; thus, levodopa treatment from early infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations in this mild form of TH deficiency.

Levodopa therapy from early infancy may prevent manifestations of some symptoms and signs in TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay; however, no levodopa trials in the early postnatal period of infants with this type of TH deficiency and biallelic TH pathogenic variants have been reported.
Arrhythmias in Timothy syndrome must be prevented with the standard therapy described in Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Treatment with nitisinone (Orfadin®) should begin as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed.
Individuals with the more severe forms are typically placed on a low-fat formula, with supplemental calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT). A variety of strategies for the low-fat diet are used, ranging from 13%-39% of calories as total fat, with an additional 15%-18% of calories supplied as MCT oil in those most strictly restricted for long-chain fats [Solis & Singh 2002].

Extra MCT has demonstrated benefit in older individuals with long-chain defects who have exercise intolerance. Gillingham et al [2006] demonstrated improved exercise tolerance in individuals given 0.5 g/kg lean body weight 20 minutes prior to exercise. [Behrend et al 2012].

Triheptanoin has been used in a few individuals with the goal of providing calories as well as providing anaplerotic carbons; however, the efficacy remains controversial. Formal clinical trials of triheptanoin are in progress (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Severe exercise (e.g., military training) has unmasked symptoms in previously asymptomatic adults [Hoffman et al 2006, Laforêt et al 2009], emphasizing that exercise should be guided by the individual’s tolerance level.

The use of carnitine supplementation is controversial [Arnold et al 2009]: consensus as to whether additional carnitine is detrimental or efficacious has not been established.
Initiation of regular IVIG at the time of diagnosis to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Individuals with type 3 VWD are often given prophylactic infusions of VWF/FVIII concentrates to prevent musculoskeletal bleeding and subsequent joint damage.
See Treatment of Manifestations for discussion of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT).

Infection

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii (PCP) is indicated for infants with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as they are at risk of developing PCP. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy. Individuals with recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic use.

Intravenous immune globulin. Replacement therapy with IVIgG by age six months is administered every three to four weeks or subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis. IVIgG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies).

Routine childhood immunizations. Live vaccines should be avoided. Other “non-live” vaccinations can be given safely to individuals with a WAS-related disorder but may not generate protective levels of antibody.

Bleeding

Splenectomy. Splenectomy is palliative, and while it may be life-saving in an individual with severe bleeding, it does not prevent any of the other possible complications of the disorder [Mullen et al 1993]. In a survey of clinical immunologists performed by the European and Pan American Groups on Immunodeficiencies, respondents from centers treating the highest numbers of individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome did not recommend splenectomy [Conley et al 2003]. Because splenectomy significantly increases the risk of life-threatening infections in males with XLT [Albert et al 2011] as well as in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who subsequently undergo HCT [Ozsahin et al 2008], it should be used with caution.

Males who have had splenectomy must take antibiotics routinely for the rest of their lives because of the increased risk for overwhelming infection.

Platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions should be administered judiciously (e.g., for significant bleeding and surgical procedures).
Medical therapy is recommended for asymptomatic patients to prevent development of symptoms (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) ) is an option for boys and adolescents in early stages of symptom set 1 who have evidence of brain involvement on MRI.

Because HSCT is associated with a 20% risk for morbidity and mortality, it is recommended only for individuals with evidence of brain involvement by MRI but minimal neuropsychologic findings (performance IQ >80) and normal clinical neurologic examination.

HSCT is not recommended for individuals with severe neurologic and neuropsychologic dysfunction (i.e., performance IQ <80) [Shapiro et al 2000, Baumann et al 2003, Loes et al 2003, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2005, Resnick et al 2005].
It is recommended that boys with known or suspected XLP and hypogammaglobulinemia receive regular intravenous (IV) IgG replacement therapy every three to four weeks until definitive treatment can be provided.

HCT is the only curative therapy and should be considered in children with confirmed XLP as early in life as possible.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Prompt immune reconstitution is required for survival of children with X-SCID [Myers et al 2002]. BMT was first successful in 1968 and remains the standard means of immune reconstitution. The general experience is that genotypically HLA-identical marrow transplantation restores T-cell immunity in more than 90% of unconditioned individuals with SCID, although B-cell reconstitution occurs in only a limited subset of these individuals [O'Reilly et al 1989, Buckley et al 1999].

Although many centers have expertise in performing bone marrow transplantation in individuals with malignancy, the special issues arising in bone marrow transplantation for X-SCID require involvement of immunodeficiency specialists for an optimal outcome. Individuals with SCID have no immune system capable of rejecting the graft and, therefore, do not typically require fully ablative conditioning; regimens that do not employ agents at doses resulting in long-lasting marrow aplasia are referred to as reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens. Additionally, protocols including alpha/beta T-cell depletion in graft preparations are now being used to improve unrelated donor graft outcomes.

HLA-matched bone marrow transplantation from a relative is preferred; however, most individuals lack a matched, related donor.

For infants who do not have a matched, related donor, haploidentical parental bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T cells can be used [Buckley et al 1999, Pai et al 2014]. In this technique, the bone marrow is depleted of T cells in order to remove mismatched T cells, which would react against the baby's tissues and cause graft versus host disease (GVHD).

Matched, unrelated donor transplantation of peripherally harvested bone marrow (or less frequently cord blood hematopoietic stem cells) in association with partially myeloablative or RIC regimens is now being used at specialized transplantation centers, although GVHD can be a significant problem in some individuals.

Mismatched T cells can react against the baby's tissues and cause GVHD. Cord blood from normal infants is now being banked; frozen cells can be thawed and used in other unrelated donor transplants.

The best timing for BMT is immediately after birth because young infants are less likely than older infants to have had serious infections or failure to thrive. The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) found in 25 centers over the last decade significantly better outcomes (>90% survival) in children receiving transplantation in early infancy (age <3.5 months) without prior infections even after alternative donor grafts were used [Pai et al 2014]. Younger infants also have more rapid engraftment, fewer post-transplantation infections, less GVHD, and shorter hospitalizations than those in whom BMT is delayed [Kane et al 2001, Myers et al 2002]. The optimal age and RIC regimen in young infants, however, remains to be determined. BMT after age 3.5 months and/or a history of infections resulted in a dramatic decrease in survival post transplantation.

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells, chronic warts, and lymphocyte dysregulation.

Administration of immunoglobulin. Long-term periodic administration of immunoglobulin may be required in those who fail to develop allogeneic, functional B lymphocytes after transplantation.

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has been evaluated in individuals not eligible for BMT, after failed BMT, and in individuals with only haploidentical donors. Gene therapy performed using autologous bone marrow stem/progenitor cells transduced with gamma-retroviral vectors expressing a therapeutic gene resulted in significant T-cell reconstitution in the majority of young infants with X-SCID, but only limited success in those with severe infections at the time of transplantation [reviewed in Fischer et al 2011, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014].

B-cell reconstitution was less consistent with roughly half being able to discontinue gamma-globulin replacement therapy.

Unfortunately, between two early trials, five of 20 individuals developed leukemia-like disease requiring ALL-type therapy due to retroviral insertional activation of cellular growth regulatory genes [Howe et al 2008, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2010, Deichmann et al 2011]. Newer, second-generation vectors utilizing self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral vectors have shown similar efficacy in T-cell reconstitution with improved safety design, no adverse events reported in nine individuals over three years post transplantation, and significantly fewer insertions found in genes implicated in lymphoproliferation [Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. Clinical trials using an SIN-lentiviral vector in conjunction with busulfan-based partial myeloablative conditioning are underway for both infants and older individuals who have failed BMT. Initial results in a small number of older individuals have demonstrated sustained myeloid viral marking and restoration of T, B, and NK cell numbers and function [Author, personal communication].

See also Therapies Under Investigation.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Bacterial Infections

Gammaglobulin substitution therapy is the mainstay of treatment for individuals with XLA. Most individuals in the United States are given approximately 400 mg/kg of gammaglobulin every four weeks. In the past, the majority of individuals received their gammaglobulin by intravenous infusion every two to four weeks. In the last few years, an increasing proportion of individuals have been receiving gammaglobulin by weekly subcutaneous injections. Both routes provide good therapeutic concentrations of serum IgG. The choice of route may depend on factors related to the convenience of the physician and patient [Berger 2004].

A variety of brands of gammaglobulin are available; none has proven to be superior to others as measured by efficacy or side effects. Occasionally, individuals with XLA have a reaction to gammaglobulin, consisting of headaches, chills, backache, or nausea. These reactions are more likely to occur when the individual has an intercurrent viral infection or when the brand of gammaglobulin has been changed. Such reactions may disappear over time.

Chronic prophylactic antibiotics are used in some centers for prevention of bacterial infections.
The following methods are used to prevent infection:

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP) is indicated because infants with HIGM1 are at high risk of developing PCP during the first two years of life. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy.

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG). IVIG replacement should be considered by the time the child is age six months, as individuals with HIGM1 cannot generate antibodies to encapsulated bacteria naturally and are at risk for overwhelming infection from these organisms. IVIG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies) that is typically given every three to four weeks or can be given subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis.

Additional antibiotic prophylaxis should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

Routine childhood immunizations (killed vaccines) may be safely administered but do not preclude the need for IVIG replacement.
Treatment of XP depends on early diagnosis and immediate, aggressive avoidance of sun and other UV exposure. This involves avoiding or minimizing outdoor exposure at times when UV radiation is present (when the sun is out or during daytime through clouds).

Clinical suspicion of XP should prompt immediate sun-protective measures until the diagnosis is confirmed or an alternative explanation is determined.

Individuals should be educated to protect all body surfaces from UV radiation by wearing protective clothing including hats, long sleeves, long pants and gloves, broad-spectrum, high sun-protective factor (SPF) sunscreens, UV-absorbing glasses, and long hair styles. The eyes should be protected by wearing UV-absorbing glasses with side shields. Some individuals have custom-made hats with UV-absorbing face shields to permit visibility outdoors while protecting the face from UV.

Because the cells of individuals with XP are hypersensitive to UVA and UVB (found in sunlight) and UVC (found in some artificial light sources), it is useful to measure UV light in an individual's home, school, or work environment with a light meter so that high levels of environmental UV (e.g., halogen lamps) can be identified and eliminated if possible. While no standards exist for perfectly safe UV exposure in individuals with XP, the use of UV meters can alert individuals to unexpected sources of high levels of environmental UV.
The only curative therapy for ZAP70-related CID is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Extrapolated data show that the outcome of HSCT in children with SCID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of infections [Pai et al 2014]. Children with ZAP70-related CID have been successfully transplanted using a variety of donors including haploidentical donors and unrelated umbilical cord blood [Noraz et al 2000, Elder et al 2001, Hönig et al 2012, Cuvelier et al 2016].

Outcomes are the best with HLA-matched, related donors.

If an HLA-matched, related donor is not available, alternatives include:

Matched unrelated donor;

Umbilical cord blood donor;

Haploidentical parental bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood stem cells that have been T-cell depleted.

In contrast to individuals with SCID, individuals with ZAP70-related CID are typically treated with a chemotherapeutic conditioning regimen prior to HSCT, although some individuals have received unconditioned transplants with variable success, suggesting that conditioning may not be essential in some circumstances [Hönig et al 2012, Kim et al 2013, Cuvelier et al 2016].

The largest series of eight individuals with ZAP70-related CID who received HSCT using a variety of stem cell sources showed the following:

All individuals were alive at a median of 13.5 years of follow up.

Two-thirds of the individuals who did not receive conditioning failed to have myeloid engraftment but have maintained stable mixed chimerism. In addition, three individuals who received stem cells from a matched sib did not receive conditioning prior to transplant and achieved engraftment.

75% of individuals developed acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and 50% developed chronic GVHD.

Seven of eight individuals achieved freedom from IVIG and show evidence of class switching with resolution of dysregulated immunoglobulin production and six of the eight show evidence of antibody production to both protein and polysaccharide vaccines.

Two individuals receiving myeloablative conditioning have developed premature ovarian failure.

Cellular reconstitution following HSCT takes up to one year, while restoration of humoral immunity can take significantly longer, and may not occur in some individuals.

Complications from HSCT include graft-versus-host disease, failure to reconstitute the humoral immune compartment, graft failure over time, and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease [Skoda-Smith et al 2001, Dvorak & Cowan 2008, Pai et al 2014].

Affected individuals with poor humoral reconstitution are maintained on long-term immunoglobulin replacement.

Individuals who do not undergo HSCT require close monitoring for worsening of immune function manifested by increased susceptibility to severe or opportunistic infections (see also Surveillance). If clinical status worsens, rapid transition to HSCT should be considered.
Most affected individuals are clinically normal at birth. Since alpha-mannosidosis can be treated with BMT, and possibly also by ERT in the future, there is a pressing need for newborn screening to identify affected individuals early, before the onset of severe, irreversible, pathology [Meikle et al 2006].
Hb Bart syndrome

Because of the severity of Hb Bart syndrome and the risk for maternal complications during the pregnancy with a fetus with this disorder, prenatal diagnosis and early termination of affected pregnancies is usually considered. Future studies on the functional outcomes of children with Hb Bart syndrome who have received chronic transfusion, intrauterine transfusions, and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, will allow physicians to improve the informed decision-making process for families weighing the risk-benefit profile of present treatment options.
No specific treatment is available for the sensorimotor neuropathy.

Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team that comprises a pediatrician or pediatric neurologist, an orthopedist, a physiotherapist, and an occupational therapist.
Zinc concentrations in these patients were decreased in the brain and visceral organs, and zinc showed opposing distributions to those for iron. Because zinc has antioxidant activity, treatment with an iron chelator accompanied by zinc may be useful in patients with aceruloplasminemia to diminish iron accumulation in the brain and body and to prevent or ameliorate systemic and neurologic symptoms [Miyajima 2015].
Prophylactic treatment aimed at reduction of attack frequency and severity can be achieved, as in other forms of periodic paralysis, with the following:

Lifestyle and dietary modification to avoid known triggers

Use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide 250-500 mg/1-2x/day or dichlorphenamide 50-100 mg/1-2x/day)

Daily use of slow-release potassium supplements, which may also be helpful in controlling attack rates in individuals prone to hypokalemia. Elevating the serum potassium concentration (>4 mEq/L) has the added benefit of narrowing the QT interval, thus reducing the risk of LQT-associated arrhythmias.

An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in individuals with tachycardia-induced syncope [Chun et al 2004]

Empiric treatment with flecainide [Bökenkamp et al 2007, Fox et al 2008, Pellizzón et al 2008] should be considered for significant, frequent ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of reduced left ventricular function [Tristani-Firouzi & Etheridge 2010]. A prospective open label study in ten individuals with ATS and a confirmed KCNJ2 pathogenic variant tested the effect of flecainide, a type 1c antiarrhythmic, for the prevention of cardiac arrhythmias [Miyamoto et al 2015]. Outcomes included a 24-hour Holter monitor before and after treatment, and a treadmill exercise test. Flecainide was found to significantly reduce the number of ventricular arrhythmias seen on Holter monitor, and to suppress exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Individuals were then followed for a mean of 23 months and no syncope or cardiac arrest was documented. The study concluded that flecainide may reduce cardiac arrhythmias in ATS; however, the ultimate benefit of flecainide for prevention of medically significant cardiac arrhythmias is still unknown.
Restoring a functional immune system is essential and can be achieved in several ways. The choice of therapy is complex and depends on a number of factors, including the affected person’s age and clinical status, the expectations and desires of the parents, and the specific experience and expertise of physicians in treating ADA-deficient SCID. A workshop held in 2008 developed consensus guidelines for therapy [Gaspar et al 2009] (full text).

Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation (BMT/SCT) from an HLA-identical healthy sib is the method of choice for treating all forms of SCID.

This can be performed without cytoreductive conditioning of the affected individual, and without depletion of donor T-cells.

Results vary among transplant centers, but the procedure is curative in approximately 70% or more of affected individuals.

The main risks are graft-versus-host disease and delayed or incomplete recovery of humoral immune function, requiring continued immunoglobulin replacement.

For the majority of individuals with ADA-deficient SCID who lack an HLA-identical related donor, the following two forms of treatment can be considered [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Candotti et al 2012, Baffelli et al 2015].

BMT/SCT from a “non-ideal” donor

Donor-derived T-cells are depleted to minimize the risk of graft-versus-host disease.

Pre-transplant cytoreductive “conditioning” of the recipient (individual with SCID) is often performed to prevent graft loss, which occurs with relative frequency in those with ADA-deficient SCID who are not conditioned.

Note: Some transplant centers do not perform conditioning of the recipient prior to a haploidentical transplant because of the risk of peri-transplant morbidity [Buckley et al 1999]. However, this latter approach has frequently been associated with a failure to achieve stable engraftment [Gaspar et al 2009, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012].

Following a T-cell-depleted transplant, return of functional T-cells requires three to four months. B-cell reconstitution is delayed longer, or may not be adequately achieved, requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement therapy.

Note: Universal agreement regarding the best methods for performing partially mismatched BMT/SCT does not exist [Cancrini et al 2010, Gaspar 2010, Hassan et al 2012]. When considering therapeutic options, it is therefore important for parents to obtain specific information about prior experience and long-term results of transplants for ADA-deficient SCID at the center where their child will be treated.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has been used as a primary therapy in individuals who lack an HLA-identical marrow/stem cell donor when the risks associated with a partially mismatched transplant are deemed too great or when the risk of graft failure is high, as in older individuals with a delayed- or late-onset phenotype.

Polyethylene glycol-modified bovine adenosine deaminase (PEG-ADA) is composed of purified bovine ADA covalently linked to multiple strands of PEG (average mass: 5 kd) in order to prolong circulating life and reduce immunogenicity. It is administered by intramuscular injection once or twice a week (~15-60 U/kg per week).

By maintaining a high level of ADA activity in plasma, PEG-ADA eliminates extracellular Ado and dAdo, preventing the toxic metabolic effects that interfere with lymphocyte viability and function and that may injure other organs (liver, lung, brain) [Hershfield et al 1987, Hershfield & Mitchell 2001, Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

ERT is not curative; PEG-ADA must be given regularly and at a sufficient dose to maintain a non-toxic metabolic environment.

PEG-ADA has also been used as a secondary therapy in affected individuals who have failed to engraft following an unconditioned BMT/SCT, or in whom an acceptable recovery of immune function has not been achieved following experimental gene therapy.

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA recover partial immune function that is sufficient to prevent opportunistic infections and other clinical manifestations of SCID. A lag of approximately two to four months occurs before T-cell function appears, but B-cells often increase earlier than after BMT/SCT. Lymphocyte counts and in vitro lymphocyte function usually increase during the first year of ERT, but beyond the first year or two most PEG-ADA-treated individuals remain lymphopenic and in vitro lymphocyte function fluctuates widely. Most individuals remain clinically well, but over time both T and B lymphocytes gradually decline in number and display various functional abnormalities [Chan et al 2005, Malacarne et al 2005, Serana et al 2010, Brigida et al 2014]. Approximately half of those maintained on ERT were continuing to receive immunoglobulin replacement.

More than 300 affected individuals have received PEG-ADA. Survival of PEG-ADA-treated individuals beyond five years and through approximately ten years is approximately 75%-80%, comparable or superior to that achieved with BMT/SCT (i.e. in individuals who lack an HLA-identical donor). Most deaths occurred during the first six months of treatment, with the majority in the first month due to life-threatening infections present at diagnosis.

Lymphoproliferative disorders have developed in eight individuals who received PEG-ADA for eight to 22 years [Hershfield 2004; Chan et al 2005; Kaufman et al 2005; Husain et al 2007; Author, unpublished data]. Hepatocellular carcinoma developed in one affected individual after 13 years of ERT, and was present in another at the time ERT was initiated following an unsuccessful stem cell transplant. A third affected individual died of hepatoblastoma after 2.5 years of ERT; the tumor was thought to have been present but undetected prior to ERT. Several other affected individuals have developed persistent hemolytic anemia, which in some cases began in association with a viral infection or with central catheter sepsis [Hershfield 2004, Lainka et al 2005].

The limitations of PEG-ADA therapy include primary failure to recover protective immune function, the development of neutralizing antibodies that reduce or eliminate efficacy, immune dysregulation (particularly in the first few months of therapy), and a risk that immune function will eventually (i.e., beyond 10-15 years) decline to an inadequate level. Approximately 20% of affected individuals have discontinued ERT in order to undergo BMT/SCT. In most of these cases, the transplant had been intended at the time of diagnosis but not performed because a suitable donor was not available or the affected individual had been too ill to undergo the procedure. In a minority of individuals, the transplant was performed because of declining immune function while receiving PEG-ADA. Overall, approximately half of these secondary transplants have been successful [Hershfield 2004, Gaspar et al 2009].

Most individuals treated with PEG-ADA for longer than a year develop antibodies that bind specifically to bovine ADA and are detectable by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); these are of no clinical significance. Neutralizing antibodies that inhibit catalytic activity and enhance clearance of PEG-ADA (and which do compromise efficacy) have developed in fewer than 10% of treated individuals [Chaffee et al 1992, Hershfield 1997]. No allergic or hypersensitivity reactions to PEG-ADA have occurred, and the treatment has generally been well tolerated.

Gene therapy, while still technically experimental, is still another treatment option for those who have failed all other options (see Therapies Under Investigation).
To prevent acute attacks patients are advised on the potential triggers as follows:

Assure that adequate nutrition is provided by a normal balanced diet. Avoid unsupervised calorie restriction diets, particularly those that exclude carbohydrate completely.

Avoid drugs and chemicals known to exacerbate porphyria, particularly prescribed medication and over the counter medication. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Seek timely treatment of systemic illness or infection.

Avoid excessive alcohol consumption and smoking.
Although several therapeutic modalities have been investigated, no preventive or curative treatment is available. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Maintaining joint range of motion through moderate non-weight-bearing exercise such as swimming may have beneficial effects.

Younger individuals with alkaptonuria should be directed toward non-contact and lower-impact sports.
Bone marrow (hematopoietic stem cell) transplantation (BMT/HSCT) is currently the only curative treatment for ALPS. Because of the risks associated with BMT, it has so far been performed mostly in individuals with ALPS with severe clinical phenotypes, such as those with homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in FAS, those with severe and/or refractory autoimmune cytopenias, those with lymphoma, and those who have developed complications from (often long-term) immunosuppressive therapy. It is likely, however, that individuals with undiagnosed forms of ALPS, including ALPS-FAS, have been transplanted.

Successful (reported) BMT in several individuals indicates that defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not pose a barrier to this treatment option [Benkerrou et al 1997, Sleight et al 1998, Dowdell et al 2010].
Routine childhood illnesses should be managed to minimize the acidosis associated with acute illnesses. Many affected infants in the Lancaster Amish population have died during metabolic exacerbations associated with an intercurrent infectious illness.
The efficacy of androgen therapy in preventing manifestations such as gynecomastia is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Women with CAIS have decreased bone mineral density, regardless of timing of gonadectomy [Oakes et al 2008]. However, women with PAIS who choose not to undergo gonadectomy do not appear to be at high risk for decreased bone mineral density [Bertelloni et al 2010].

In addition to estrogen replacement therapy, supplemental calcium and vitamin D are recommended.

Regular weight-bearing exercises are encouraged to maintain bone health.

Bisphosphonate therapy may be indicated for those individuals with evidence of decreased bone mineral density and/or multiple fractures.
Adequate treatment of APRT deficiency with allopurinol (or febuxostat in those who are allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol) prevents kidney stone formation and the development of CKD in most, if not all, individuals with the disorder [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010, Harambat et al 2012]. Therefore, all affected individuals should receive lifelong treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat).
The goal should be maintenance of plasma arginine concentration as near normal as possible, consistent with the individual's tolerance for the following interventions:

Restriction of dietary protein through use of specialized formulas. In the best of circumstances, the affected individual should be on the minimal protein intake needed to maintain protein biosynthetic function, growth, and normal or near-normal plasma amino acid concentrations. Half or more of dietary protein should be an arginine-free essential amino acid mixture.

Administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate/glycerolphenylbutyrate at a dose of 350-600 mg/kg/day in patients weighing less than 20 kg, or 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day in larger patients. The medicines are to be taken in equally divided amounts with each meal or feeding (i.e., 3-6x/day) [De Deyn et al 1997, Iyer et al 1998, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium].

Liver transplantation eliminates the hyperargininemia and presumably the risk for hyperammonemia.
Dietary restriction of protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays of long-term management.

Diet. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for dietary protein is higher than the minimum needed for normal growth and, hence, most children with a urea cycle disorder (UCD) can receive less than the RDA of protein and still maintain adequate growth. To achieve this end [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]:

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, branched chain amino acids, and arginine should be maintained within normal ranges.

Serum plasma total protein and prealbumin levels should be maintained within the low normal ranges.

Plasma glutamine concentration should be maintained at less than 1000 µmol/L if possible [normal range for individuals ages two to 18 years is 266-746 µmol/L].

Some of the correlations between compliance with the prescribed diet and outcome are contradictory. Although in some patients dietary therapy along with arginine supplementation have been shown to reverse the abnormalities of hair, to improve cognitive outcome, and to reverse abnormalities on EEG [Coryell et al 1964, Kvedar et al 1991, Ficicioglu et al 2009], in many dietary therapy has not been shown to influence the outcome of liver disease or cognitive impairment [Mori et al 2002, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010].

Arginine base supplementation. The doses of arginine base routinely recommended are 400-700 mg/kg/day in persons weighing less than 20 kg and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day in those weighing more than 20 kg. Supplementation with arginine base helps replenish this amino acid (which is deficient in persons with ASL deficiency) and promote excretion of nitrogen through the urea cycle as argininosuccinate. Arginine base is preferred for long-term chronic treatment as the chronic use of arginine hydrochloride may lead to hyperchloremic acidosis.

Arginine base supplementation has been shown to reverse the hair changes; however, its efficacy in preventing the chronic complications is not known. While evidence suggests that arginine base supplementation may prevent metabolic decompensations in those with severe early-onset disease, long-term follow up of persons identified through newborn screening programs did not detect a difference in outcomes between those who were supplemented with arginine base and those who were not [Batshaw et al 2001, Ficicioglu et al 2009, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. As the renal clearance of argininosuccinic acid is high, increasing its production through arginine supplementation effectively increases waste nitrogen disposal, thereby decreasing the risk of hyperammonemia. However, because of the theoretic risk of argininosuccinic acid toxicity on hepatocytes, reducing the amount of supplemental arginine by initiating nitrogen scavenging therapy may have merits.

Oral nitrogen scavenging therapy. Patients who have had frequent metabolic decompensations or episodes of elevated ammonia despite being on a protein-restricted diet and arginine base supplementation are candidates for oral nitrogen scavenging therapy, an alternative pathway therapy in which sodium benzoate and sodium phenyl butyrate stimulate the excretion of nitrogen in the form of hippuric acid and phenylacetylglutamine, respectively [Batshaw et al 2001]. The dose of sodium phenyl butyrate is 400-600 mg/kg/day for persons weighing up to 20 kg and 9-13 g/m2/day for those weighing more than 20 kg; the dose of sodium benzoate is 250-500 mg/kg/day.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Long-term correction of ASL deficiency in the liver can be accomplished by OLT [Lee & Goss 2001] which has resulted in “biochemical cure” [Robberecht et al 2006, Marble et al 2008, Newnham et al 2008]. However, OLT does not correct the arginine deficiency or elevation of argininosuccinic acid at the tissue level, two abnormalities thought to account for the long-term complications of ASL deficiency. Thus, the authors have recommended OLT only in patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations that are resistant to conventional medical therapy, or in patients who develop cirrhosis with associated metabolic decompensations [Author, personal observations].
Prospective randomized trials have not been conducted in ARVC for the prevention of arrhythmias. Management relies on personalized recommendations based on clinical assessment.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). Observational studies support that ICD placement is effective in reducing the risk for sudden cardiac death in ARVC. ICD placement should be considered in anyone with a clinical diagnosis of ARVC. Corrado et al [2010] reported results of ICD implantation in 106 individuals with ARVC who met task force criteria. Device placement was based on the presence of arrhythmia risk factor defined as syncope, family history of sudden death, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and whether ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation was inducible in an electrophysiology done at the time of device implant. Over the follow-up interval of 58 months, 24% of subjects had an appropriate ICD discharge. Syncope was found to predict appropriate ICD discharge. The advisability of placing an ICD for primary prevention remains a question of debate [Zorzi et al 2016].

The ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, which are based on experience and previously published reports recommend as a Class I indication (i.e., procedure/treatment should be performed) ICD implantation for prevention of sudden cardiac death in individuals with documented sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation who have a reasonable expectation of survival with good functional status for more than one year. Class II indications (i.e., it is reasonable to perform procedure/treatment) for ICD implantation include extensive disease (e.g., left ventricular involvement), family members with sudden death, or undiagnosed syncope when ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia cannot be excluded as the cause of syncope while the individual was on optimal medical therapy [Tracy et al 2013, Priori et al 2015].
With the exception of AVED, Refsum syndrome, CTX and CoQ10 deficiency, no specific treatments exist for hereditary ataxia.If vitamin E treatment is initiated in presymptomatic individuals (e.g., younger sibs of an index case), the symptoms of AVED do not develop [Amiel et al 1995, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].
Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of the disease, allows early appropriate treatment and monitoring.
Uveal melanoma. Arc welding has been associated with risk of uveal melanoma and this should be avoided if possible.

Sunglasses with high UVA and UVB protection can reduce risk of cancer on the eyelids, but data regarding the benefit of sunglasses for uveal melanoma are lacking.

Malignant mesothelioma. As with all individuals, asbestos exposure and smoking should also be avoided.

Cutaneous melanoma. Primary prevention is limited to those measures typically used to reduce the risk for cutaneous melanoma, including limiting of sun exposure, regular use of sunscreen and protective clothing, and regular dermatologic examinations.
Affected individuals should cover up exposed skin by wearing long sleeves, high collars, and hats; complete sunblock should be used.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Prompt administration of biotin and thiamine early in the disease course (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Avoidance of triggers/stressors including trauma and surgery
No preventive or curative treatment is available for BHDS. However, development of renal cell carcinoma has the strongest positive association with cigarette smoking [Moore et al 2005].
All individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency (<10% mean normal enzyme activity), even those who have some residual biotinidase enzyme activity, should be treated with biotin independent of their genotype [Wolf 2003]. Note: Although Möslinger et al [2003] stated that children with greater than 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may not need treatment, a child with 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may be just as likely to develop symptoms as one with total loss of enzyme activity [Wolf 2002]. It is therefore strongly recommended that all children with profound biotinidase deficiency, regardless of the residual biotinidase enzyme activity, be treated with biotin.

Note: Because genotype/phenotype correlations in biotinidase deficiency are not well established, decisions regarding treatment should be based on the results of enzyme activity rather than molecular genetic testing.

Biotinidase deficiency is treated by supplementation with oral biotin in free form as opposed to the bound form. Children with biotinidase deficiency identified by newborn screening will remain asymptomatic with compliance to biotin therapy.

All symptomatic children with biotinidase deficiency have improved after treatment with 5-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin is usually dispensed as a tablet or a capsule (most of which is filler: the quantity of biotin is minute relative to the quantity of filler). To administer biotin to an infant or young child, the tablet can be crushed or the contents of the capsule can be mixed with breast milk or formula in a spoon, medicine dispenser, or syringe. Note that the contents of the tablet or capsule should not be put into a bottle because the mixture will stick to the bottle and/or fail to pass through the nipple, thus delivering inconsistent doses.

Although biotin occasionally is dispensed as a solution or syrup, these liquid preparations are not recommended because the mixture – which is a suspension – tends to settle (especially upon refrigeration) and to grow bacteria upon storage. The liquid preparations usually do not provide a consistent dose and should not be added to milk in a bottle.

The biochemical abnormalities and seizures rapidly resolve after biotin treatment, followed by improvement of the cutaneous abnormalities. Hair growth returns over a period of weeks to months in children who have alopecia. Optic atrophy and hearing loss may be resistant to therapy, especially if a long period has elapsed between their onset and the initiation of treatment. Some treated children have rapidly achieved developmental milestones, whereas others have continued to show delays.

Only a few anecdotal reports exist regarding symptoms in children with partial biotinidase deficiency who were not treated with biotin. Because there is no known toxicity for biotin, children with partial deficiency are usually treated with 1-10 mg oral biotin per day.

Biotin therapy is lifelong. There are no known adverse side effects from pharmacologic doses of biotin. In fact, the major problem is the lack of treatment or non-compliance with prescribed treatment.

More data are required to determine the dosage of biotin that is necessary for older children with either profound or partial biotinidase deficiency, but essentially all children have tolerated 10 mg/day of oral biotin with no side effects. Anecdotally, two girls with profound biotinidase deficiency developed hair loss during adolescence that resolved following increase of their biotin dosages from 10 mg per day to 15 or 20 mg per day.

A protein-restricted diet is not necessary.
Otologic manifestations of disease can often be surgically corrected with correction of the cupped-ear malformation and occasionally improvement in the conductive component of the hearing loss.

Branchial arch anomalies can be surgically corrected.
Breast cancer

Consider prophylactic bilateral mastectomy

Given the conflicting data on the degree of risk reduction of breast cancer associated with prophylactic oophorectomy, consider discussing the risks and benefits of this approach with a genetics specialist.

Chemoprevention. In a retrospective study tamoxifen reduced the risk for breast cancer by 62% among healthy women with a BRCA2 germline variant [King et al 2001]. The sample size, however, was extremely small. In a nested case-control study, tamoxifen use was associated with a 41%-50% reduction in the risk of developing contralateral breast cancer [Narod et al 2000, Metcalfe et al 2005]. There have been no prospective randomized trials of tamoxifen as a chemoprevention agent in women with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants.

Breast feeding for a cumulative total of more than one year reduced the risk for breast cancer [Jernström et al 2004].

Ovarian cancer/fallopian tube cancer

Consider prophylactic oophorectomy, recognizing that completion of childbearing may factor into this decision. Several studies have documented a significant (80%-96%) risk reduction in ovarian cancer following risk-reducing oophorectomy [Kauff et al 2002, Rebbeck et al 2002, Rutter et al 2003].

Salpingectomy. Recent advances in understanding the molecular events preceding ovarian cancer have established the fallopian tube as the origin of the majority of high-grade serous ovarian cancers, leading to the consideration of salpingectomy with ovarian retention until the age of natural menopause as the first step in primary prevention. This approach is likely to reduce the health hazards of premature menopause, but its adoption will require prospective data to establish its safety and efficacy [Daly et al 2015].

Tubal ligation. A meta-analysis of 13 studies showed a reduction in risk for ovarian cancer of 34% in the general population after tubal ligation [Cibula et al 2011]. A meta-analysis of modifiers of risk of cancer in individuals with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 found a reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer in females with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, although study design issues limit the impact of these findings [Friebel et al 2014].

Oral contraceptive use has been associated with a reduction in ovarian cancer risk of 14% among women who had ever used oral contraceptives and 38% among long-term users [Whittemore et al 2004a].

Note: There is no evidence that use of current (after 1975) oral contraceptive formulations increases the risk for early-onset breast cancer for women with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.
Quinidine (1-2 g daily) has been shown to restore ST segment elevation and decrease the incidence of arrhythmias [Belhassen et al 2004, Hermida et al 2004, Probst et al 2006].
Dietary restriction of total fat intake may prevent hypertriglyceridemia (see Treatment of Manifestations).
There is no evidence to date that use of a special diet and/or cofactor (zinc) treatment during periods of wellness prevents metabolic decompensations.
There are no preventive measures for stroke or vascular dementia.

Migraine attacks can be treated symptomatically and prophylactically according to migraine care standards.
Salt-wasting crisis. Newborn screening programs aim to identify infants with classic 21-OHD CAH in order to initiate glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid treatment prior to a potentially life-threatening salt-wasting crisis.

See Treatment of Manifestations, Glucocorticoid replacement therapy and Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy.
The only preventive measure in an asymptomatic individual is surgical removal of a heart tumor (cardiac myxoma) prior to the development of heart dysfunction, stroke, or other embolism.
Early institution of therapy may reduce but not completely prevent primary manifestations.

To prevent metabolic decompensations, patients should be advised to avoid situations that result in catabolism, such as prolonged fasting and dehydration. Of note, during an intercurrent illness patients may be treated with glucose-containing IV fluid.

Flu prevention (i.e., immunization) should be a routine part of health maintenance.
MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib), characterized by hepatic-intestinal disease, is the most common type of CDG for which therapy exists. Because so few individuals have been treated and the natural history of this disorder is variable, careful monitoring and discussion among physicians treating these individuals are warranted [Jaeken et al 1998, Niehues et al 1998, de Lonlay et al 1999, Hendriksz et al 2001, de Lonlay & Seta 2009]:

In the first reported case, mannose normalized hypoproteinemia and coagulation defects and rapidly improved the protein-losing enteropathy and hypoglycemia [Harms et al 2002]. One gram of mannose per kg body weight was given per day, divided into five oral doses.

In two children with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) treated from infancy with mannose, protein-losing enteropathy and vomiting improved significantly; however, the two children were recently reported to have progressive liver fibrosis [Mention et al 2008].

Recurrent episodes of thromboembolism and consumptive coagulopathy did not recur in an individual with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) treated with mannose [Tamminga et al 2008].

For some individuals with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib), heparin therapy can be an alternative to mannose in the treatment of the enteropathy [de Lonlay & Seta 2009].

A woman age 28 years with MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) developed progressive liver fibrosis despite mannose treatment and heparin therapy and had a successful liver transplant with resolution of her symptoms for at least two years post transplant [Janssen et al 2014].
Maintaining appropriate plasma carnitine concentrations through oral L-carnitine supplementation (see Treatment of Manifestations) and preventing hypoglycemia (with frequent feeding and avoiding fasting) typically eliminate the risk of metabolic, hepatic, cardiac, and muscular complications.

Note: Hospitalization to administer intravenous glucose is recommended for individuals with CDSP who are required to fast because of medical or surgical procedures or who cannot tolerate oral intake because of an illness such as gastroenteritis.
Initiation of steroids prior to the onset of proximal muscle weakness and/or sclerotic bone changes has not been reported. Because of the variable symptomatology and decreased penetrance, treatment of asymptomatic individuals cannot be recommended.
See Treatment of Manifestations.

Breast-feeding had been thought to exert a protective effect against the development of celiac disease in early childhood; however, this was not shown to be the case in two recent clinical trials [Lionetti et al 2014, Vriezinga et al 2014].

Earlier studies comparing breast-fed children with children who were not breast-fed found that breast-fed children who then developed celiac disease were more likely to have:

A later age of onset of symptoms;

Fewer classic symptoms such as diarrhea, growth disturbance, vomiting, abdominal pain, or distention [Ivarsson et al 2002];

A higher rate of “non-classic” symptoms [D'Amico et al 2005].
Strict avoidance of sunlight and protection from light are indicated.
Antibacterial prophylaxis. No randomized prospective clinical trials of antibacterial prophylaxis in persons with CGD have been performed; however, several retrospective studies suggest that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective in preventing bacterial infections. Lifelong daily antibacterial prophylaxis with oral TMP-SMX is recommended at 5 mg/kg up to 320 mg administered in two divided doses. Note: In liquid TMP-SMX the concentration of TMP is 40 mg / 5 mL and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg / 5 mL; the therapeutic dose of TMP-SMX is determined by the TMP component.

Alternatives to TMP-SMX for patients allergic to sulfonamides include trimethoprim as a single agent, dicloxacillin, cephalosporins, and fluroquinolones.

Antifungal prophylaxis. The use of azole antifungal drugs has markedly reduced the frequency and severity of fungal infections in CGD. Lifelong antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole 5 mg/kg oral solution to a maximum of 200 mg once daily is recommended [Gallin et al 2003].

In a randomized trial, 39 patients were assigned to receive either placebo or itraconazole (100 mg/day in patients age 5-12 years; 200 mg/day in those age >13 years and weight >50 kg); only one person receiving itraconazole had a serious fungal infection compared to seven in the placebo group [Gallin et al 2003].

For those unable to tolerate itraconazole, posaconazole has been studied in the oncology setting and is likely to be effective in CGD as well [Segal et al 2005].

Of note, the primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts.

Immunomodulatory therapy. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) has become part of the prophylactic regimen in most centers in the United States; however, opinions differ on its use as primary prophylaxis and in the treatment of acute infections. The exact mechanism of IFN-gamma in CGD is not known, adding to the debate over its utility.

An international multicenter randomized prospective placebo-controlled trial showed a decrease in the rate of serious infections in the group receiving IFN-gamma (22%) versus placebo (46%) after a follow-up period of 8.9 months. This improvement was independent of age, CGD genotype, or concomitant use of other prophylactic antibiotics. Three prospective Phase IV trials showed decreased rates of infections ranging from 0.13 to 0.4 per patient year. However, one prospective study comparing treatment with TMP-SMX and itraconazole alone versus addition of IFN-gamma showed no difference in the rates of infection [Martire et al 2008].

Some practitioners use IFN-gamma only in the setting of acute infection, rather than as primary prophylaxis. The data for this are anecdotal and unimpressive. The authors typically discontinue IFN-gamma during acute infection, as its utility is unclear and the exacerbation of malaise and fever can confuse the clinical picture and alter decision making [Holland 2010].

Administration by injection, cost, and lack of familiarity with cytokine therapy all affect the use of IFN-gamma in CGD. The authors use IFN-gamma in addition to antimicrobials as prophylaxis [Holland 2010]. Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA). For BSA >0.5/m2 the dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously 3x/week; for BSA ≤0.5/m2 the dose is 1.5 μg/kg subcutaneously 3x/week. Fever, myalgias, and malaise are the most common side effects but can be alleviated with concurrent administration of acetaminophen.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is the only known cure for CGD. Historically, HSCT has been associated with high morbidity and mortality and thus reluctantly offered. However, the use of non-myeloablative conditioning regimens has greatly decreased the risk of regimen-related toxicity as well as allowing for transplantation in the setting of active infection; recent reports place transplant survival at greater than 90% [Güngör et al 2014] with roughly equal survival among patients with matched related, matched unrelated, and umbilical cord blood donors.

The issue of which individuals with CGD should undergo HSCT remains complex. While transplant-related mortality rates have fallen dramatically and successful cure has risen, issues of long-term risk, sterility, graft-versus-host disease, donor matching, expense, center experience, availability, and insurance coverage all strongly influence family and physician choices regarding transplantation. Levels of residual superoxide production have correlated well with overall survival [Kuhns et al 2010]; that is, individuals with very low superoxide production had worse long-term survival than those with higher levels of residual superoxide production, suggesting that this latter group could benefit more from transplantation. However, even within this group some patients do relatively well for long periods.

Patients with CGD may experience behavioral, emotional, and learning difficulties as a consequence of chronic disease, recurrent hospitalization, and limitations of activity. Older children and adolescents are especially likely to be non-compliant with respect to prophylaxis and risk avoidance, increasing their risk for CGD-related complications. The inflammatory bowel disease present in up to 50% of persons with X-linked CGD may result in discomfort and growth impairment, and may require colostomy or colectomy. Overall quality of life is reduced in children with CGD, whereas patients with CGD who have undergone transplant report quality of life comparable to healthy children [Cole et al 2013]. Thus, with improved outcomes HSCT presents an increasingly reasonable alternative and the possibility of a normal life.

As HSCT becomes safer, more reliable and more available it will likely be an early and initial choice for the management of CGD. Currently, many centers offer HSCT after the first life-threatening infection, but with advances in the technique, the availability of donors, especially for minority populations, and the availability of experienced centers, that equation and timing may change. Even without HSCT the majority of persons with CGD will live into adulthood. There is currently very little difference in overall survival over the first decades of life between medical and transplant management. However, the significant mortality in medical management begins to accrue after age 20 [Kuhns et al 2010]. Aggressive prophylaxis and infection management increase the likelihood of doing well.

The European Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Working Group 2011 statement [EBMT Working Group 2011] recommends allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CGD in the case of unavailability of reliable specialist medical care, non-compliance with long-term antibiotic/antifungal prophylaxis, one or more life-threatening infections, severe granulomatous disease with progressive organ dysfunction (e.g., lung restriction), steroid-dependent granulomatous disease (e.g., colitis), or ongoing therapy-refractory infection (e.g., aspergillosis).
See Treatment of Manifestations.
To prevent hyperammonemia and improve growth, a diet rich in protein and lipids and low in carbohydrates is recommended [Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006, Dimmock et al 2007, Saheki et al 2008, Dimmock et al 2009].

High-carbohydrate meals and alcohol should be avoided.

Arginine administration may be effective in preventing hyperammonemic crises.
ARO

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Since the defective osteoclasts in osteopetrosis are of hematopoietic origin, allogeneic HSCT can be curative. Most manifestations (bone sclerosis, bone marrow failure, and extramedullary hematopoiesis) can be prevented or reversed by HSCT.

Secondary neurosensory impairments caused by nerve compression may be prevented by early transplantation, but not reversed when they are already present.

Primary neurologic problems and retinal degeneration developing in the neuronopathic form of ARO, however, are independent of the bone disease and therefore cannot be improved or prevented by HSCT. Persons with ARO resulting from CLCN7 pathogenic variants who do not develop neurologic complications have been reported [Pangrazio et al 2010; A Schulz and U Kornak, unpublished results].

It is highly important but difficult to exclude individuals with the neuronopathic form from this invasive treatment. On the other hand, HSCT should be performed as soon as possible in the majority of those without primary neurologic sequelae to prevent irreversible secondary complications, including visual impairment. The evaluation of affected individuals and treatment by HSCT should therefore be performed in experienced pediatric centers after multidisciplinary evaluation to assess the severity of the disease and individual prognostic factors.

The outcome of HSCT in ARO has been analyzed in a retrospective survey of the European Society of Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and the European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) [Sobacchi et al 2013]. The five-year disease-free survival was estimated at 88% for genoidentical transplants, 80% for matched unrelated transplants, and 66% for haploidentical transplants [Sobacchi et al 2013]. In a recently published report of 193 patients transplanted in various centers by a cyclophosphamide-based regimen, the five-year probabilities of survival were 62% after HLA-matched sib transplantation and 42% after alternative donor transplantation [Orchard et al 2015]. A further improved outcome was most recently reported from three large transplant centers using a fludarabine-based conditioning regimen [Natsheh et al 2016; Schulz and Moshous, personal communication].

Note: Because TCIRG1 pathogenic variants are more often the cause of ARO than are CLCN7 pathogenic variants, the majority of HSCTs have been performed in infants with TCIRG1 rather than CLCN7 pathogenic variants. However, there appears to be no significant difference in treatment outcome between individuals with TCIRG1 and CLCN7 pathogenic variants [A Schulz et al, unpublished results].

The incidence of severe complications post-HSCT is high, particularly when alternative stem cell sources are used. Complications include rejection, delayed hematopoietic reconstitution, venous occlusive disease, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercalcemic crisis [Steward et al 2004, Corbacioglu et al 2006, Shroff et al 2012].

Cranial nerve dysfunction (visual impairment caused by optic nerve atrophy) is irreversible in most cases. In the authors' series including about 30 individuals, about two thirds of affected individuals were visually impaired after successful transplantation [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Progressive neurologic sequelae, developmental delay, and repeated seizures occur in a subset of individuals after successful HSCT [Steward 2003]. Severe neurologic manifestations other than visual impairment have been seen in about 10% of individuals in the authors' series [A Schulz, unpublished results].

Other. Conservative treatment strategies include stimulation of host osteoclasts with calcium restriction, calcitriol, steroids, parathyroid hormone, and interferon [Kocher & Kasser 2003]. Since evidence for a favorable outcome in severe osteopetrosis is limited and because side effects are severe (particularly in infants), these drugs may be administered in special situations only.
Sudden respiratory insufficiency or apneic attacks provoked by fever or infections are common in individuals with pathogenic variants in CHAT or RAPSN, even if the myasthenic symptoms are mild between crises. These individuals should receive prophylactic anticholinesterase therapy. Note: Less frequently, acute respiratory events may also occur in other CMS subtypes. Parents of infants are advised to use apnea monitors and be trained in CPR.
No treatment reverses or slows the natural progression of CMT.
No treatment that reverses or slows the natural process of CMT exists.
Avoidance of anticoagulant exposure and activities that involve an increased risk for head trauma may decrease the risk for intracerebral hemorrhage.
Early CoQ10 supplementation may prevent the onset of manifestations of primary CoQ10 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations).
A high-carbohydrate diet (70% of calories) that is low in fat (<20% of calories) is generally recommended to provide a constant supply of carbohydrate energy, particularly during illness. Restriction of dietary fat intake is somewhat controversial when affected individuals are well. If the physician chooses to recommend a low-fat diet when the affected individual is well, supplementation with essential fatty acids is necessary.

Provision of approximately one third of total calories as medium-chain triglycerides is recommended during periods of illness. C6-C10 fatty acids do not require the carnitine shuttle for entry into the mitochondrion.

Frequent feeding is recommended, particularly for infants, given their limited glycogen reserves. Cornstarch feedings given overnight provide a constant source of slow-release carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycemia during sleep.

Older children should not fast for more than 12 hours and for a shorter time if evidence of a febrile or gastrointestinal illness exists.

Adults should be aware of the risks of fasting and they and their primary care physician should be aware of the risks during surgery when both metabolic stress and fasting occur.

Brief hospital admission for administration of intravenous dextrose-containing fluid should be considered in individuals with known CPT1A deficiency who are required to fast more than 12 hours because of illness or surgical or medical procedures.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Infusions of glucose during intercurrent infections to prevent catabolism

Note: Oral glucose cannot achieve this effect.

High-carbohydrate (70%) and low-fat (<20%) diet to provide fuel for glycolysis

Frequent meals and avoidance of extended fasting

Avoidance of prolonged exercise and other known triggers
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Prevention of hyperammonemia is achieved through lifelong protein restriction, nitrogen scavenger therapy, and possible liver transplantation based on metabolic control (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Cystine depletion therapy with cysteamine bitartrate (Cystagon®) has revolutionized the management and prognosis of people with nephropathic cystinosis. Cysteamine is now the worldwide treatment of choice for cystinosis. This free thiol can deplete cystinotic cells of more than 90% of their cystine content [Kleta & Gahl 2004]. Wilmer et al [2011] found that cysteamine also increased intracellular glutathione levels and restored the glutathione redox status of cystinotic cells.

Cysteamine therapy should be considered for all affected individuals, regardless of age and transplantation status [Gahl et al 2007]. With early, diligent treatment many individuals with cystinosis have survived into their twenties without the need for renal transplantation [Gahl et al 2002].

Regular and diligent cysteamine therapy prevents or delays end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [Markello et al 1993] and hypothyroidism, enhances growth, and depletes muscle parenchyma of cystine [Gahl et al 2002].

It is critical to initiate cysteamine therapy immediately after diagnosis to allow for kidney growth and acquisition, rather than loss, of renal function [Kleta et al 2004a].

Cystagon® is taken orally every six hours at 60 to 90 mg of free base per kg per day (1.3 to 1.95 g/m2/day). The recommended adult dose is 500 mg free base every six hours; however, for both children and adults, the dose is titrated to reduce, if possible, leukocyte cystine concentration (measured 5-6 hours after a dose) to below 1.0 nmol half-cystine/mg protein [Belldina et al 2003, Kleta & Gahl 2004, Kleta 2006].

Procysbi® (cysteamine bitartrate) is a delayed-release capsule intended for affected individuals age six years and older. Procysbi® is taken every 12 hours. Blood testing showed Procysbi® was noninferior to Cystagon® in controlling cystine levels [Langman et al 2012].

Side effects of cysteamine treatment include nausea and vomiting, in part because of its unpleasant odor and taste [Schneider 2004]. Cysteamine increases gastrin synthesis and gastric acid production. Omeprazole may be of benefit for oral cysteamine treatment [Dohil et al 2003].

With long-term cystine-depleting therapy most late complications of cystinosis can be avoided.

Despite diligent oral cysteamine therapy, cysteamine hydrochloride eye drops or CYSTARAN™ (cysteamine ophthalmic solution) 0.44% are required to achieve sufficient tissue concentration to dissolve corneal crystals [Gahl et al 2000]. Cysteamine eye drops are given ten to 12 times per day as a 0.55% solution with benzalkonium chloride 0.01% as a preservative [Tsilou et al 2007]. With good compliance photophobia is relieved within weeks (Figure 1b, 1c) [Kaiser-Kupfer et al 1987, Gahl et al 2000]. Systemic cysteamine treatment ameliorates or postpones retinal deterioration [Tsilou et al 2006].
Early treatment with CDCA in presymptomatic individuals appears to prevent clinical manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Beta-blockers are indicated for primary prevention in all clinically affected individuals (see Treatment of Manifestations) and in individuals with pathogenic variants in the genes associated with CPVT who have a negative exercise stress test (class IIa). Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day). For symptomatic individuals with CPVT, the maximum tolerated dosage should be maintained. Flecainide can be added for primary prevention of cardiac arrest when beta-blockers alone cannot control the onset of arrhythmias during exercise stress test.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is effective in elevating blood neutrophil counts in both congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia. G-CSF treatment ameliorates the symptoms and problems of infections in almost all affected individuals. (Although both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used to treat ELANE-related neutropenia, G-CSF is much more effective and associated with fewer adverse effects than GM-CSF.)

In cyclic neutropenia, G-CSF shortens the periods of neutropenia as well as the length of the neutropenic cycle. Treatment is known to be effective at least as early as age six months to one year. Studies indicate that treatment is effective with no adverse effects on growth, development, or pregnancy outcome with follow-up to age 18 years [Dale et al 2003; Dale, unpublished observations].

Treatment of cyclic neutropenia requires daily or alternate-day injections of G-CSF, normally in a dose of approximately 2 µg/kg/day. Individuals with congenital neutropenia often require higher doses (e.g., 5-10 µg/kg/day).

Common side effects of G-CSF include bone pain and headache, splenomegaly, and osteoporosis. Vasculitis, rashes, arthralgias, and glomerulonephritis have been infrequently reported [Dale et al 2003].

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)

For affected individuals with a well-matched donor, HSCT may be the preferred treatment option [Choi & Levine 2010, Oshima et al 2010].

HSCT is the only alternative therapy for individuals with congenital neutropenia who are refractory to high-dose G-CSF or who undergo malignant transformation.
Droxidopa can improve the orthostatic hypotension and symptoms, but these recur if treatment is stopped.
Whenever a child presents with progressive sensorineural hearing loss and progressive ataxia, with or without neurologic or cutaneous symptoms, biotinidase deficiency should be considered, with initiation of treatment as early as possible to prevent irreversible sequelae.
For individuals with TS-NSAN:

Prevent febrile episodes.

Avoid the level of exercise and/or ambient conditions that would cause body temperature to rise.

Treat febrile episodes as quickly as possible to return body temperature to normal.

Educate individuals and their caregivers that the onset of hearing loss may be the first sign of a pyretic/infectious event requiring treatment [Starr et al 1998]. Appropriate precautions including avoidance of potentially dangerous or noisy situations should be encouraged.
Physical therapy may prevent early joint contractures.
No compelling evidence exists for the prevention of acute episodes, despite multiple attempted dietary strategies and medications. The frequency of acute episodes decreases with age in most patients with DLD deficiency.

Although no specific therapy exists to prevent the neurologic dysfunction and/or the hepatic manifestations of DLD deficiency, avoidance of precipitating factors is recommended. As such, empiric recommendations include the following:

Provide protein intake at or around RDA and titrate based on growth and plasma amino acid values. See MSUD for the recommended intake and target levels of leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

Supplement with levocarnitine if deficient.

Avoid fasting, catabolic states, and extremes of dietary intake until dietary tolerance/stressors are identified.

Avoid liver-toxic medications.
As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of GTPCH1-deficient DRD; levodopa therapy from infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations.
In addition to the pharmacologic treatments mentioned above, behavioral measures such as avoidance of stress, abrupt movements, loud noises or caffeine intake may be used to reduce disease manifestations in either a symptomatic or an asymptomatic person.
Treatment with acetazolamide does not appear to prevent the progression of interictal symptoms [Baloh & Winder 1991]. It is not clear how acetazolamide prevents attacks of EA2, although Yue et al [1997] speculated that the mechanism involves a decrease in pH, thus inhibiting ion permeation through open calcium channels. Acetazolamide could stabilize channels that fail to properly inactivate. Acetazolamide may not work in some individuals, particularly if the pathogenic variant distorts the pore region of the channel, altering the stabilizing effect of H+ ions.

To date no data regarding whether 4-aminopyridine can prevent the progression of interictal symptoms are available.
New blister formation can be minimized by wrapping and padding of extremities; use of soft and properly fitted clothing and footwear; and avoidance of: contact with adhesives, contact sports, and other activities that create friction.
Age-appropriate play involving activities that cause minimal trauma to the skin is encouraged.

Dressings and padding are needed to protect bony prominences from blister-inducing impact.

If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of DEB, cesarean delivery may reduce trauma to the skin during delivery.
In the following studies, small sample sizes limit the statistical validity and generalizability of the results; however, given the lack of effective treatments for EBS, these potentially helpful treatments should be considered on a case-by-case basis:

20% aluminum chloride applied to palms and soles can reduce blister formation in some individuals with EBS, presumably by decreasing sweating.

A case report [Abitbol & Zhou 2009] and small study [Swartling et al 2010] suggest that injection of botulinum toxin into the feet is effective in reducing blistering and associated pain. The mechanism of action is unclear, but likely relates to reduction of sweating and subsequent maceration of the skin.

In one study of a limited number of individuals with EBS-gen sev, cyproheptadine (Periactin®) reduced blistering. This may result from the anti-pruritic effect of the medication, but the true mechanism is not clear [Neufeld-Kaiser & Sybert 1997].

In another study, tetracycline reduced blister counts in two thirds of persons with EBS-loc [Weiner et al 2004]. A recent study evaluated three months of oral erythromycin therapy in six children ages one to eight years with EBS-gen sev, and showed the medication was well tolerated and improved blistering in three children [Chiaverini et al 2015]. An anti-inflammatory mechanism, rather an anti-microbial mechanism, is proposed for the effect of antibiotics in the treatment of EBS.

Other. Use of keratolytics and softening agents such as urea for palmar plantar hyperkeratosis has some benefit in preventing tissue thickening and cracking. In addition, soaking the hands and feet in salt water helps soften hyperkeratosis and ease debridement of the thick skin.
Very young children with pronounced skin fragility can wear protective pads or bandages over the forehead, knees, and shins in order to avoid skin tears. Older children who are active can wear soccer pads or ski stockings with shin padding during activities.

For recommendations on prevention of primary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising but has no effect on the primary findings of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, and joint hypermobility. In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults, with proportionally reduced doses for children; however, there is no limitation.
Improved joint stability may be achieved by low-resistance exercise to increase muscle tone (subconscious resting muscle contraction), as opposed to muscle strength (voluntary force exerted at will). Emphasis should be placed on both core and extremity muscle tone. Examples include walking, bicycling, low-impact aerobics, swimming or water exercise, and simple range-of-motion exercise without added resistance. Core toning activities, such as balance exercises and repetitive motions focusing on the abdominal, lumbar, and interscapular muscles, are also important. Progress should be made by gradually increasing repetitions, frequency, or duration, not resistance. It often takes months or years for significant progress to be recognized.

Wide-grip writing utensils can reduce strain on finger and hand joints. An unconventional grasp of a writing utensil, gently resting the shaft in the web between the thumb and index finger and securing the tip between the distal interphalangeal joints or middle phalanges of the index and third fingers (rather than using the tips of the fingers), results in substantially reduced axial stress to the interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, and carpometacarpal joints. These adjustments frequently result in marked reduction of pain in the index finger and at the base of the thumb.
Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. Note: When indicated, splenectomy is curative; however, it can have potential life-threatening complications (see Treatment of Manifestations). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).
Sun avoidance is the only effective means of preventing primary manifestations.
Avoidance of triggers (warmth, prolonged standing) may reduce the number or severity of episodes.
Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination should be initiated at age nine years in order to reduce the risk of gynecologic cancer in females, and possibly reduce the risk of oral cancer in all individuals.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The two ERTs using recombinant or gene-activated human α-Gal A enzyme that have been evaluated in clinical trials are Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and Replagal™ (agalsidase alfa 0.2 mg/kg every 2 weeks). Both were approved in 2001 by the European Agency for Evaluation of Medical Products; only Fabrazyme® was approved by the FDA for use in the United States.

The following is a summary of some of the clinical trials for each drug:

Single-center double-blind placebo-controlled studies of agalsidase alfa have shown a beneficial effect of ERT on neuropathic pain [Schiffmann et al 2001] and left ventricular hypertrophy [Hughes et al 2008]. Data from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) suggest that ERT with agalsidase alfa improves pain and quality of life, reduces the natural rate of decline of renal and cardiac function in males and females with Fabry disease [Mehta et al 2009] and may improve life expectancy [Beck et al 2015]. The enzyme is safe in children [Ramaswami et al 2006]. In persons with advanced renal disease, weekly administration of 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa may be associated with a slower decline in renal function [Schiffmann et al 2007, Schiffmann et al 2015].

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of agalsidase beta demonstrated increased clearance of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) from the endothelial cells of the kidney, heart, and skin among treated subjects [Eng et al 2001].

A Phase IV extension study showed that the risk of major clinical events (a combination of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, development of ESRD, or a 33% increase in serum creatinine concentration) was reduced by 53% with agalsidase beta treatment after adjustment for baseline proteinuria (P=0.06) [Banikazemi et al 2007]. In a ten-year follow up of these individuals, with additional data from the Fabry Registry, Germain et al [2015] reported that 49 of 52 were alive and 42/52 (81%) did not experience any severe clinical events during the ten-year treatment interval. Disease progression was most likely to be observed in those individuals who initiated treatment after age 40 years and/or had advanced renal disease at baseline. A study of cardiac outcomes from the Fabry Registry of 115 males treated with agalsidase beta for at least two years reports that treated individuals fared better than 48 untreated males. Left ventricular mass fell at a slope of -3.6 g/year in 31 males aged 18-30 years but rose by 9.5 g/year in 15 males who were not treated [Germain et al 2013].

The largest comparative study is the Canadian Fabry Disease initiative. Sirrs et al [2014] have reported five-year follow-up data on 362 subjects for a composite endpoint (death, neurologic or cardiovascular events, development of ESRD, or sustained increase in serum creatinine of 50% from baseline). Ninety-two of 178 individuals treated with ERT were randomly allocated to either agalsidase alfa or agalsidase beta. No differences were found with regard to the clinical efficacy of the two medications, and individuals who switched from agalsidase beta to agalsidase alfa during the time of Fabrazyme® shortage were stable. In comparison with the placebo group in the Banikazemi study individuals treated with ERT had a significant reduction in clinical events, which occurred at an older age. The eight-year follow-up data continued to suggest that the two medications are equivalent at their standard doses [M West, personal communication].

Antibody formation has been reported with both agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta in males, but not females [Linthorst et al 2005, Wilcox et al 2012]. Lenders et al [2015] reported that 40% of 68 males with Fabry disease on ERT have evidence of serum-mediated inhibition of agalsidase activity. They further reported that inhibition-positive individuals have worse clinical outcomes and higher levels of lyso-Gb3 than inhibition-negative individuals. There appeared to be no difference between agalsidase alfa and beta with regard to the development of serum inhibitors. The impact of antibody formation on the overall efficacy of treatment is currently unknown.

During 2009-2012, a shortage of agalsidase beta resulted in the substitution of agalsidase alfa for agalsidase beta in several cohorts of affected individuals. Reports thus far have not indicated any significant difference in clinical parameters as a result of this transition [Smid et al 2011, Tsuboi & Yamamoto 2012, Pisani et al 2013, Goker-Alpan et al 2016].

Lubanda et al [2009] have shown in a small study of 21 individuals that those who have been ‘stabilized’ with agalsidase beta at 1 g/kg can thereafter be safely treated with a maintenance dose of 0.3 g/kg every other week. A study of lower-dose agalsidase beta has been conducted in children (FIELD study [Wijburg et al 2015]); it will be interesting to observe if lower doses of agalsidase beta are equally efficacious in children.

There is an emerging consensus that ERT has, at best, a limited impact on the long-term outcome of Fabry disease. Studies of consecutive affected persons from individual centers suggest that cardiac, renal, and cerebrovascular outcomes are comparable among treated and untreated cohorts [Rombach et al 2013, Weidemann et al 2013]. A recent Cochrane review has also highlighted the generally poor quality of evidence in favor of ERT for Fabry disease.

Despite these emerging data, a panel of physician experts have recommended that ERT be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease, including children and those with ESRD undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation, and in heterozygous females with significant disease [Desnick et al 2003, Eng et al 2006] because all are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and neurologic complications including transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The treatment initiation guidelines from a group of European physicians are generally more conservative [Biegstraaten et al 2015]. They emphasize the need to start ERT before the advent of irreversible complications and suggest that initiation of ERT after irreversible organ damage has occurred is to be avoided. ERT should be discontinued if it is making no impact on organ function in an individual; and compliance should be closely monitored.
In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele because the 1%-3%/year risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated less than 1%/year risk for thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation. Because the initial thrombosis in factor V Leiden heterozygotes occurs in association with other circumstantial risk factors in 50% of cases, a short course of prophylactic anticoagulation during exposure to hemostatic stresses may prevent some of these episodes.

Prophylactic anticoagulation should be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for all asymptomatic carriers.

Decisions regarding prophylactic anticoagulation should be based on a risk/benefit assessment in each individual case. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in consensus guidelines [Geerts et al 2008].

Pregnancy. No consensus exists on the optimal management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are similar to those for individuals who are not pregnant [Kujovich 2004b, Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Until more specific guidelines are defined by prospective trials, decisions about anticoagulation should be individualized based on the thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis.

Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy:

Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis. These women should be warned about potential thrombotic complications, counseled about the risks and benefits of anticoagulation during pregnancy, and offered a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation after delivery, as the greatest thrombotic risk is in the initial postpartum period [Bates et al 2008].

Is recommended for women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of unprovoked VTE. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin should be given during pregnancy, followed by a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation post partum [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for heterozygous women with a prior estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, Bates et al 2008].

Should be considered for asymptomatic women with homozygous factor V Leiden or double heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or with other combined thrombophilic defects, especially those with circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Barbour 2001, Bates et al 2008].

Graduated elastic compression stockings are recommended for all women with a prior DVT [Bates et al 2008].
Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms.

Weighted gloves can sometimes be used to assist with dysmetria.

Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be debilitating. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following:

Oral trihexyphenidyl, baclofen, tizanidine, benzodiazepines, and/or dantrolene

Intramuscular botulinum toxin targeting abnormal co-contraction of selected muscle groups

Ablative pallidotomy or thalamotomy. Dystonia may return despite this aggressive measure [Justesen et al 1999]. (For discussion of deep brain stimulation [DBS] see Therapies Under Investigation.)

It is important to help affected individuals to maintain independence whenever possible.

Affected individuals should be referred to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the visually impaired (if optic atrophy is present), and special education.

As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids such as a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities and augmentative communication devices.
Colectomy is advised to reduce the risk for colorectal cancer in FAP. For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals, the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient to prevent colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy can therefore be utilized for surveillance, as well as prevention of colorectal cancer.

To reduce the risk for duodenal/periampullary adenocarcinoma, endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas should be considered if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms.
The arc of peripheral retinal avascularity, thought to be an aberration of retinal development, is not preventable using current treatments.
Colchicine

Homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. Individuals who are homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val or compound heterozygous for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele should be treated with colchicine as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed to prevent both the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Colchicine is given orally, 1-2 mg/day in adults. Children may need 0.5-1 mg/day according to age and weight. Affected individuals should receive colchicine for life.

Individuals who do not have the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant and who are only mildly affected (those with infrequent inflammatory attacks) should either be treated with colchicine or be monitored every six months for the presence of proteinuria.

Continuous treatment with colchicine appears to be less indicated for individuals who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Glu148Gln. Colchicine should only be given to these individuals if they develop severe inflammatory episodes and/or proteinuria as a result of amyloidosis.

Heterozygotes. The presence of a single MEFV pathogenic variant together with clinical symptoms is sufficient to warrant the initiation of a trial of colchicine; therefore, manifesting heterozygotes should be treated [Booty et al 2009]. However, for asymptomatic heterozygotes there is no indication for treatment.

Complications of colchicine use occasionally include myopathy and toxic epidermal necrolysis-like reaction.

Treatment of affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine. Some individuals appear to be unresponsive to colchicine treatment. In one study this was associated with inadequate colchicine concentration in mononuclear cells, possibly resulting from a genetic defect underlying FMF [Lidar et al 2004] or from poor compliance.

Canakinumab is an anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody that binds human IL-1β and neutralizes its pro-inflammatory effects. Canakinumab has been recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of CAPS. Canakinumab differs from anakinra and rilonacept in that it has high specificity for IL-1β, it has a longer half-life than anakinra (26 days), it can be administered every two months, and its effectiveness lasts longer. In one individual with FMF with longstanding destructive arthritis, canakinumab, given as a first-line agent, induced a complete clinical remission [Mitroulis et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Mitroulis et al 2011, Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Canakinumab was effective in an individual with FMF who was unresponsive to colchicine and anakinra [Hacihamdioglu & Ozen 2012]. Alpa & Roccatello [2015] reported continued efficacy after two years of treatment.

Rilonacept, an IL-1 receptor fusion protein, reduced the fever episodes by 76%, and improved quality of life [Hashkes et al 2012], but failed to reduce the duration of the attacks. Results were confirmed in a subsequent study extended to 14 colchicine-resistant individuals [Hashkes et al 2014]. Hentgen et al [2013b] recommended that rilonacept, which is a long half-life molecule, should be considered only if anakinra, a short half-life molecule, has been proven to be effective.

Anakinra, an IL-1-receptor inhibitor with a short half-life, has been shown to have a therapeutic advantage in persons with FMF who are resistant to colchicine. Several reports indicate that this offers a relatively safe and effective treatment (100 mg daily or every other day) for persons who do not respond to colchicine [Belkhir et al 2007, Bhat et al 2007, Gattringer et al 2007, Kuijk et al 2007, Calligaris et al 2008, Roldan et al 2008, Moser et al 2009, Petropoulou et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Ozen et al 2011, Ozturk et al 2011, Hentgen et al 2013b]. Anakinra has been found to stop the attacks in 75% of individuals who did not respond to colchicine. Anakinra is expensive and has mild side effects, such as painful local reactions at the site of injections and possible risk of bronchopulmonary infection, especially in persons with other risk factors for pulmonary infections. Further studies are needed to investigate the long-term effects of this drug if it is to be taken continuously as required in severely affected individuals with FMF. Anakinra treatment should be considered in the presence of secondary amyloidosis, in candidates for renal transplantation due to end-stage renal amyloidosis, individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine, and individuals developing major side effects from colchicine.

Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), was studied in a few individuals and found to be effective in the treatment of one individual with FMF who was resistant to colchicine, resulting in the complete remission of febrile abdominal episodes [Ozgocmen et al 2006]. In another individual, infliximab ameliorated the proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis and the recurrent attacks of arthritis and abdominal pain [Metyas et al 2004].

Weekly intravenous colchicine (1.0 mg) to supplement oral colchicine resulted in a 50% reduction (except joint attacks) in attack frequency in one study of 13 individuals [Lidar et al 2003]. This is not a long-term solution.

Thalidomide has been used successfully in sporadic cases [Seyahi et al 2002, Seyahi et al 2006] but is not frequently used.

Etanercept, a TNF dimeric fusion protein, has been shown to decrease the disease severity in colchicine-resistant individuals; three of the 14 individuals included in the study had adverse effects and switched to IL-1-receptor inhibitor [Sakallioglu et al 2006, Seyahi et al 2006, Mor et al 2007].

Interferon alpha is another therapeutic agent that has shown signs of promise in a few reports for affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine [Tunca et al 2004, Tweezer-Zaks et al 2008, Vandecasteele et al 2011]. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that included 34 individuals given interferon alpha or placebo, the authors could not demonstrate a definitive effect. Interferon alpha was effective in suppressing the acute inflammation of FMF only if administered at the earliest phase [Tunca et al 2004]. The possibility of interferon alpha side effects (e.g., chills and fatigue) should also be considered.

Sulphasalazine. The use of sulphasalazine has been reported in a girl age eight years with a five-year history of typical FMF attacks. She was homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val and for several months had had arthritis of one knee that was unresponsive to NSAIDs or colchicine. Resolution was achieved after the addition of sulphasalazine at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day [Bakkaloglu et al 2009].
Infants diagnosed by genetic testing before signs and symptoms appear should be treated immediately to prevent the onset of folate deficiency and the metabolic and clinical consequences of the disorder.
The diaphragmatic defects in Fryns syndrome may be amenable to surgical repair in the prenatal period. Survival in a controlled trial of open hysterotomy-guided fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion versus conventional care was not improved; an experimental, minimally invasive approach called percutaneous fetal endoluminal tracheal occlusion is still being evaluated [Losty 2014].
There are no recognized therapies to ameliorate or reverse the metabolic abnormalities resulting from decreased activity of fumarate hydratase. A brief therapeutic trial of a low-protein diet in one mildly affected individual with fumarate hydratase deficiency did not alter urinary excretion of fumaric acid or improve clinical signs [Kimonis et al 2012].
Dietary intervention. Immediate dietary intervention is indicated in infants whose erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is ≤10% of control activity and whose erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate concentration is >10 mg/dL.

Because 90% of the newborn’s carbohydrate source is lactose and human milk contains 6%-8% lactose, cow’s milk 3%-4% lactose, and most proprietary infant formulas 7% lactose, all of these milk products must be replaced immediately by a formula that is free of lactose (e.g., Isomil® or Prosobee®). Such soy formulas contain sucrose, fructose, and galactose-containing oligosaccharides that cannot be hydrolyzed in the small intestine.

Elemental formulas that contain small amounts of galactose such as Alimentum®, Nutramigen®, and Pregestimil® made with casein hydrolysates have been employed in the past without obvious side effects. A formula (Neocate®) that contains neither free nor bound galactose has been used without any side effects [Zlatunich & Packman 2005].

Dietary restrictions on all lactose-containing foods including cow’s milk and other dairy products should continue throughout life; however, managing the diet becomes less important after infancy and early childhood, when milk and dairy products are no longer the primary source of energy. It is debated how stringent the diet should be after infancy [Berry et al 2004, Bosch et al 2004a, Schadewaldt et al 2004], as endogenous galactose production is an order of magnitude higher than that ingested from foods other than milk. Until more prospective evidence-based medicine studies have been performed with a large number of subjects, parents should be educated about the lifelong need for dietary restriction of cow’s milk and dairy products.
In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia dietary restriction of galactose/lactose prevents early feeding problems, vomiting, poor weight gain, hepatic dysfunction, and cataracts.

The challenge in treating an asymptomatic newborn with epimerase deficiency galactosemia is that it may take months to obtain the results of tests used to distinguish peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia from intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Additional Testing); furthermore, such tests may not be available. The most conservative approach, therefore, is to advise dietary restriction of galactose/lactose for all infants with epimerase deficiency galactosemia, relaxing the restriction as warranted once a more accurate diagnosis has been confirmed.
The only definitive cure for GATA1-related cytopenia is bone marrow transplantation.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been undertaken in individuals with severe GD, primarily those with chronic neurologic involvement (type 3 GD). Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver volume. In a few individuals, stabilization of neurologic and bone disease has occurred. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT limit its use in individuals with type 1 and type 3 GD. Therefore, this procedure has been largely superseded by enzyme replacement therapy (see ERT).

Individuals with chronic neurologic GD and progressive disease despite ERT may be candidates for BMT or a multi-modal approach (i.e., combined ERT and BMT).

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is based on the provision of sufficient exogenous enzyme to overcome the block in the catabolic pathway and effect the clearance of the stored substrate, GL1.

Global availability may differ, but there are three recombinant glucocerebrosidase enzyme preparations currently available. All are based on the human gene sequence, but are distinguished according to the cell type involved in their production: imiglucerase (Cerezyme®) generated in Chinese hamster ovary cells; velalglucerase alfa (VPRIV®) from human fibroblast-like cell line; and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso®) from a carrot cell line. Each formulation is modified to expose the alpha-mannosyl (carbohydrate) residues for enhanced uptake by the macrophage.

Regular intravenous infusions of the recombinant enzymes imiglucerase and velaglucerase have been demonstrated to be safe and effective in reversing those features resulting from hematologic and visceral (liver/spleen) involvement [Weinreb et al 2002, Zimran et al 2010]. Experience with taliglucerase alfa appears comparable [Zimran et al 2011, Ben Turkia et al 2013].

It is likely that end-stage histologic changes (e.g., fibrosis, infarction) influence the response to ERT. Thrombocytopenia may persist in individuals with residual splenomegaly and/or the presence of splenic nodules [Stein et al 2010].

ERT is well tolerated. Approximately 10%-15% of individuals develop antibodies to infused imiglucerase; whereas antibody formation has been reported in 1% of persons receiving velaglucerase. In most cases these individuals remain asymptomatic [Rosenberg et al 1999, Starzyk et al 2007]. Adverse effects (e.g., pruritus, hives) are relatively well controlled with premedication using antihistamines.

Individuals with type 1 GD report improved health-related quality of life after 24-48 months of ERT [Damiano et al 1998, Masek et al 1999, Weinreb et al 2007]. After prolonged treatment, ERT reduces the rate of bone loss in a dose-dependent manner [Wenstrup et al 2007], improves bone pain, and reduces bone crises [Charrow et al 2007].The effectiveness of ERT for the treatment of neurologic disease remains to be established, although a few reports have suggested some benefit [Poll et al 2002].

Individuals with type 2 GD and pyramidal tract signs are not likely to respond to ERT, perhaps because the underlying neuropathology is cell death rather than lysosomal storage of GL1 [Takahashi et al 1998]. These individuals and those with hydrops fetalis are not appropriate candidates for BMT, ERT, or substrate reduction therapy (SRT) [Campbell et al 2003, Migita et al 2003].

Individuals with type 3 GD appear to derive some benefit from ERT, although long-term prognosis remains to be defined for this heterogeneous group [Vellodi et al 2001]. Onset of progressive myoclonic seizures while on ERT appears to indicate a poor prognosis [Frei & Schiffmann 2002]. Brain stem auditory evoked responses have deteriorated in individuals with type 3 GD on ERT [Campbell et al 2003]. SRT used in combination with ERT for type 3 GD with progressive neurologic disease does not appear to alter ultimate prognosis.

Consensus recommendations exist for ERT and monitoring of children with type 1 GD [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). The optimal dose and frequency of recombinant enzyme administration is not certain, mostly because of limited information regarding tissue half-life and distribution and the limitations associated with the modalities used for assessing clinical disease course. Intravenously infused enzyme may not reach adequate concentrations in certain body sites (e.g., brain, bones, and lungs). In the majority of individuals, treatment is initiated with a dose of 15-60 units of enzyme per kg of body weight administered intravenously every two weeks. The enzyme dose may be increased or decreased after initiation of treatment and during the maintenance phase, based on response – i.e., hematopoietic reconstitution, reduction of liver and spleen volumes, and stabilization or improvement in skeletal findings [Pastores et al 2004].

Affected individuals may require assistance with insurance-related issues and reimbursement because of the high cost of ERT.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT). SRT aims to restore metabolic homeostasis by limiting the amount of substrate precursor synthesized (and eventually subject to catabolism) to a level that can be effectively cleared by the mutant enzyme with residual hydrolytic activity [Dwek et al 2002]. A potential concern regarding the use of SRT is its nonspecificity; i.e., the substrate whose production is blocked or limited is a precursor in the formation of other glycosphingolipids (ganglio- and lacto- series).

Miglustat, the first oral agent for the treatment of individuals with mild to moderate Gaucher disease for whom ERT is not a therapeutic option (e.g., because of constraints such as allergy, hypersensitivity, or poor venous access). Miglustat has been approved in Canada, countries of the European Union, Israel, Switzerland, and the US. In at least three studies, involving more than 30 individuals with GD type 1, miglustat treatment resulted in a significant decrease in liver and spleen volume after six to 18 months, with clinical improvement noted over 24 months. Bone involvement and platelet and hemoglobin values remained stable or were modestly improved [Cox et al 2000, Elstein et al 2004a, Pastores et al 2005]. An increase in bone density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck was reported to occur as early as six months after the initiation of miglustat monotherapy [Pastores et al 2007]. The most common adverse reactions noted in the clinical trials were weight loss (60% of individuals), and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea (80%), which resolved or diminished with longer use of the product.

Eliglustat, an alternative inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthetase recently approved by the FDA, has been shown in clinical trials to be a safe and effective treatment for individuals with Gaucher disease type 1 who are not on any therapy as well as those previously treated with ERT.

In a placebo-controlled phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients not previously on any therapy, those who were given eliglustat for nine months showed a 28% decrease in spleen volume and a 7% decrease in liver volume as well as a 1.2 gm/dL increase in hemoglobin level and 42% increase in platelet count [Mistry et al 2015].

In a separate phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients previously on ERT, eliglustat demonstrated outcomes similar to imiglucerase for the composite primary endpoint of stability in spleen and liver volume, hemoglobin level, and platelet count from baseline to 12 months [Cox et al 2015].

An effect on GD-related bone disease was suggested by a significant increase in lumbar spine T-scores (mean of -1.6 to -0.9) in 19 patients enrolled in the pivotal phase 2 study who were on eliglustat therapy for up to four years [Kamath et al 2014].

Note: (1) Reported side effects of eliglustat were generally mild. (2) The use of eliglustat requires cytochrome P450 2D6 genotyping and avoidance of drugs that may interact through this metabolic pathway. (3) Drug distribution studies indicate that eliglustat, a P-glycoprotein ligand, is not transported across the blood-brain barrier and, thus, not indicated for neuronopathic forms of GD. Preclinical studies involving analogs that may be efficacious for primary CNS involvement are ongoing [Larsen et al 2012].
Clinical observations suggest that early diagnosis and treatment with a ketogenic diet is associated with improved neurologic outcome by nourishing the immature brain during this critical period of growth and development [Alter et al 2015].
See Treatment of Manifestations.
CRIM Status

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it may be appropriate to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce cross-reactive immunologic material (i.e., who are CRIM-negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment course, optimally before the first infusion [Winchester et al 2008, Kishnani et al 2010, Messinger et al 2012]. Multiple immunomodulation protocols are in use, most of which use rituximab with additional drugs (including mycophenylate mofetil, methotrexate, and sirolimus) [Messinger et al 2012, Elder et al 2013].

Geographic areas in which CRIM-negative status is common include the US and the Middle East [Messinger et al 2012].

Two ways to determine the CRIM status of an individual with Pompe disease are:

Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation performed by an antibody-based method in cultured fibroblasts;

Molecular genetic testing to determine if the pathogenic variants result in total absence of enzyme activity (i.e., are CRIM-negative) [Bali et al 2012].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Myozyme® (alglucosidase alfa) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for IOPD infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Lumizyme® was approved by the FDA in 2010 for use in individuals older than age eight years with LOPD. Age restrictions on Lumizyme were removed in 2014.

Myozyme® and Lumizyme® are administered by slow IV infusion at 20-40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks. Many individuals are now treated with the higher dose.

Complications of ERT

Infusion-associated reactions. In clinical studies, infusion reactions were observed in half of those treated with Myozyme®.

The majority of treated children developed IgG antibodies to Myozyme® within the first three months of treatment. Infusion reactions appear to be more common in individuals with IgG antibodies. Some affected individuals with high sustained IgG titers may have a poor clinical response to treatment (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation).

Development of IgE antibodies is less common but may be associated with anaphylaxis requiring life support measures.

Most infusion-associated reactions can be modified by slowing the rate of infusion or administration of antipyretics, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids. For these reasons – and because many individuals with IOPD have preexisting compromise of respiratory and cardiac function – initiation of therapy in centers equipped to provide emergency care is recommended.

Other. Children with IOPD may have difficulty with anesthesia for procedures related to placement of devices for venous access.

Prognosis

IOPD. The rationale for newborn screening (NBS) is that cardiac status and motor development in infants with IOPD treated early with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are better than in controls [Chien et al 2009]; initiation of ERT before age two weeks is associated with significantly improved gross motor function at age 12 months [Yang et al 2016]. Long-term follow-up data are not yet available on this cohort.

In those in whom ERT was initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory assistance, a majority had improved survival, improved ventilator-independent survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor skills compared to an untreated cohort.

Longer-term survivors who underwent early ERT may show sustained improvement in cardiac and motor function [Prater et al 2012]. ERT reduces cardiac mass to varying degrees and improves the ejection fraction, although there may be a transient decrease in the ejection fraction after the first several weeks of ERT [Levine et al 2008]. ERT results in an increase of the PR interval and a decrease in the left ventricular voltage [Ansong et al 2006].

While the long-term prognosis is as yet unknown, available studies suggest better cognitive outcomes than had been predicted. Of note, assessment of cognitive abilities is difficult in children younger than age five years with IOPD; typical assessment tools frequently underestimate the cognitive abilities of these children [Kishnani et al 2009, Nicolino et al 2009, Ebbink et al 2012]. Estimates of cognitive abilities at age 24 months using the Bayley scales showed preservation of cognitive abilities in infants ascertained by NBS and treated early with ERT [Lai et al 2016].

Pivotal trials of ERT on IOPD show convincing delay in the onset of dependence on ventilator support, but most patients who are ventilator dependent remain so . This finding is consistent with experimental evidence demonstrating relative resistance of skeletal muscle (especially type II fibers) to effective glycogen depletion with administered alpha glucosidase. Predictors of a poor response to ERT include increase in muscle glycogen during therapy, high IgG titers to alpha glucosidase, and CRIM negativity.

LOPD. The major morbidities are motor disability and respiratory insufficiency. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of 90 affected individuals age eight years and older who were ambulatory and free of invasive ventilatory support at baseline, those receiving the active agent had better preservation of motor function and forced vital capacity at the 78th week evaluation point [van der Ploeg et al 2010]. Similar findings were demonstrated in an open-label trial [Strothotte et al 2010].

Quality of life, assessed with the Rand Corporation 36-Item Short Form Survey Instrument (SF-36), had declined in adults with LOPD before initiation of ERT and improved in the first two years of ERT [Güngör et al 2016].

Note: Although the timing of initiation of ERT in infants predicted to have LOPD who have been ascertained by newborn screening is not well established, the Taiwan group uses clinical severity to identify those for whom ERT is warranted before age three years [Chien et al 2015].
Most of the primary manifestations of GSD III can be diminished or avoided with good metabolic (dietary) control.

When euglycemia is maintained and ketosis is avoided, hepatomegaly regresses and other abnormal laboratory values (e.g., elevated AST and ALT, increased serum concentration of triglycerides) normalize or come close to baseline [Bernier et al 2008].

Myopathy and cardiomyopathy may be partially avoided by good dietary control. New evidence suggests that skeletal muscle metabolism is impaired during exercise in GSD III. Consumption of fructose or sucrose prior to exercise may improve exercise tolerance, but does not completely prevent exercise-induced damage [Preisler et al 2015].
See Treatment of Manifestations and Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.
Hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia may be prevented by administration of uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) one to three times a day.
Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia. Frequent feedings high in complex carbohydrates and protein are given to prevent hypoglycemia. In some individuals, no additional treatment is required to prevent hypoglycemia. However, some persons with liver PhK deficiency have severe and recurrent hypoglycemia which can be prevented by ingestion of uncooked cornstarch (range of cornstarch dose 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg) one to four times per day, depending on the severity of the condition. Some individuals may require cornstarch only before bedtime. Requirements for cornstarch tend to lessen with age.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Little published information is available on prevention of primary manifestations in individuals with muscle PhK deficiency; however, regular moderate aerobic exercise may be beneficial. Intense exercise should be avoided as it may promote rhabdomyolysis and muscle cramping.
Prevention of acute attacks

involves the following:

Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives to identify those heterozygous for the CPOX pathogenic variant identified in the proband

Education of CPOX heterozygotes regarding circumstances that may trigger an acute attack (See Clinical Description.)

Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are risky and not recommended. The recommended method of birth control for HCP heterozygotes is an IUD plus a barrier (diaphragm and/or condom).

A copper-eluting IUD is theoretically the safest in porphyria.

The hormone-eluting variety may also be safe because the systemic increase in hormone is quite small; however, little information exists.

Suppression of menses using a GnRH agonist. Leuprolide, nafarelin, and other GnRH agonists may help CPOX heterozygotes who experience monthly exacerbations.

CPOX heterozygotes undergoing surgery are at increased risk for an acute attack because of the routine preoperative fast and the (former) use of barbiturate (thiopental) induction of anesthesia. Adherence to the following recommendations greatly reduces the risk of an acute attack:

Minimizing the preoperative fast as much as possible and providing intravenous glucose (10% dextrose in half-normal saline) in the perioperative period

Anesthesia induction using non-barbiturate agents that have little or no P450-inducing activity (e.g., propofol, ketamine, short-acting benzodiazepines). Inhalation agents (isoflurane) and muscle relaxants also appear to be low-risk for triggering an attack.

Prevention of acute attacks

does not

involve the following:

Use of glucose. Because glucose is used to treat acute attacks, its use in preventing attacks has been suggested, and is in fact touted in lay discussions of porphyria; however, there is no evidence that heterozygotes can protect themselves by overeating or adopting a high-carbohydrate diet, and they risk becoming obese. Heterozygotes should adhere to a healthful diet with the usual balance of protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Weight loss is possible but only by incremental restriction of calories combined with exercise. Extreme diets (e.g., all bacon, all brown rice, starvation) are risky and should be avoided.

Liver transplantation. Because the vast majority of attacks respond to hematin and other supportive measures, liver transplantation has no role in prevention of acute attacks in a CPOX heterozygote.
No known treatment stops or slows the progression of HDL2.
Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hemophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusions of factor VIII concentrate three times a week or every other day to maintain factor VIII clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002, Feldman et al 2006]. Newer modified recombinant products with longer half-lives allow less frequent infusions.

Factor VIII concentrate infusions given prophylactically in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds can nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007].

The greatest benefit is seen in affected individuals who start therapy before age 2.5 to three years. Routine prophylaxis begun later in childhood or in adults significantly decreases bleeding episodes [Valentino et al 2012, Manco-Johnson et al 2013, Mondorf et al 2013].

"Secondary" prophylaxis, started after some joint damage has occurred, can be given on a long-term basis or around periods of increased activity or surgical procedures. An increasing number of adults with hemophilia are on long-term prophylaxis and clinical benefit is being documented in short- and long-term studies.
Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hæmophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusion of factor IX concentrate twice weekly or every other day to maintain factor IX clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002]. Also, some individuals will require troughs higher than 1% to prevent bleeding. Longer-acting factor IX concentrates that extend the half-life three- to fivefold are now available. Choice of product should be individualized based on clinical factors and activity levels. Initiation of prophylactic infusions of factor IX concentrate in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds has been shown to nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007]. Prophylaxis in adults is standard of care in many countries and has been shown to decrease bleeding and improve joint function and quality of life [Josephson 2013, Manco-Johnson et al 2013]
See Treatment of Manifestations.
The following measures are recommended:

Protection from sunlight because of the high risk for severe skin damage and possible mutilation

Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) . See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Avoidance of drugs and agents that induce the hepatic P450

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B
Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is necessary for the treatment/management of HFI (Table 3).

Specific ingredients to avoid include fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, agave syrup, inverted sugar, maple-flavored syrup, molasses, palm or coconut sugar, and sorghum.

In addition, medicines and formulas in which fructose/sucrose may not be listed as a primary component, examples of which include syrups, enema solutions, some immunoglobulin solutions, and many infant and pediatric nutritional drinks. When ingredients are listed, the terms “sugar,” “table sugar,” “natural flavorings” and even in some cases “sugar-free” or “no added sugar” (with no further clarification on the type of carbohydrate used) should raise suspicion for the presence of fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Table 3. 

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Food Category

Foods Permitted

Foods Prohibited

Dairy

Any milk, cheese, eggs

Milk products w/added sugar (sweetened yogurt, fruit yogurt, milkshake, chocolate milk)

Meat

Beef, veal, lamb, pork

Ham, bacon, hot dogs, processed meats; any other meat where sugar is used in processing

Fish

All fish

None

Poultry

Chicken, turkey

None

Cereal

Cooked or ready-to-eat cereals (except sweetened & sugar-coated cereals)

Sweetened/sugar-coated cereals

Fruit

None

All fruits, fruit juices, including squashes & cordials, & fruit extracts prohibited

Vegetables

Asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, green beans, green peppers, lettuce, nuts, onions, potatoes, spinach, wax beans

All other vegetables, including sweet potatoes

Bread

Breads prepared w/out fructose, sucrose, sugar, or sorbitol; soda crackers & saltines

Any breads or crackers prepared w/fructose/sucrose/sugar/sorbitol

Fat sources

Butter, margarine, oil, mayonnaise / mustard prepared w/out sugar

Mayonnaises, mustards, & salad dressings made with sugar

Desserts and sweeteners

Dietetic jello, dietetic ice cream, dietetic puddings; natural yogurt; glucose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose & zero-calorie sweeteners

All desserts containing sugar (cake, pie, cookies, candy, jello, ice cream, sherbet, honey, fruit juice); sugar, sucrose, sorbitol, fructose

Miscellaneous

Vegetable juices, coffee, tea, salt, pepper, broths/soups from permitted vegetables; some sugar substitutes; some dietetic beverages; pasta; rice; cinnamon, garlic, poppy seeds; peanut butter (when pure & w/out added sugars)

Ketchup & any other sauces / condiments containing sugar, jam, jelly, preserves, carbonated beverages / soda; peanut butter if prepared w/added sugars; chewing gum w/sorbitol

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

During hospitalizations special caution should be taken to avoid use of fructose-containing intravenous fluids. A number of reported accidental and iatrogenic fructose infusion-related deaths have prompted greater awareness of HFI [Locher 1987, Sachs et al 1993, Curran & Havill 2002, Müller et al 2003]; however, with a rare disorder such as HFI and in circumstances in which specific dietary (and infusion) restrictions may not be adequately disclosed, the danger of exposure in a hospital setting remains [Cox 1993]. The following are recommendations:

During any hospitalization, all members of the care team should be aware of the diagnosis of HFI and the patient is advised to wear at all times a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace that provides information about the diagnosis of HFI.

‘Red flags’ should be placed in the patient’s chart or medical record to alert practitioners to the HFI diagnosis and to medical risks associated with exposures to foods and/or medications (oral or parenteral) containing fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Specific medicines known to contain fructose or fructose-like substances should be avoided.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should be utilized and medications should be cleared for use on a case-by-case basis.

Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a favorable approach to diagnosis of HFI.

Dietary restriction should be strictly followed and maintained, especially in infancy. Although some have suggested that after age two years dietary restrictions can be relaxed somewhat [Steinmann & Santer 2011], currently, there are no specific guidelines regarding dietary fructose limits in any age group.

Tolerance of dietary fructose probably depends on an individual’s residual enzyme activity. Furthermore, because actual fructose content in foods may be unreliably reported or difficult to ascertain, adherence to complete dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol may be difficult attain and unrealistic for some patients with HFI.
Biopsy-proven diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended if a biopsy shows diffuse-type gastric carcinoma [Chun et al 2001, Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Heterozygotes for a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant. The importance of identifying the genetic basis of cancer susceptibility in families with HDGC has been underscored by the observation of early gastric cancers in prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) samples obtained from individuals with a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant [Chun et al 2001, Huntsman et al 2001, Norton et al 2007]. These findings suggest that currently prophylactic total gastrectomy, rather than endoscopic surveillance, is the best preventive measure for individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant.

Prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) involves D-2 dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy and obtaining proximal margins to ensure removal of the gastric mucosa [Norton et al 2007].

In a young, healthy individual, the risk of mortality with PTG in an experienced surgeon’s hands is less than 1% [Lynch et al 2005]. However, the morbidity from prophylactic gastrectomy is high. All individuals have long-term morbidity related to both immediate post-surgical complications as well as long-term complications including rapid intestinal transit, dumping syndrome, diarrhea, eating habit alterations, and weight loss [Caldas et al 1999, Lewis et al 2001]. In addition, the risk for malabsorption increases after total gastrectomy; malabsorption accounts for the increased incidence of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and malnutrition described in persons with gastric cancer [Liedman 1999].

In light of these possible complications, it is recommended that a multidisciplinary team including a surgeon, gastroenterologist, and dietician provide preoperative and postoperative care for an individual undergoing PTG. The multidisciplinary team members can counsel candidates for PTG on the risks and benefits of the surgery. In making the decision to undergo PTG, the affected individual and his/her physicians should consider the following:

The age-specific risks of gastric cancer. Due to nutritional implications, PTG is not generally recommended until the individual’s growth period is complete. In families in which gastric cancer is early onset, PTG should be considered on a case by case basis [Blair et al 2006]. In these individuals, regular endoscopic screening may be begun prior to the consideration of PTG.

The 100% morbidity of gastrectomy and the 1% risk of mortality following the surgery

The risk in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant of developing extragastric cancers (e.g., lobular breast cancer and colorectal cancer) and the screening recommendations for these cancers

Breast cancer. Referral to a high-risk breast clinic is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Prophylactic mastectomy may be considered in women heterozygous for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. The authors are aware of only a handful of women who have to date undergone prophylactic mastectomy for this reason. It is important to note that prophylactic mastectomy can have psychological effects; appropriate counseling should include the possible altered perception of the body and sexual relationships [Lodder et al 2002, Brandberg et al 2008].
Depending on their age, individuals with HHH syndrome should be maintained on a protein-restricted diet. For infants and children the dietary protein needs to be restricted to control hyperammonemia, but sufficient for normal growth and development.

Dietary supplementation with Cyclinex®-1 (infants and children) or Cyclinex®-2 (adult) formulas that provide only essential amino acids and other nutritional supplements have been helpful for some affected individuals.

Citrulline supplementation at 0.17 g/kg/day or 3.8 g/m2/day is preferred to arginine because citrulline accepts an aspartate (via the arginosuccinate synthase reaction) and therefore eliminates two amino groups per cycle. Moreover, there may be a possible association between arginine supplementation and progression of lower limb spasticity [HHH International Round Table, Roma 2006, unpublished].

Sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®) is given at 450-600 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Sodium phenylbutyrate initially is imported into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to produce phenylacetate.

Lysine supplementation is indicated when plasma lysine concentrations are low. Low plasma lysine concentrations have been associated with delayed growth and development.

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, glutamine, arginine, and essential amino acids should be maintained within the normal range. Note: (1) Although elevated plasma ornithine concentrations may decrease significantly if dietary management is followed, complete normalization of plasma ornithine concentration is rarely observed. (2) Even in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, affected individuals may continue to develop neurologic complications such as spasticity or learning disabilities. Maintaining as low a level of plasma ornithine concentration as possible by restricting protein intake could help prevent some of the progressive neurologic complications seen in these individuals.

Liver transplantation is not indicated for persons with HHH syndrome. Because SLC25A15 and the ornithine degradation pathway are expressed in all tissues (i.e., brain, kidney) and most cell types (i.e., astrocytes, fibroblasts), liver transplantation may correct the hyperammonemia, but it will not correct tissue-specific metabolic abnormalities that also contribute to the neurologic pathology.

Three individuals with HHH syndrome who had acute fulminant hepatic failure and coagulopathy rapidly stabilized after protein restriction and arginine or citrulline supplementation [Fecarotta et al 2006, Mhanni et al 2008].
See Treatment of Manifestations. Prevention is currently focused at ablating, occluding, resecting or shrinking telangiectases and AVMs to prevent associated morbidity and mortality.
Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be undertaken in children with confirmed familial HLH as early in life as possible.
Chelation therapy and iron supplementation may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Prophylactic removal of the uterus and ovaries (prior to the development of cancer) can be considered after childbearing is completed.

Because routine colonoscopy is an effective preventive measure for colon cancer, prophylactic colectomy (removal of the colon prior to the development of cancer) is generally not recommended for individuals with Lynch syndrome.
Protective pads at elbows or knees may prevent pressure and trauma to local nerves.
The principles of treatment are to correct the biochemical abnormalities ‒especially to control the elevated plasma homocysteine concentrations as much as possible, to prevent or at least reduce the complications of homocystinuria [Yap & Naughten 1998], and to prevent further complications such as thrombosis [Morris et al 2017].

The best results have been reported in those individuals identified by newborn screening and treated shortly after birth in whom the plasma free homocystine concentration is maintained below 11 µmol/L (preferably, ≤5 µmol/L) [Yap et al 2001b]. This corresponds to a plasma total homocysteine concentration below 120 µmol/L or, preferably, below 100 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017]. For B6-responsive individuals, the goal for plasma total homocysteine is below 50 µmol/L [Morris et al 2017].

These goals may need revision when very long-term data becomes available.

Measures used to control total plasma homocysteine concentration include vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy (if shown to be B6 responsive), methionine-restricted diet, and folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Betaine therapy is usually added to the therapeutic regimen; in adolescents and adults betaine may be the major form of treatment but it is preferable to remain on life-long metabolic diet. In those who have already had a vascular event, betaine therapy alone may prevent recurrent events [Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010].

Details about each aspect of treatment follow.

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) therapy. In those who are shown to be B6 responsive, treatment with pyridoxine in a dose of approximately 200 mg/day or the lowest dose that produces the maximum biochemical benefit (i.e., lowest plasma homocysteine and methionine concentrations), as determined by measurement of total homocysteine and amino acid levels, should be given.

Pyridoxine may also be included in treatment despite evidence of B6 non-responsiveness, typically in doses of 100-200 mg daily (although some adults receive 500-1000 mg daily).

Dietary treatment. B6-non-responsive neonates or those only very poorly responsive to pyridoxine require a methionine-restricted diet with frequent metabolic monitoring. This diet should be continued indefinitely. Dietary treatment should be considered for clinically diagnosed individuals but often is not tolerated if begun in mid-childhood or later.

The majority of B6-responsive individuals also require a methionine-restricted diet for metabolic control.

The diet for homocystinuria is very complex and the skills of an experienced metabolic dietician must be utilized. Dietary treatment reduces methionine intake by restricting natural protein intake. However, to prevent protein malnutrition, a methionine-free amino acid formula supplying the other amino acids (as well as cysteine, which may be an essential amino acid in CBS deficiency) is provided. Breast feeding may be continued in combination with the methionine-free amino acid infant formula [MacDonald et al 2006]. The amount of methionine required is calculated by a metabolic dietician and supplied in natural food and special low-protein foods and monitored on the basis of plasma concentrations of total homocysteine as well as methionine.

Folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Folate and vitamin B12 optimize the conversion of homocysteine to methionine by methionine synthase, thus helping to decrease the plasma homocysteine concentration. When the red blood cell folate concentration and serum B12 concentration are reduced, folic acid is given orally at 5 mg per day; and vitamin B12 is given as hydroxycobalamin at 1 mg IM per month.

Betaine treatment. Treatment with betaine provides an alternate remethylation pathway to convert excess homocysteine to methionine (see Figure 1) and may help to prevent complications, particularly thrombosis [Yap et al 2001a, Lawson-Yuen & Levy 2010]. By converting homocysteine to methionine, betaine lowers plasma total homocysteine concentrations but raises the plasma concentration of methionine.

For children the initial betaine dose is 50 mg/kg twice daily, adjusted according to response (increased weekly by 50 mg/kg increments). For adults the initial dose is 3 g twice daily. The dose and frequency are adjusted according to biochemical response. There is unlikely to be any benefit in exceeding a dose of 150-200 mg/kg/day [Morris et al 2017].

Betaine may be added to the treatment regimen in individuals poorly compliant with dietary treatment or may become the major treatment modality in those intolerant of the diet. Individuals who are pyridoxine non-responsive who were unable to attain metabolic control with diet substantially reduced their plasma homocysteine concentrations when betaine was supplemented [Singh et al 2004].

Side effects of betaine are few. (1) Some affected individuals develop a detectable body odor, resulting in reduced compliance. (2) The increase in methionine produced by betaine is usually harmless; however, cerebral edema has occurred when hypermethioninemia is extreme (>1000 µmol/L) [Yaghmai et al 2002, Devlin et al 2004, Tada et al 2004, Braverman et al 2005]. Eliminating betaine resulted in rapid reduction of the hypermethioninemia and resolution of the cerebral edema.

Note: In a murine model for homocystinuria the effect of betaine treatment diminished significantly over time [Maclean et al 2012].
Low-impact physical activity and exercise may improve general bone health. Supervision by a physician specialist familiar with hypophosphatasia is suggested.
Preventive treatment is intended to decrease the frequency and intensity of paralytic attacks. Triggering factors need to be identified and, if possible, avoided (see Table 7).

A diet rather low in sodium and carbohydrate and rich in potassium is recommended.

Potassium supplementation for prevention and treatment of attacks is an empiric but effective treatment for shortening attacks and sometimes preventing their occurrence (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Oral intake of potassium salts (10-20 mmol/dose, 3 doses/day) can prevent attacks, especially if the dose of potassium is taken some hours before the usual time of the attack (i.e., a nocturnal dose if crises occur at awakening).

Acetazolamide is generally considered the additive treatment of choice for prevention of paralytic attacks and myopathy in HOKPP. However, there is no standardized treatment regimen and no consensus as to when to start treatment with acetazolamide.

Typical dosage for acetazolamide in adults is between 125 mg/day and 1000 mg/day (usually 250-500 mg/day), divided into three doses and taken with meals; in children a dose of 5-10 mg/kg/day, divided into three doses and taken with meals, is used.

Acetazolamide treatment:

Is beneficial in approximately 50% of individuals with HOKPP;

Has no effect in 30% of affected individuals;

Exacerbates symptoms in approximately 20% (this deleterious effect may be predicted by genotype, see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations).

In some affected persons, permanent weakness may be partly reversed and muscle strength may be improved by acetazolamide treatment [Links et al 1988].

Whether acetazolamide treatment prevents or treats myopathy and the resulting fixed weakness that occurs with age is unknown.

Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect of preventive acetazolamide treatment on attack rate, severity-weighted attack rate, permanent weakness, and myopathy.

Alternatives to acetazolamide. If acetazolamide is not tolerated or if it is not effective after prolonged use, alternatives include dichlorphenamide (50-200 mg/day), triamterene (50-150 mg/day), and spironolactone (25-100 mg/day).

Other drugs have been used with limited success: lithium gluconate [Confavreux et al 1991] (though Ottosson & Persson [1971] earlier demonstrated lack of efficacy); pinacidil [Ligtenberg et al 1996]; and bumetanide [Wu et al 2013].
Prophylactic total parathyroidectomy has been suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma. However, given the rarity of parathyroid carcinoma in individuals with HPT-JT syndrome and the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not recommended.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Idursulfase (Elaprase®) is a recombinant form of human iduronate 2-sulfatase that has been approved in the United States and the European Union for the treatment of MPS II [US Food and Drug Administration 2006a, US Food and Drug Administration 2006b].

Clinical efficacy of ERT was shown in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of 96 patients [Muenzer et al 2006]. When compared to the placebo group after one year of treatment, persons in the weekly idursulfase group demonstrated statistically significant improvement of the primary endpoint (a composite of distance walked and lung function). Based on the better clinical response in the group in which medication was administered weekly compared to group in which it was administered every other week, idursulfase was approved in both the US and EU for the treatment of MPS II at a weekly dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Because this trial only studied individuals with the slowly progressive form of the disease, it yielded little information on outcomes in individuals younger than age five years or with early progressive CNS disease.

Results of a study on ERT in children younger than age five years or individuals with severe pulmonary compromise or severe CNS disease have been published [Muenzer et al 2012].

More recently, in a 3.5 year independent follow-up of 27 individuals with MPS II, Tomanin et al [2014] determined that:

Long-term use of ERT was safe;

ERT efficacy was similar in both a younger age group (age 1.6-12 years at the start of ERT) and an older age group (age 12-27 years at the start of ERT); and

Improvement/stabilization of findings such as GAG level, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otologic disorders, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and cardiac valve regurgitation (except mitral valve) was greater in individuals with the early progressive form compared to those with the slowly progressive form.

Since Elaprase® does not cross the blood-brain barrier, no effect on CNS disease is anticipated; however, there is reason to believe that somatic manifestations of those with severe CNS involvement would benefit from ERT. The young age is not adding any safety concerns, and patients have significant amelioration of somatic symptoms [Lampe et al 2014a].

Infusion-related reactions that may occur with use of Elaprase® ERT are comparable to similar reactions seen with other ERT products used in treatment of lysosomal storage disease and with other infused proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., infliximab). The etiology of the more severe forms of these non-allergic reactions, referred to as anaphylactoid, is unknown. Current evidence suggests that anaphylactoid (as opposed to anaphylactic) reactions are not immune mediated [Mayer & Young 2006].

Infusion reactions are generally mild and include brief, insignificant decreases or increases in heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory rate; itching; rash; flushing; and headache. Mild reactions can usually be managed by slowing the infusion rate for several treatments and then slowly returning to the prior rate.

Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines, as is often done for ERT in other conditions, is not suggested on the label for Elaprase®; however, if mild or moderate infusion reactions (e.g., dyspnea, urticaria, or systolic blood pressure changes of ≤20 mm Hg) cannot be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate, the addition of treatment one hour before infusion with diphenhydramine and acetaminophen (or ibuprofen) to the regimen usually resolves the problem. Pretreatment can typically be discontinued after six to ten weeks.

Severe non-allergic anaphylactoid reactions such as major changes in blood pressure, wheezing, stridor, rigors, or drop in oxygen saturations should be immediately addressed by stopping the infusion and giving appropriate doses of subcutaneous (SQ) epinephrine, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine, and hydrocortisone or methylpredinsolone. Subsequent infusions should then be given at a significantly reduced rate with pretreatment with prednisone 24 hours and eight hours before the infusion, diphenhydramine and acetaminophen or ibuprofen orally one hour before the infusion, and IV methylpredinsolone just before beginning the infusion.

Because of the limitation of the design of the clinical trial, it is not known at this time whether the incidence or severity of infusion-related reactions is different for patients younger than age five years with severe respiratory compromise or with severe CNS disease.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using umbilical cord blood or bone marrow is a potential way of providing sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression of the disease [Guffon et al 2009, Annibali et al 2013]; however, the use of HSCT is controversial because of the associated high risk of morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, it remains unclear if treatment early in life significantly reduces the progression of neurologic disease [Mullen et al 2000], and anecdotal case reports published to date have been disappointing, quite unlike the reports of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Hurler syndrome (MPS I). Overall, the efficacy of BMT for MPS II cannot be determined until a number of children with MPS II younger than age two years with known or probable severe CNS disease undergoes transplantation, along with documentation of long-term follow up [Tanaka et al 2012]. Although this study needs to be validated, the use of HSCT is difficult to justify since HSCT and ERT have equal efficacy in restoring growth in children with MPS II [Patel et al 2014].
Plasma exchange prophylaxis has been shown to prevent disease recurrences in persons with mutation of CFH [Davin et al 2008]. Plasma exchange and eculizumab prophylaxis may prevent disease recurrences in those with mutation of circulating factors (CFH, C3, CFB, and CFI).
For individuals with familial HCM felt to be at increased risk for SCD, ICD therapy is an important consideration. ICDs are currently the best option for the prevention of SCD and have been shown to be effective in sensing and terminating ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF).

The annual rate of appropriate ICD therapies has been estimated at 2%-4% in individuals with an ICD placed for primary prevention, and 4%-11% in individuals with an ICD placed for secondary prevention [Maron et al 2007, O'Mahony et al 2012].

The potential for complications must be considered in the discussion of ICD placement. Although ICDs are generally safe, they are not benign and cumulative morbidity needs to take into account the age at implantation and duration of therapy. The rate of complications has been reported at 5% per year in persons with HCM. The rate of inappropriate shocks is roughly double the rate of appropriate therapies in persons who received ICDs for primary prevention [Maron et al 2007, Lin et al 2009, O'Mahony et al 2012].

In the absence of highly sensitive, patient-specific predictors, the decision to implant an ICD requires detailed and thoughtful evaluation, as well as the active input of well-informed patients.
Treatment with erythropoietin can reverse anemia [Zivná et al 2009].

Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol can prevent development of gout.
Diet/environment. Preventive therapy for individuals with hyperPP consists of frequent meals rich in carbohydrates and avoidance of the following:

Potassium-rich medications and foods (e.g., fruits, fruit juices)

Fasting

Strenuous work

Exposure to cold

Diuretics. It is often advisable to prevent hyperkalemic attacks of weakness by the continuous use of a thiazide diuretic or a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, such as acetazolamide or the recently approved medication dichlorphenamide. Diuretics are used in modest dosages at intervals from twice daily to twice weekly.

Thiazide diuretics are preferable because they have fewer side effects than either acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide therapy.

The dosage should be kept as low as possible (e.g., 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide daily or every other day). In severe cases, 50 mg or 75 mg of hydrochlorothiazide should be taken daily very early in the morning.

Individuals should be monitored so that the serum potassium concentration does not fall below 3.3 mmol/L or the serum sodium concentration below 135 mmol/L [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].
Preventive measures include the following:

Statin-based therapy with addition of other medications as needed

Reduced intake of saturated fat

Increased intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day

Increased physical activity

Not smoking
See Treatment of Manifestations, clonazepam.
No treatment that reverses or slows the natural history of muscle weakness in GNE-related myopathy is available.
Routine vaccinations and yearly influenza vaccinations are recommended, but caution with certain live virus vaccines may need to be observed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). No evidence exists to suggest that vaccinations cause acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) in an individual heterozygous for an RANBP2 pathogenic variant.
BMT is currently the only cure for IPEX syndrome; the degree of symptomatic remission may depend on use of BMT prior to irreversible damage to target organs such as pancreatic islet cells and thyroid.
Individuals with biochemical evidence of iron overload but without evidence of organ dysfunction or failure should be encouraged to undergo regular phlebotomies until excess iron stores are depleted to prevent the development of complications associated with excess iron stores.

Treatment by phlebotomy in presymptomatic stages can prevent organ damage.
See Treatment of Manifestations regarding prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death.
Increased awareness, education, and screening have helped successive generations benefit from early detection of JPS and cancer prevention/risk reduction.
There are currently no effective treatments to prevent development of disease manifestations in an asymptomatic individual known to possess an expanded CAG repeat after presymptomatic diagnosis.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in presymptomatic infants [Escolar et al 2005] and older individuals with mild symptoms [Krivit et al 1998] provides a benefit over symptomatic treatment only. Treated individuals show improved and preserved cognitive function; however, many show progressive deterioration of peripheral nervous system findings.

The availability of suitable donors has changed considerably with the use of umbilical cord blood for HSCT.

The identification of newborns with the potential to develop Krabbe disease by newborn screening (presently in place in New York State) facilitates the initiation of treatment before neurologic damage has occurred. Concerns remain regarding the age at which to start treatment, prediction of clinical course without treatment, and long-term consequences of treatment.

Given the significant clinical variability among individuals with late-onset forms (even those with the same genotype), evaluation of treatment effectiveness is difficult.
The implementation of hosiery prior to the development of lymphedema may be beneficial in reducing the extent of edema [P Mortimer, personal communication].
For treatment of the following disorders, see Treatment of Manifestations.

Thiamine transporter deficiency (mutation of SLC19A3)

Biotinidase deficiency (BTD)

Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis defect (PDSS2)
Primary disease manifestations can be prevented in a few of the leukodystrophies: in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, Krabbe disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy, for example, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) may be beneficial if performed early in the disease course. Patients with these disorders should be referred to specialized centers for consideration of HSCT or BMT [Eichler et al 2009].
There is evidence that raised intraocular pressure could be a risk factor triggering visual loss in individuals at risk for developing LHON. Until further evidence becomes available, it is reasonable to set a lower threshold for initiating treatment for raised intraocular pressure in individuals with a LHON-causing variant given the possible deleterious consequences of raised intraocular pressure on mitochondrial function and retinal ganglion cell survival [Thouin et al 2013].
Females with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have the option of prophylactic mastectomy to reduce the risk for breast cancer [Thull & Vogel 2004]. Recent recommendations for colonoscopy may be considered surveillance as well as primary prevention of colorectal cancer. Counseling for avoidance of sun exposure, tobacco use, and exposure to other known or suspected carcinogens is encouraged.
The overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid.
The prevention of metabolic abnormality is the goal of the treatment. Long-term management is based on protein-restricted diet and administration of citrulline (see Treatment of Manifestations).
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Medications that reduce hemodynamic stress on the aortic wall, such as beta-blockers, are routinely prescribed. This therapy should be managed by a cardiologist or geneticist familiar with its use. Therapy is generally initiated at the time of diagnosis with Marfan syndrome at any age or upon appreciation of progressive aortic root dilatation even in the absence of a definitive diagnosis. The dose needs to be titrated to effect, keeping heart rate after submaximal exercise or agitation lower than 110 in young children or lower than 100 in older children or adults.

Verapamil or other calcium channel blockers have been suggested if beta-blockers cannot be used (e.g., in individuals with asthma) or are not tolerated (e.g., prolonged lethargy, depression). Data documenting either the efficacy or safety of this approach in people with Marfan syndrome are very limited.

Yetman et al [2005] suggested that use of ACE inhibitors may be more beneficial than beta-blockers. Of note, the treatments were not randomized and the dose of beta-blocker was not titrated to effect. ACE inhibitors have been used for decades in Marfan syndrome to manage volume overload resulting from valve dysfunction, and (unlike beta-blockers) have not previously been reported to provide notable protection from progressive aortic enlargement.

There is at least some theoretic concern that reducing afterload without a concomitant reduction in inotropy (as provided by a beta-blocker) could increase hemodynamic stress in the ascending aorta. Currently, afterload-reducing agents are only commonly used in conjunction with a beta-blocker to manage volume overload in the setting of valve dysfunction.
The mainstay in the treatment of MCAD deficiency is avoidance of fasting. Derks et al [2007] studied the length of time that MCAD-deficient but asymptomatic individuals should be able to fast. Based on their findings, they recommend maximum fasting times of:

Up to eight hours in infants between ages six and 12 months

Up to ten hours during the second year of life

Up to 12 hours after age two years

To avoid excessive fasting:

Infants require frequent feedings.

Toddlers could receive 2 g/kg of uncooked cornstarch as a source of complex carbohydrates at bedtime to ensure sufficient glucose supply overnight. A relatively low-fat diet (e.g., <30% of total energy from fat) may be beneficial.

Additional consideration of the patient’s MCAD enzyme activity led Derks et al [2007] to suggest that when residual MCAD enzyme activity in leukocytes is greater than 10% of normal, prevention of fasting is not necessary for otherwise healthy individuals older than age six months [Touw et al 2013]. However, Sturm et al [2012] consider that residual MCAD enzyme activity lower than 30% requires treatment and follow up. Whether possible variability in MCAD enzyme activity assays plays a role in these different assessments is uncertain.
Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol, probenecid, or febuxostat can prevent development of gout.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.
Avoidance of excessive sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation, and limiting exposure to ionizing radiation (e.g., by computed tomography and x-ray) is recommended because of the increased predisposition for the development of basal cell carcinomas.
No specific treatment for MELAS exists.

The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].

Idebenone, an analog of CoQ10 that crosses the blood-brain barrier more efficiently, has also been reported as beneficial in anecdotal reports [Napolitano et al 2000]. A clinical trial of idebenone for MELAS is in progress [Author, personal observation].
The organs in MEN1 syndrome at highest risk for malignant tumor development — the duodenum, pancreas, and lungs (bronchial carcinoids) — are not suitable for ablative surgery.

The only prophylactic surgery possible in MEN1 syndrome is thymectomy to prevent thymic carcinoid [Brandi et al 2001]. Prophylactic thymectomy should be considered at the time of neck surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism in males with MEN1 syndrome, particularly those who are smokers or have relatives with thymic carcinoid [Ferolla et al 2005].
Prophylactic thyroidectomy is the primary preventive measure for individuals with an identified germline RET pathogenic variant [Cohen & Moley 2003, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is safe for all age groups; however, the timing of the surgery is controversial [Moley et al 1998]. According to the consensus statement from the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force, the age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is performed can be guided by the codon position of the RET pathogenic variant (Table 4, Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, these guidelines continue to be modified as more data become available.

Table 4. 

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

ATA 1 Risk Level

Pathogenic Variants 2, 3

Age of Prophylactic Surgery

Age to Begin Screening

For PHEO

For HPT 4

Level D(highest risk)

p.Ala883Phep.Met918Thrp.Val804Met+p.Glu805Lys 5p.Val804Met+p.Tyr806Cys 5p.Val804Met+p.Ser904Cys 5

As soon as possible in 1st year of life

8 yrs

NA

Level C

p.Cys634Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyr

<5 yrs

8 yrs

8 yrs

Level B

p.Cys609Phe/Arg/Gly/Ser/Tyrp.Cys611Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys618Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Cys620Arg/Gly/Phe/Ser/Trp/Tyrp.Cys630Arg/Phe/Ser/Tyrp.Asp631Tyrp.633/9 bp dupp.634/12 bp dupp.Val804Met+p.Val778Ile 5

Consider <5 yrs; may delay if criteria met 5

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Codon 630 pathogenic variant: 8 yrsAll others: 20 yrs

Level A

p.Arg321Glyp.531/9 bp dupp.532 dupp.Cys515Serp.Gly533Cysp.Arg600Glnp.Lys603Glup.Tyr606Cysp.635/insert ELCR;p.Thr636Prop.Lys666Glup.Glu768Aspp.Asn777Serp.Leu790Phep.Val804Leu/Metp.Gly819Lysp.Arg833Cysp.Arg844Glnp.Arg866Trpp.Ser891Alap.Arg912Pro

May delay beyond age 5 yrs if criteria met 6

20 yrs

20 yrs

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

1. 

ATA = American Thyroid Association

2. 

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

3. 

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

4. 

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

5. 

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

6. 

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Risk for Aggressive MTC Based on Genotype and Recommended Interventions

Adapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force [2009]

ATA = American Thyroid Association

p.Ser649Leu and p.Tyr791Phe have been removed from this list as they were reclassified as benign variants [Erlic et al 2010].

Pathogenic variant designations have not been edited by GeneReviews staff and may not be standard nomenclature.

HPT = Hyperparathyroidism

Pathogenic variants in cis configuration on one allele

Criteria: normal annual basal and or stimulated serum calcitonin; normal annual neck ultrasound examination; family history of less aggressive MTC

Thyroidectomy for C-cell hyperplasia, before progression to invasive MTC, may allow surgery to be limited to thyroidectomy with sparing of lymph nodes [Brandi et al 2001, Kahraman et al 2003].

For all individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who have not had a thyroidectomy, annual biochemical screening is recommended with immediate thyroidectomy if results are abnormal [Szinnai et al 2003].

Annual serum calcitonin screening [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009] should begin at age:

Six months for children with MEN 2B

Three to five years for children with MEN 2A or FMTC

Caution should be used in interpreting calcitonin results for children younger than age three years, especially those younger than age six months [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Prophylactic thyroidectomy is not routinely offered to at-risk individuals in whom the disorder has not been confirmed.
Menkes disease. In classic Menkes disease, treatment with subcutaneous injections of copper histidine or copper chloride before age ten days normalizes developmental outcome in some individuals and improves the neurologic outcome in others [Kaler et al 2008, Kaler et al 2010].

Note: Despite very early copper histidine treatment, some infants show no significant improvement relative to the natural history of untreated Menkes disease [Kaler et al 1995, Kaler et al 2008]. The type and severity of the ATP7A pathogenic variant determine the response to early copper treatment.

To maintain serum copper concentration in the normal range (70-150 µg/dL), the suggested dose of copper chloride is:

For children age <1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 2x/day

For children age >1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 1x/day

Occipital horn syndrome. Although there is no evidence that copper replacement therapy for OHS is clinically beneficial, it would be reasonable to expect even better overall neurodevelopmental and neurocognitive outcomes if individuals with OHS were identified early and treated with copper during their first three years.
The administration of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) (50-100 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (1000 mg 3x/day) has been of some benefit to some individuals. In a small randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of affected individuals with heterogeneous mitochondrial diseases, CoQ10 combined with creatine and lipoic acid produced modest benefits including slowing progression of ankle weakness and lower resting plasma lactate concentration [Rodriguez et al 2007].
Preventive measures for individuals known to be susceptible to MH or for any individual with an equivocal contracture test response (MHE) (treated clinically as MHS):

For any individual undergoing anesthesia, obtain a thorough anesthetic history to determine the possibility of the individual or a family member having experienced an MH episode. When suspicion of MHS exists, family members should not be given trigger anesthetic agents, i.e., potent volatile anesthetic agents such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane, and isoflurane or the depolarizing agent succinylcholine.

In general, individuals undergoing general anesthetics that exceed 30 minutes in duration should have their temperature monitored using an electronic temperature probe. Skin liquid crystal temperature sensors are not recommended as they have been found to be unreliable indicators of changing temperature during human malignant hyperthermia (MH) events.

Individuals with any form of myotonia (see Differential Diagnosis) should not receive succinylcholine.

Individuals with central core disease, multiminicore disease, nemaline myopathy, congenital fiber-type disproportion, or Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy should not receive trigger anesthetics.

Individuals with MHS should carry proper identification as to their susceptibility; identification bracelets are available through the Medic Alert Foundation, Turlock, California (www.medicalert.org).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only presently available therapy that attempts to treat the primary central nervous system manifestations of MLD [Krivit et al 1999, Peters & Steward 2003, Krivit 2004]. Not all individuals with MLD are suitable candidates for these procedures and not all families are willing to undertake the risks involved. Although identification of adequately matched donors and treatments for complications of HSCT are constantly improving, it remains controversial. Substantial risk is involved and long-term effects are unclear.

However, in the absence of alternative approaches, HSCT needs to be discussed with families. This is particularly important for families with more slowly progressing late-onset forms of MLD because family members may be diagnosed with MLD by biochemical or molecular genetic testing before symptoms occur.

A number of reports on the experience of individual centers using HSCT have appeared over the past ten years: each involves a limited number of patients and few with MLD. They reflect evolving pretreatment conditioning and improved donor matching. HSCT failures continue; nevertheless, some improvement has been seen. Even when HSCT is successful, however, MLD progresses for a substantial period before implanted cells populate the central nervous system. The best clinical outcomes are obtained when transplantation occurs before clinical symptoms have appeared.

Meuleman et al [2008] reported minimal complications in an adult who underwent reduced intensity conditioning accompanied by mesenchymal stromal cell infusion.

Although the availability of hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood enhances the chances of obtaining a suitable source of donor cells, the results reported to date indicate that considerable problems remain [Martin et al 2006].

Cartier & Aubourg [2008] concluded that “…banked umbilical cord blood is still associated with significant risks of graft failure or GVHD.”

In earlier studies, HSCT for MLD appeared to slow disease progression, but not alleviate peripheral nervous system manifestations [Koç et al 2002]. More recently, however, a 13-year follow up of an individual with juvenile MLD treated with HSCT reported slow disease progression in the two years following transplantation, but subsequent stabilization [Görg et al 2007].

Pierson et al [2008] reported three sibs with MLD who were transplanted with umbilical cord blood at different stages of disease: the oldest experienced disease progression; the two younger children had stable or improved neuropsychologic, neuroimaging, and nerve conduction evaluations over a two-year period of follow up.

Tokimasa et al [2008] evaluated the feasibility of transplants from unrelated donors using a modified preparative procedure. Two persons with MLD showed complete donor chimerism and survived more than a year after transplantation.

Smith et al [2010] followed an adult with psycho-cognitive MLD for 11 years after HSCT. “Cognitive decline, indistinguishable from the natural course of the disease…” was observed.

de Hosson et al [2011] reported treatment of five patients and reviewed the literature. They conclude that in most published cases, HSCT has not been effective for MLD.

Cable et al [2011] report five-year follow up of three sibs with juvenile MLD who were transplanted with unrelated umbilical cord blood. The disease progressed over the first two years post-transplant followed by stabilization of symptoms. The overall outcome depended on the disease status at the age of transplantation with the oldest showing typical disease progression.

In a review of outcomes of persons with MLD undergoing HCST, Orchard & Tolar [2010] concluded that persons with later-onset disease may benefit and presymptomatic children with pathogenic variants typical for late-infantile onset (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) appear to have significant cognitive benefits; however, it is unclear if progressive motor problems will improve.

Lanfranchi et al [2009] reviewed the therapeutic use of stem cells of various origins in a variety of conditions including MLD.

HSCT in a presymptomatic neonate has been reported, but complications were encountered and disease progression was not halted [Bredius et al 2007].

For further information on the specific nursing care requirements for those with MLD who undergo HCST, see Barrell [2007].
Dietary Management

Nutrition. After stabilization, nutritional management is critical. This typically includes instituting a low-protein, high-calorie diet. When available, accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure can guide dietary and caloric prescriptions and eliminate overfeeding [Hauser et al 2011].

Natural protein needs to be carefully titrated to allow for normal growth, while avoiding an excessive propiogenic amino acid load (isoleucine, valine, methionine and threonine) into the pathway. Adjustment of dietary whole (complete)-protein intake, based on clinical and laboratory findings, is needed throughout life for these patients.

The FAO/WHO/UNU report [2007] recommended that safe levels per age group should be the aim for natural protein intake [Baumgartner et al 2014]; however, the individual protein amount prescribed will depend on growth parameters, metabolic stability, stage of renal failure, and other factors. A propiogenic amino acid-deficient formula (e.g., Propimex®-1/2,, XMTVI-1/2, OA-1/2) and protein-free formula (e.g., Pro-Phree®, Duocal®) are given to some individuals to provide extra fluid and calories. As the infant grows, the total protein load is slowly reduced, based on growth, plasma amino acid concentrations, and plasma and urine methylmalonic acid concentrations.

Of note, in patients with low protein tolerance, severe restriction of propiogenic amino acid precursors (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine) can produce a nutritional deficiency state. Furthermore, an iatrogenic essential amino acid deficiency can be induced by the relatively high leucine intake through the MMA formulas that can negatively affect long-term growth and possibly other outcomes [Manoli et al 2016b]. Medical foods should be used in moderation with the relative intake of natural protein to propiogenic amino-acid deficient formula not exceeding a ratio of 1:1. Isolated valine or isoleucine supplementation should be avoided.

These dietary guidelines do not apply for patients with CblC deficiency, a separate disorder in the pathway [Manoli et al 2016a].

Hydroxocobalamin injections. 1.0-mg injections every day to every other day are usually required in individuals who are vitamin B12 responsive. The regimen of B12 injections needs to be individually adjusted according to the patient's age and, possibly, weight.

Carnitine can be given at a dose of 50-100 mg/kg/day, up to approximately 300 mg/kg/day. As a dietary supplement, carnitine may replace the free carnitine pool and enhance the conjugation and excretion of propionylcarnitine. The contribution of propionylcarnitine excretion to the total propionate load is, however, small. The relief of intracellular CoA accretion may be the mechanism by which carnitine supplementation benefits some individuals.

Antibiotics. A variety of antibiotic regimens to reduce the production of propionate from gut flora can be used:

Oral neomycin, 250 mg by mouth 4x/day, was the original regimen reported by Snyderman et al [1972].

Metronidazole at 10-15 mg/kg/day has also been reported.

The intervals at which affected individuals are treated may vary, but a typical course is one week to ten days of treatment per one to three months.

Although oral antibiotics reduce the propionate load that derives from gut flora in affected individuals, chronic antibiotic therapy is not innocuous; it introduces the risk of repopulation of the individual with resistant flora. This could pose a serious infectious threat and could be especially dangerous to individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, since most deaths are related to metabolic decompensation, often precipitated by infection.

Response to antibiotic administration should be determined in treated persons by demonstrating either a decrease in whole body output of methylmalonic acid on antibiotic therapy by a timed urine collection or a decrease in the plasma methylmalonic acid concentration compared to the baseline value for that individual.

Rotating antibiotic regimens may be considered in some persons.

Antioxidants. One individual with isolated methylmalonic acidemia who was documented to be glutathione deficient after a severe metabolic crisis responded to ascorbate therapy [Treacy et al 1996]. Several recent studies document increased oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and specific respiratory chain complex deficiencies in persons with the mut0 enzymatic subtype with methylmalonic acidemia [Schwab et al 2006, Atkuri et al 2009, Chandler et al 2009, de Keyzer et al 2009, Manoli et al 2013], suggesting a potential benefit of treatment with antioxidants or other mitochondria-targeted therapies in these patients.

A regimen of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E has been shown to prevent progression of acute optic nerve involvement in a patient with MMA [Pinar-Sueiro et al 2010] and was shown to attenuate the progression of kidney disease in a mouse model of MMA [Manoli et al 2013].

Organ Transplantation

The number of individuals who have undergone liver and/or kidney transplantation, the detailed effects on the underlying metabolic disorder, and the overall outcome in those undergoing this procedure have yet to be determined [Sloan et al 2015]. Inclusion of enzymatic and genotype information in case series of transplanted patients will allow better comparisons of the outcomes and genotype-phenotype associations that could inform decisions about the indication and timing of transplantation in individual cases.

Liver transplantation. Because most of the metabolic conversion of propionate occurs in the liver, replacing the liver could contribute enough enzyme activity to avert metabolic decompensation. Liver transplantation has been shown to largely protect against metabolic instability but is not curative, and individuals with isolated MMA remain at risk for long-term complications of MMA including renal disease, basal ganglia injury, and neurologic complications [Chakrapani et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Vernon et al 2014]. To date, more than 35 individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia have undergone living donor or cadaveric, orthotopic, or partial liver transplantation or combined liver-kidney transplantation (>20 patients) [van't Hoff et al 1998, van't Hoff, McKiernan et al 1999, Kayler et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Hsui et al 2003, Kasahara et al 2006, Morioka et al 2007, McGuire et al 2011, Niemi et al 2015].

The underlying biochemical parameters and the frequency of metabolic decompensation improved significantly in individuals undergoing liver transplantation despite persistent metabolic abnormalities [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Niemi et al 2015], probably as a result of increased extrahepatorenal methylmalonic acid production primarily from the skeletal muscle [Chandler et al 2007].

Following liver transplantation, some individuals continued to have progressive renal failure as well as high CSF concentrations of methylmalonic acid [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006].

Neurologic complications post-transplant, including globus pallidus injuries [Chakrapani et al 2002, Cosson et al 2008, McGuire et al 2011] suggest that adequate protein restriction and supportive care should be continued after the transplantation.

Earlier transplantation particularly for individuals with mut0 (who are very fragile) is gaining support as surgery techniques and outcomes improve [Niemi et al 2015, Spada et al 2015]. The choice of the kind and timing of the indicated transplant procedure remains challenging for families and treating physicians [Sloan et al 2015]. In the long term, the details regarding development of renal disease, optic nerve atrophy, and neurologic complications will be most important.

Kidney transplantation. Some individuals have received only renal allografts [Van Calcar et al 1998, Lubrano et al 2001, Coman et al 2006, Cosson et al 2008, Clothier et al 2011].

One of the first reports on isolated renal transplantation in mut0 methylmalonic acidemia was claimed to provide enough enzyme activity to normalize methylmalonic acid excretion and allow for increased dietary protein tolerance; however, it was later determined that that patient had cblA deficiency and responded to vitamin B12. Thus, this individual, who has a much milder case, is not representative of the outcomes of isolated renal transplantation in individuals with severe MMA subtypes (mut0 or cblB) [Lubrano et al 2001, Lubrano et al 2007, Lubrano et al 2013].

Elective kidney transplantation, even before the onset of renal disease, has been advocated as a form of “cell therapy” to help stabilize individuals with mut0 MMA [Brassier et al 2013]. However, one patient died after developing hepatoblastoma, neurologic deterioration accompanied by CSF lactic acidosis, and multiorgan failure; a second patient developed progressive neurologic symptoms; and two others developed metabolic decompensations post transplant. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if this is a safe alternative to liver transplantation or liver-kidney transplantation, especially in persons with severe mut0 MMA.
Although most treatment for DDD/MPGNII is ineffective, plasma replacement therapy in patients with pathogenic variants in CFH can control complement activation and prevent ESRD [Licht et al 2006].
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)

HSCT is considered standard of care for children with severe MPS I. Outcome from HSCT is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time of diagnosis (and thus, with the age of the patient). Due to the morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with severe MPS I.

HSCT should be used only in carefully selected children with extensive pretransplantation clinical assessment and counseling in whom systematic long-term monitoring will be possible [Aldenhoven et al 2015a, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Adults have not undergone HSCT.

Pulmonary and cardiac complications in the peri-transplant period appear to be significant predictors of transplant complications [Orchard et al 2010].

In general, the outcome of children undergoing HSCT is varied and depends on the degree of clinical involvement and the child's age at the time of transplantation. It is generally recommended that HSCT be performed before age two years to maximize benefit.

HSCT has been successful in reducing the progression of some findings in children with severe MPS I [Vellodi et al 1997, Guffon et al 1998, Neufeld & Muenzer 2001, Souillet et al 2003, Staba et al 2004, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. Although the heterogeneity of the disease makes the outcomes of HSCT somewhat difficult to interpret, available data show that:

Successful HSCT reduces facial coarseness, and hepatosplenomegaly, improves hearing, and maintains normal heart function;

The skeletal manifestations and corneal clouding continue to progress at the same rate in children treated with HSCT and in untreated children [Weisstein et al 2004, Taylor et al 2008];

The degree to which HSCT relieves neurologic complications other than progressive intellectual decline is not clear: a few reports suggest improvement [Munoz-Rojas et al 2008, Valayannopoulos et al 2010] whereas others do not [Eisengart et al 2013, Aldenhoven et al 2015b]. In children undergoing HSCT before evidence of significant developmental delay (i.e., usually between ages 12 and 18 months), HSCT appears to slow the course of cognitive decline. Children showing significant cognitive impairment prior to undergoing HSCT do not show correction of existing impairment.

HSCT is not curative and does not ameliorate cardiac valvular or skeletal manifestations.

In individuals predicted to have severe MPS I based on the presence of known severe pathogenic variants, use of HSCT resulted in stabilization and improvement of myocardial function with regression of hypertrophy and normalization of chamber dimensions [Braunlin et al 2003]. In that cohort, HSCT did not appear to show significant effects on the presence and progression of valvular involvement.

In part because of increased longevity after HSCT, treated individuals develop increasing pain and stiffness of the hips and knees, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord compression, and progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis [reviewed in Neufeld & Muenzer 2001]. As a result, various orthopedic procedures intended to maintain function and gait have been performed post-HSCT [Masterson et al 1996, Tandon et al 1996].

Pathophysiology. The beneficial effect of HSCT is thought to result from the replacement of deficient macrophages by marrow-derived donor macrophages (Kupffer cells; pulmonary, splenic, nodal, tonsilar, and peritoneal macrophages; and microglial cells) that constitute an ongoing source of normal enzyme capable of gaining access to the various sites of storage [Guffon et al 1998, Prasad & Kurtzberg 2010]. As existing damage is not reversed, early HSCT is critical for optimal effect.

One hypothesis regarding the failure of HSCT in treating skeletal manifestations is the relatively poor vascularity of bone tissues [Taylor et al 2008].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Laronidase (Aldurazyme®) is currently licensed in the US, Europe, and Canada for use in treating non-CNS manifestations of MPS I. The current dose regime involves premedication with an anti-inflammatory and antihistamine drugs and intravenous weekly infusion of 100 U/kg of Aldurazyme® over four hours. Note that the package insert provides details that may differ by country.

The potential effect of Aldurazyme® on the progression of somatic findings and (more importantly) the effect that Aldurazyme® may have when started very early in the treatment of an individual with attenuated disease remain to be answered. The latter is particularly important as early diagnosis is critical. Aldurazyme® does not cross the blood-brain barrier and thus is not expected to influence the CNS disease in severely affected individuals.

A Phase I open label study included ten individuals with attenuated MPS I treated with human α-L-iduronidase and studied over one year. This study showed improvement in liver size, growth, joint mobility, breathing, and sleep apnea. Increased ability to perform daily functions was reported [Kakkis et al 2001]. A six-year follow up of five of the treated individuals showed sustained improvements in joint range of motion and sleep apnea and no progression of heart disease, but evidence of progression of valvular involvement [Sifuentes et al 2007].

A Phase III double-blind placebo-controlled study included 45 individuals with attenuated MPS I treated for 52 weeks with a 26-week placebo phase [Wraith et al 2005]. This study showed statistically significant improvements in pulmonary function and a six-minute walk test and clear biologic effect with reduction in urinary GAG excretion and liver volume. Patients who had significant sleep apnea at the start of the study improved significantly.

Other case reports representing smaller numbers of treated patients show variable responsiveness to treatment. The heterogeneity of treated patients published to date complicates any conclusions that can be drawn. It appears that the ability of ERT to reverse disease symptoms in individuals with attenuated disease relates closely to the burden of disease prior to commencement of treatment.

All published reports indicate that ERT is well tolerated. Although most individuals treated in either clinical trial developed IgG antibodies, no apparent clinical effects have been reported. These antibodies may, however, hinder therapeutic benefit by promoting more rapid clearance of the enzyme. Follow up of individuals who were part of the Phase I and Phase III studies indicates that immune tolerance is eventually reached [Kakavanos et al 2003, Wraith et al 2005].

A Phase III extension trial included 40 of the individuals from the Phase III trial for an additional four years of treatment [Clarke et al 2009].

Urinary GAG levels decreased 60%-70% before the reduction rate plateaued after 12 weeks (with 15% of patients achieving normal values).

Hepatic volume normalized in 92%.

Respiratory function either improved slightly or remained constant.

Shoulder joint mobility increased gradually, with larger increases being seen in persons with more severe disease.

Timed walk measurements remained largely constant.

Quality of life index improved in most (especially with respect to pain).

Visual acuity improved in 24% although corneal clouding was unchanged.

Growth resumed in approximately 70%; although the growth rate increased with treatment, the final height was still reduced.

The most common reactions were of an immune nature; most were not serious, indicating that Aldurazyme® is generally well tolerated. IgG antibodies to Aldurazyme® were produced in 93% of patients, in inverse correlation to urinary GAG excretion levels; they were not, however, directly related to adverse immune reactions.

Other studies have shown:

Improvement in height and cranial diameter with earlier administration of Aldurazyme® (age <1 year) as compared to later administration (age ≥3 years), despite no measurable improvement in growth rate when treatment was started at age one year [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010b];

Improvement of learning performance in one of three patients and noticeable alteration of MRI profile after 3.5-4.5 years of ERT in 3/3 persons with attenuated disease [Valayannopoulos et al 2010]; however, many more individuals would need to be treated to confirm this finding.

Clear differences between early initiation (age 5 months) and late initiation (age 5 years) of ERT in sibs with attenuated MPS I [Coppa et al 2010].

Pathophysiology. The effectiveness of ERT depends on the ability of recombinant enzymes (supplied intravenously) to enter cells and to localize to the lysosome, the appropriate intracellular site [Russell & Clarke 1999].
See Treatment of Manifestations for information regarding ERT.

The experience of hematopoietic stem cell therapy is very limited and has not been well studied.
Dietary management. The goals of dietary management for newly diagnosed infants:

Normal weight gain, linear growth, and head growth

Normal psychomotor development, as assessed by serial examinations and valid developmental screening tools (e.g., Denver Developmental Screening Test II, standardized intelligence testing, validated behavioral inventories) [Muelly et al 2013]

Age-appropriate tolerance of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, with stable plasma BCAA concentrations and BCAA concentration ratios

Avoidance of essential amino acid, fatty acid, and micronutrient deficiencies

Home formula supplies include BCAA-free powder; breast milk or regular infant formula as a natural protein source; and 10-mg/mL solutions of isoleucine, valine, and leucine in distilled water. If the BCAA-free powder is not already fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010], these can be given separately as a combined powder (weight ratio 3:2). Parents maintain a record of intake of calories, leucine, isoleucine, and valine and send dried blood spots by overnight mail for monitoring of amino acid concentrations. The frequency of amino acid monitoring varies by age, metabolic stability, compliance, and regional clinical practice. For rapidly growing infants, monitoring weekly or twice weekly is recommended. Of note, the frequency of amino acid monitoring correlates directly with long-term measures of intelligence [Muelly et al 2013].

Suggested clinical parameters for the asymptomatic infant or young child include the following:

Normal age- and weight-adjusted energy intake

Protein as essential and non-essential amino acids: 2-3 g/kg/day

Appropriate leucine tolerance. The dietary requirement for BCAAs varies as a function of age, growth rate, calorie intake, illness, and residual in vivo BCKAD enzyme activity. In persons with classic MSUD (0%-2% enzyme activity), leucine tolerance in mg/kg/day is 65-85 for neonates, 20-40 for children, and 10-15 for adults (Figure 9) [Strauss et al 2010].

Isoleucine and valine supplements as needed to maintain a plasma leucine-to-valine concentration ratio (mol:mol) of 0.5 or less and a leucine-to-isoleucine ratio of approximately 2.0. Isoleucine supplements can periodically be suspended based on plasma amino acid monitoring, but continuous valine supplementation is prudent because its low affinity for the blood-brain barrier LAT1 transporter makes it especially vulnerable to competitive inhibition by leucine [Smith & Takasato 1986] and its appropriate fortification is directly related to long-term intellectual outcome [Strauss et al 2010, Muelly et al 2013].

The authors recently compiled age-specific (birth to age 4 years) nutrient intakes for Mennonite children with classic MSUD under their care. These data are presented in Table 5, which shows mean (and 25th to 75th percentile range) intakes for energy, total protein, supplemental amino acids, omega-3 fatty acids, and select minerals at different age intervals.

Goals of laboratory monitoring:

Plasma leucine concentration: 150-300 µmol/L with an age-appropriate intake

Plasma isoleucine concentration approximately equal to plasma leucine concentration

Plasma valine concentration at least twofold plasma leucine concentration

Indices of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3 essential fatty acid sufficiency

Neuropsychiatric morbidity is most effectively addressed by presymptomatic diagnosis followed by strict and consistent metabolic control [Muelly et al 2013]. Adolescents and adults with MSUD and ADHD, depression, or anxiety respond favorably to standard psychostimulant and antidepressant medications.

Thiamine treatment. The existence of "thiamine-responsive" BCKAD mutants is controversial. Nevertheless, for any person with MSUD in whom the functional consequences of the pathogenic variant(s) are unknown, a four-week trial of enteral thiamine (50-100 mg/day, divided 2x a day) is reasonable. However, it should be noted that significant changes in dietary therapy (e.g., BCAA or calorie intake) during the treatment period confounds interpretation of a specific thiamine effect.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is an effective therapy for classic MSUD, with removal of dietary restrictions and complete protection from decompensations during illness [Wendel et al 1999, Bodner-Leidecker et al 2000]. Through a collaboration between University of Pittsburgh Children's Hospital and Clinic for Special Children [Strauss et al 2006], 52 individuals with classic MSUD (age 1.9-20.5 years) underwent elective orthotopic liver transplantation between 2004 and 2013. Plasma leucine, isoleucine, and valine concentrations were normal within six hours after transplantation in all individuals and remained so on an unrestricted diet. Metabolic cure was reflected by a sustained increase in weight-adjusted leucine tolerance from 10-40 mg/kg/day to more than 140 mg/kg/day, normalization of plasma concentration relationships among branched-chain and other essential and non-essential amino acids, and metabolic and clinical stability during protein loading and intercurrent illnesses [Strauss et al 2006, Mazariegos et al 2012].

Risks associated with surgery and immune suppression were similar to those in other pediatric liver transplant populations and one person developed EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Currently, disease-free survival and graft survival are 100% in this cohort of 52 patients [Mazariegos et al 2012]; however, deaths and graft failures have been reported among individuals with MSUD transplanted elsewhere during the same time period [Mazariegos, unpublished observations].

Although liver transplantation does not reverse cognitive disability or psychiatric illness in individuals with MSUD [Muelly et al 2013], it does appear to arrest progression of neurocognitive impairment [Shellmer et al 2011] and prevent life-threatening cerebral edema associated with metabolic crisis [Mazariegos et al 2012].
MT-RNR1-related aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. Physicians can inquire about a family history of aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss prior to the administration of aminoglycosides, either systemically or locally (e.g., into the cochlea as treatment for Meniere disease). In individuals with a positive family history, alternatives to aminoglycoside treatment should be considered when possible.

In the US, aminoglycoside use is most common in the neonatal intensive care unit; however, the therapeutic imperative of treatment with antibiotics in a neonatal intensive care unit setting does not always lend itself to pre-treatment screening by molecular genetic testing.

Bitner-Glindzicz et al [2009] report a population frequency of 0.19% for the A to G change in a European cohort of children age seven to nine years who had the pathogenic variant but did not have hearing loss because they were not exposed to aminoglycosides; they make an argument for screening on demand to avoid a preventable cause of hearing loss.

In a recent commentary by Boles & Friedlich [2010], the authors suggest a prospective study into the feasibility of screening for these mitochondrial pathogenic variants (especially in busy neonatal units) in order to identify a preventable form of hearing loss.

In the Tianjin Province in China, screening of 58,000 newborns with both audiologic and genetic methods determined that 1.8% of newborns had a pathogenic mitochondrial DNA variant and only one had hearing loss [Zhang et al 2013].
Thrombocytopenia cannot be prevented; however, the risk of bleeding can be significantly reduced through education regarding drugs that affect platelet function (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Affected individuals should be prepared for surgery or other invasive procedures with platelet transfusions, desmopressin, antifibrinolytic drugs, or eltrombopag according to the individual's platelet count and history of bleeding.

Oral contraceptives are often effective in preventing or controlling menorrhagia; however, oral contraceptives increase the risk of thrombosis, which has also been described in individuals with MYH9RD. Thus, the balance between risks and benefits associated with use of oral contraceptives should be considered [Heller et al 2006, Nishiyama et al 2008, Girolami et al 2011].

Regular dental care and good oral hygiene are essential to prevent gingival bleeding.
The major management goal is to prevent episodes of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this goal may be achieved by avoiding sustained fatiguing physical exertion.
Exercise temporarily alleviates myotonia (the warm-up effect). A long-term beneficial effect of gymnastics is sometimes reported by affected individuals; the effect has not been systematically studied.
Prevention of primary manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations) is possible when the diagnosis is made promptly after birth via molecular genetic testing. A genetic diagnosis may be performed after a few days; treatment and monitoring may then start immediately.
There is no way to prevent primary manifestations of this disorder. Note: The effect of therapy in mildly affected children with pathogenic variants that result in residual enzyme activity is still under investigation.
Neonatal screening for thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine (T4) levels with appropriate thyroid replacement can prevent systemic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Variable results have been reported with HSCT. Shah et al [2005] reported successful HSCT for NPD-A. Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver and spleen volumes. However, stabilization of the neurologic component following HSCT has not been reported; therefore, any attempts to perform HSCT in individuals with clinically evident neurologic disease should be considered experimental. The morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT limit its use.

Enzyme replacement therapy. See Therapies Under Investigation.
Skin care in individuals with OCA1 is guided by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight.

For individuals with OCA1A, the white skin is completely devoid of melanin and needs to be protected whenever exposed to the sun. Sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be substantial in very sensitive individuals, and exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually substantial in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves, pants, and socks) and sun screens with a high SPF value (blocks with SPF 45-50+). Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing validity of numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

For individuals with OCA1B, the amount of skin pigmentation varies and the use of sun screen should correlate with skin pigmentation and the ability to tan. Skin that burns with sun exposure needs protection. An early (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted.
No dietary or ophthalmologic procedures or exercises will prevent or alter the clinical features of albinism.
All primary manifestations are present at birth. To date no factors that can influence their expression have been identified.
In neonatal-onset OTC deficiency diagnosed prenatally, prospective intravenous (IV) treatment with ammonia scavengers within a few hours of birth (before the ammonia level rises) can prevent a hyperammonemic crisis and coma.

Later on, prevention of hyperammonemic episodes is focused on restriction of dietary protein through low-protein diet and administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs balanced with supplementation of essential amino acids (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Antifibrinolytics should be used to prevent bleeding for surgical and dental procedures, childbirth, and other invasive procedures. Antifibrinolytics can be administered IV, PO, or topically, the latter especially during dental procedures.

Women who have heavy menstrual bleeding often benefit from continuous or intermittent prophylactic use of the antifibrinolytics tranexamic acid and epsilon-aminocaproic acid.
The ability to prevent the primary manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis (regardless of genetic cause) is limited.

The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation. If a low-fat diet is chosen, extra attention to providing fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) is needed.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals may minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]. Anti-oxidant therapy is very low risk and low cost, and thus, an appropriate first course of action [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Cessation/abstinence from smoking and alcohol, the strongest recommendation for all persons with pancreatitis. Substantial evidence shows that oxidative stress from alcohol and tobacco smoke is inherently linked to progression and pain in pancreatitis [Schoenberg et al 1995, Petrov 2010, Tandon & Garg 2011]. This observation provides a pathophysiologic link for alcohol and tobacco smoking as risk factors, and also suggests that nutrition control may be an important preventive measure. Smoking is also a major risk for pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Note: Men with one high-risk CLDN2 variant and women with two high-risk CLDN2 variants should be strongly urged to stop drinking immediately and directed to effective treatment programs.

Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels & Whitcomb 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001].

Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack.

Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].
For patients with known mutation of PAX2, regular monitoring of blood pressure, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, and urine analysis and serum studies of renal function are indicated to allow for early diagnosis, as more than 90% of affected patients will develop ESRD.
No curative therapy is presently available for PBD, ZSS.
There are no known effective measures to prevent the primary manifestations of PC. Consistent, regular care of the conditions is necessary. Reduction of trauma, friction, and shear forces to the skin and nails does little to reduce symptoms.
Educate parents about the factors that elicit a crisis and the early signs of decompensation.

Carry an informational statement regarding the child's disorder and the appropriate treatment in an emergency setting.

Minimize intercurrent infections as environmental stressors.
The effective treatment of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy requires lifelong pharmacologic supplements of pyridoxine; the rarity of the disorder has precluded controlled studies to evaluate the optimal dose.

The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for pyridoxine is 0.5 mg for infants and 2 mg for adults. In general, individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy have excellent seizure control when treated with 50-100 mg of pyridoxine per day. Seizures in some individuals are controlled on much smaller doses and others require somewhat higher doses [Basura et al 2009, Stockler et al 2011].

Affected individuals may have exacerbations of clinical seizures and/or encephalopathy during an acute illness, such as gastroenteritis or a febrile respiratory infection. To prevent such an exacerbation in these circumstances, the daily dose of pyridoxine may be doubled for several days until the acute illness resolves.

Studies have indicated that higher doses may enhance intellectual development; it has been suggested that a dose of 15-30 mg/kg/day may be optimal [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011] and that the dosage should not exceed 500 mg/day [Stockler et al 2011].

Such therapy is required for life; affected individuals are metabolically dependent on the vitamin, rather than pyridoxine deficient. Compliance with pyridoxine supplementation is critical, as status epilepticus may develop within days of pyridoxine discontinuation.
Always maintain good hydration.

Avoid activities that potentially increase blood viscosity (e.g., mountain climbing, scuba diving, smoking).

For those at increased risk for thromboembolic events: take precautions in higher-risk situations such as long-distance airline flights.
Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation should be the primary therapy in individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency unless cirrhosis is present, in which case LTX should be considered.

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. LTX appears difficult to justify in patients with mild, intermittently manifesting ATP8B1 deficiency. The role of surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation in mild ATP8B1 deficiency is unclear.
Recommendations can all be found in Treatment of Manifestations, specifically in the sub-sections on Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation and Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis.
The main preventative treatment is to maintain adequate hydration status and to enhance calcium oxalate solubility with exogenous citrate and neutral phosphates as described in Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Some women at increased risk for breast cancer consider prophylactic mastectomy, especially if breast tissue is dense or if repeated breast biopsies have been necessary. Prophylactic mastectomy reduces the risk of breast cancer by 90% in women at high risk [Hartmann et al 1999]. Note: The recommendation of prophylactic mastectomy is a generalization for women at increased risk for breast cancer from a variety of causes, not just from PHTS.

No direct evidence supports the routine use of agents such as tamoxifen or raloxifene in individuals with PHTS to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer. Physicians should discuss the limitations of the evidence and the risks and benefits of chemoprophylaxis with each individual. In addition, the clinician must discuss the increased risk of endometrial cancer associated with tamoxifen use in a population already at increased risk for endometrial cancer.
No measures that eliminate disease manifestations in a symptomatic person or prevent them from appearing in an asymptomatic person have been identified.
Although not specifically studied in PJS, prophylactic mastectomy may be considered to manage the increased risk for breast cancer based on the family history or other clinical factors. Prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy to prevent gynecologic malignancy in women may be considered. In some disorders with a high risk for malignancy (e.g., HNPCC), evidence supports this strategy [Schmeler et al 2006].
See Treatment of Manifestations.
No therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease is known.
Prompt treatment of ACTH, TSH, GH, LH, and FSH deficiency prevents the consequences of these hormone deficiencies.
Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) is advised. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is appropriate.
Acute attack

Attacks are less likely to occur in the future if exacerbating factors are corrected or avoided.

Recurrent premenstrual attacks of acute porphyrias, including VP, can be prevented with GnRH analogues [Anderson et al 1990].

Weekly or biweekly hemin infusions may prevent frequent noncyclical attacks; however, published experience is lacking.

Photocutaneous. Prevention of the skin manifestations of VP requires protection from sunlight.
Dietary management. The mainstay nutritional intervention is modification of diet to control the intake of propiogenic substrates (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine), while ensuring normal protein synthesis and preventing protein catabolism, amino acid deficiencies, and growth restriction.

Important note: Dietary management needs to be directed by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician.

Recommended protein intake depends on age of the patient (see Table 11 in Baumgartner et al [2014]).

The ratio of natural source protein to medical foods varies depending on the individual’s clinical status, laboratory parameters, and growth trajectory [Sutton et al 2012].

Laboratory parameters useful in guiding nutritional intervention can include the following:

Pre-prandial plasma essential amino acids

Plasma albumin

Prealbumin

Hemoglobin

Plasma ammonia

Urinary ketones, plasma lactic acid, and methylcitric acid to monitor and adjust nutritional management

Plasma vitamin D

Essential fatty acid profile

Additional calories can be provided using protein-free formulas.

G-tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence in chronic management of PA.

Since the number of acute decompensations negatively correlates with the intellectual quotient in patients with PA [Grünert et al 2012], prevention and proactive management of metabolic crises can be an important point of intervention to maximize favorable clinical outcomes.

Medications

Levocarnitine. The optimal dose of levocarnitine has not been established; doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/kg per day have been reported [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

When calculating the daily dose of levocarnitine, one needs to consider the presence of this pharmaceutic compound in medical foods and the maximum daily dose in older patients.

Levocarnitine can be given enterally and intravenously.

Antimicrobial therapy. Oral metronidazole has been shown to reduce propionic acid production by intestinal gut flora [Thompson et al 1990, Mellon et al 2000]. One regimen uses a one-week-on, three-weeks-off approach [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012].

Biotin supplementation. There is no consensus regarding the use of biotin supplementation nor the optimal dose in the treatment of PA. Given biotin’s favorable profile, a short therapeutic trial may be considered [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Whether a biotin-responsive form of PA exists is not known [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Management during episodes of metabolic decompensation includes:

Avoidance of fasting (e.g., using intravenous dextrose).

Increasing calorie intake to prevent catabolism (e.g., intravenous fat emulsion).

When enteral feeding cannot be provided for a prolonged period of time, judicious use of total parenteral nutrition may include standard amino acid mixes providing age-appropriate recommended daily allowance of protein [Sutton et al 2012]. In rare circumstances, specialized amino acid mixes with reduced content of isoleucine, valine, threonine and methionine are necessary.

Organ transplantation. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) may be indicated in those individuals who, despite adequate medical treatment, still experience frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable hyperammonemia, and poor growth [Barshes et al 2006, Charbit-Henrion et al 2015].

Benefits of OLT include decrease in the frequency of metabolic decompensations, improved quality-adjusted life years, increased life expectancy, life-time cost savings [Vara et al 2011, Li et al 2015], and reversal of dilated cardiomyopathy [Yorifuji et al 2004, Romano et al 2010].

Liver transplantation has been performed from unrelated donors [Barshes et al 2006, Romano et al 2010] and from heterozygous related donors [Morioka et al 2005, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012].

Continuous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Sato et al 2009, Kasahara et al 2012], and left ventricular assist devices have been used while waiting for OLT [Ameloot et al 2011].

OLT in patients with PA is not curative. It does not completely protect against a metabolic stroke, hyperammonemia, or metabolic decompensations.

Life-long post-transplant management is recommended [Yorifuji et al 2004, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continued protein restriction and L-carnitine supplementation after OLT is advocated by several authors [Saudubray et al 1999, Yorifuji et al 2004, Kasahara et al 2012].

Sedation and perioperative management. Anesthetic aspects of perioperative management of patients with PA have been infrequently discussed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Involvement of a metabolic specialist perioperatively to ensure adequate hydration and caloric management can help minimize the risk of decompensations.

Emergency situations. Emergency letters, bracelets, and emergency information in smartphones help facilitate appropriate emergency care by healthcare providers unfamiliar with propionic acidemia.
Gout and renal lithiasis caused by chronically elevated serum and urine uric acid, the result of purine overproduction, can be reduced by a xanthine oxidase inhibitor.

Some neurologic attributes of the severe form of the disease may be preventable by early treatment with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), although this is experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).
Prevention of primary manifestations in hereditary pancreatitis is limited. The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis:

Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation.

Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals are recommended to minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation.

Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001].
In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not recommended for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes, since the 1%-3% yearly risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated (<1%) yearly risk for thrombosis [Martinelli et al 2000a, Middeldorp & van Hylckama Vlieg 2008, Berg et al 2011].

Prophylactic anticoagulation may be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians consensus guidelines [Guyatt et al 2012] (full text).
Obesity may be prevented if the diet, exercise, and supervision program described in Treatment of Manifestations is instituted. Early diagnosis allows the clinician to begin anticipatory guidance concerning the natural history of PWS, and in particular the nutritional phases, informing the family about the risk of obesity and the need to monitor weight increase and to restrict calories beginning around 18-36 months of age.

If started at a young age, growth hormone treatment, along with good dietary control, may retard obesity and the high proportion of fat mass. It may also prevent development of the typical facial appearance and improve motor milestones.
Weight control, avoidance of smoking, and aggressive management of hypertension and lipid disorders may reduce the risk of vascular complications by reducing the risk of comorbidity resulting from atherosclerosis. However, reduction in risk resulting from these measures has not been confirmed in controlled studies.
Dietary restriction of phytanic acid to avoid the consequences of phytanic acid accumulation over time may benefit individuals with milder forms of RCDP.
No curative therapy currently exists for Refsum disease.

By restricting dietary intake of phytanic acid or eliminating phytanic acid by plasmapheresis or lipid apheresis, plasma phytanic acid concentrations can be reduced by 50% to 70%, typically to about 100 to 300 µmol/L. This reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration successfully resolves symptoms of ichthyosis, sensory neuropathy, and ataxia in approximately that order. However, it is uncertain whether treatment affects the progression of the retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and deafness [Gibberd & Wierzbicki 2000]. Although data are limited, it appears that despite strict dietary treatment the retinitis pigmentosa is very slowly progressive [BP Leroy, unpublished observations].

A high-calorie diet is necessary to avoid mobilization of stored lipids, including phytanic acid, into the plasma.

Postoperative care requires parenteral nutrition with solutions that do not contain phytanic acid, e.g., Intralipid® available in 10%, 20%, and 30% concentrations, which are all based on soybean oil and egg yolk phospholipid.
See Treatment of Manifestations, Pharmacologic treatment.
Beta blockers. Beta blockers are clinically indicated in all asymptomatic individuals, including those who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Males who have a pathogenic variant and who have been asymptomatic before 40 years are at low risk of cardiac events. In these individuals the necessity of beta-blockers can be discussed [Locati et al 1998].

ICD. In general, ICD implantation is not indicated for asymptomatic individuals with LQTS who have not been tried on beta blocker therapy. Prophylactic ICD therapy can be considered for asymptomatic individuals suspected to be at very high risk, such as asymptomatic individuals with two or more pathogenic variants on molecular testing [Priori et al 2013]. LQTS-related sudden death in a close relative is not an indication for an ICD in surviving relatives [Kaufman et al 2008].
See Therapies Under Investigation.
No therapy is known to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

No drugs have been proven to provide symptomatic relief of ataxia; however, minor tranquilizers may show some benefits in motor coordination in those persons who experience anxiety.
Management of affected individuals remains supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.
Preventive measures if necessary include avoidance of fasting longer than 12 hours (during childhood) and an age-appropriate heart-healthy diet. Age-appropriate shorter fasting periods would be required in infants and toddlers. No dietary fat restriction or specific supplements are recommended in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].
Ongoing education is essential to help minimize morbidity and mortality. Education comprises a regular review of interventions including the following:

Maintaining hydration and avoiding extremes of climate

Monitoring for signs and symptoms requiring acute medical intervention

Early detection of chronic complications

Updates on new therapies

Disease-modulating therapies are discussed in several reviews [Vichinsky 2012, Kassim & DeBaun 2013, Ware et al 2017].

Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. The initial goal of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy varies depending on indication but typically is to maintain the percentage of HbS <30% and suppress reticulocytosis. Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy may be warranted for the following [Yawn et al 2014, Howard 2016, Ware et al 2017]:

Primary prevention of stroke in individuals with an abnormal transcranial Doppler

Prevention of stroke recurrence

Treatment of chronic pain refractory to other therapies

Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic renal failure

Recurrent episodes of ACS

Severe end-organ damage

Complications of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy include: iron overload, alloimmunization, and, rarely, infection. To limit alloimmunization and transfusion reactions, extended matching of red blood cell antigens should be performed and blood products should be leuko-reduced (removal of white blood cells from the transfusion product). Red blood cells antigen matched at the full Rh locus (D, C, E) and Kell have been suggested to decrease alloimmunization rates, as well as other alleles when possible [Lasalle-Williams et al 2011]. Approaches to decrease alloimmunization in the future include obtaining a better understanding of the process of alloimmunization as well as molecular genotyping. Defining antigens molecularly has multiple benefits including the ability to type cells when serologic reagents are not available [Yazdanbakhsh et al 2012, Matteocci & Pierelli 2014].

Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea), until recently the only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, is only approved for adults. Hydroxyurea benefits individuals with SCD via several mechanisms [Platt 2008, Ware 2010] including:

Induction of HbF synthesis resulting in decreased sickling and improved red-cell survival;

Reduction of white blood cell (WBC), reticulocyte and platelet counts;

Metabolism into nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator;

Overall improvement in blood flow;

Reduction of vascular inflammation.

Multiple NIH consensus statements have noted strong evidence to support its routine use in adults [Brawley et al 2008, Yawn et al 2014]. It has been demonstrated that hydroxyurea therapy is safe to use in children as young as nine months with no decrease in immune function [Ware 2010, Rogers et al 2011, Wang et al 2011, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Lederman et al 2014]. It is now very strongly recommended that every individual with S/S and S/β0-thalassemia age nine months or older be offered treatment with hydroxyurea [Yawn et al 2014]. This early initiation decreases clinical events [Thornburg et al 2012]. In addition, use of hydroxyurea has been associated with a decrease in healthcare costs [Wang et al 2013].

Hydroxyurea can have potentially significant toxicity, including myelosuppression. Individuals treated with hydroxyurea must be monitored closely with CBCs and reticulocyte counts. In order to balance the benefits with potential toxicities of hydroxyurea, many suggest a careful titration of the drug to find a dosing for each affected person that provides an appropriate reduction in WBC count without toxicity [Ware 2010, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Yawn et al 2014].

Glutamine has just received FDA approval for the prevention of acute complications in individuals age five years and older with SCD, whether on hydroxyurea or not. Due to its antioxidant properties and in vitro activity, glutamine has long been considered of potential benefit in the treatment of SCD. Though not published, a multicenter placebo-controlled clinical trial suggests that chronic use of oral glutamine can decrease the frequency of sickle cell pain-related episodes (clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01179217). Having a second FDA-approved drug opens the door to combination therapy using multiple agents.

Stem cell transplantation from a healthy donor or one with sickle cell trait can be curative in individuals with SCD and while the number of matched-sib transplants continues to rise, there is rapid evolution in the use of alternate donors. Children with SCD receiving stem cell transplantation using a matched sib donor can expect a 92% chance of cure with an overall survival of 95%. [King & Shenoy 2014, Nickel et al 2014, Walters 2015]. These phenomenal outcomes are balanced by potential long-term consequences including chronic-graft-versus host disease and infertility. There is debate now as to who should be transplanted and when. Transplanting with a matched sib early in life can subvert a life of debilitating complications and decreasing end-organ function – the latter making transplant at a later age more difficult. Notably, pediatric providers may overly worry about the risks of transplant, while not appreciating the high morbidity of sickle cell disease manifestations in adulthood. However, the comparative long-term benefits of supportive care (including hydroxyurea and improvements in sickle cell management) versus transplantation are not yet known.

Despite the great successes associated with transplantation, it is estimated that fewer than 30% of individuals with SCD have suitable matched-sib donors, few have suitable matched unrelated donors, and transplant for adults with SCD has been far more difficult due to regime-related toxicity. The field of transplantation for SCD is currently undergoing rapid expansion. Thus, the use of alternate donors (including unrelated donors and haploidentical donors) and cord blood is an active area of research [Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016, Walters et al 2016].

Initial myeloablative regimes yielded too much toxicity for older individuals with SCD; the recent development of less toxic transplant regimens makes stem cell transplantation a more acceptable option for older individuals [Tisdale et al 2013].

While unrelated cord blood transplants are falling out of favor due to the high rate of graft failure, there is an increased use and success of haploidentical transplants, vastly broadening the number of individuals who could potentially be cured [Gluckman 2013, Tisdale et al 2013, Walters 2015, Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016].

Gene therapy. As all allogenic transplants for SCD present a risk for graft-versus-host disease, there has been an explosion of research in gene therapy for SCD. While both gene editing and gene addition approaches are being activity pursued, only viral mediated gene therapy approaches are being used in clinical trials [Goodman & Malik 2016, Cavazzana et al 2017].

The criteria, risks, and benefits of transplantation are changing rapidly; thus, it is important for families and providers to discuss the risks and benefits with a transplantation center with expertise in SCD.
Chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Currently, no treatment for BSCL2-related neurologic disorders that reverses or slows the natural disease process exists.
Avoidance of cow’s milk lessens the severity of gastroenteritis and reduces exacerbations of thrombocytopenia (in older children).
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX). The only effective therapy for the neuropathy of familial TTR amyloidosis is orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX), which removes the main production site of the amyloidogenic protein. Successful OLTX results in rapid disappearance of variant TTR protein from the serum and thus halts the progression of peripheral and/or autonomic neuropathy. It has been shown by pre- and postoperative sural nerve biopsy that myelinated nerve fibers regenerate after OLTX [Ikeda et al 1997].

Recommended clinical criteria for OLTX in individuals with TTR amyloid polyneuropathy [Takei et al 1999, Adams et al 2000] include the following:

Age younger than 60 years

Disease duration less than five years

Either polyneuropathy that is restricted to the lower extremities or autonomic neuropathy alone

No significant cardiac or renal dysfunction

As of the end of June 2010, 1913 individuals with familial TTR amyloidosis, approximately 90% of whom were heterozygous for the Val30Met variant, had undergone liver transplantation (www.fapwtr.org/ram_fap.htm) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003, Herlenius et al 2004, Stangou & Hawkins 2004]. The five-year survival rate was significantly higher in individuals with the Val30Met variant than in those with other pathogenic variants (80% vs 57%, p=0.001) [Ericzon et al 2000, Ikeda et al 2003]. The most common causes of postoperative death were cardiovascular events (29%) and septicemia (26%) [Ikeda et al 2003].

Poor outcomes of transplanted individuals based on ten years' experience [Ikeda et al 2003] include:

Poor nutritional condition (mean body mass index <600)

Severe polyneuropathy (Norris score <55/81)

Permanent urinary incontinence

Marked postural hypotension

A fixed pulse rate

OLTX is not effective in the non-neuropathic forms of familial TTR amyloidosis (i.e., cardiac amyloidosis, leptomeningeal amyloidosis, and familial oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis [FOLMA]).

Cardiomyopathy was reported to progress after OLTX in some individuals with specific pathogenic variants other than Val30Met (Ala36Pro, Glu42Gly, and Ser77Tyr) (see Table 5) [Dubrey et al 1997, Stangou et al 1998, Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. It is presumed that amyloid cardiomyopathy may accelerate after OLTX by progressive deposition of wild-type TTR on a template of amyloid derived from variant TTR [Yazaki et al 2000, Hörnsten et al 2004]. Therefore, it is critical to assess the severity of cardiac amyloidosis when considering OLTX [Coutinho et al 2004, Juneblad et al 2004].

Individuals with leptomeningeal involvement may not be candidates for liver transplantation because amyloidogenic TTR variants that cause intracranial amyloid deposits are considered to be derived from the choroid plexus.

Vitreous opacities may also progress after OLTX, possibly as the result of de novo production of variant TTR in the retinal epithelium.

Note: Because liver involvement in familial TTR amyloidosis is minimal, the liver of an individual with familial TTR amyloidosis can be grafted into an individual with liver cancer or end-stage liver disease (so-called "domino" liver transplantation). Since 1995, more than 330 domino liver transplantations have been performed. Several individuals who had received a liver graft from heterozygotes with familial TTR amyloidosis developed symptomatic systemic TTR amyloidosis [Stangou et al 2005, Goto et al 2006, Barreiros et al 2010, Lladó et al 2010, Obayashi et al 2011, Adams et al 2011]
In affected individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration, prevention of primary manifestations is accomplished by weekly phlebotomy to deplete iron stores (see Treatment of Manifestations).
As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of TH-deficient DRD; thus, levodopa treatment from early infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations in this mild form of TH deficiency.

Levodopa therapy from early infancy may prevent manifestations of some symptoms and signs in TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay; however, no levodopa trials in the early postnatal period of infants with this type of TH deficiency and biallelic TH pathogenic variants have been reported.
Arrhythmias in Timothy syndrome must be prevented with the standard therapy described in Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Treatment with nitisinone (Orfadin®) should begin as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed.
Individuals with the more severe forms are typically placed on a low-fat formula, with supplemental calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT). A variety of strategies for the low-fat diet are used, ranging from 13%-39% of calories as total fat, with an additional 15%-18% of calories supplied as MCT oil in those most strictly restricted for long-chain fats [Solis & Singh 2002].

Extra MCT has demonstrated benefit in older individuals with long-chain defects who have exercise intolerance. Gillingham et al [2006] demonstrated improved exercise tolerance in individuals given 0.5 g/kg lean body weight 20 minutes prior to exercise. [Behrend et al 2012].

Triheptanoin has been used in a few individuals with the goal of providing calories as well as providing anaplerotic carbons; however, the efficacy remains controversial. Formal clinical trials of triheptanoin are in progress (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Severe exercise (e.g., military training) has unmasked symptoms in previously asymptomatic adults [Hoffman et al 2006, Laforêt et al 2009], emphasizing that exercise should be guided by the individual’s tolerance level.

The use of carnitine supplementation is controversial [Arnold et al 2009]: consensus as to whether additional carnitine is detrimental or efficacious has not been established.
Initiation of regular IVIG at the time of diagnosis to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Individuals with type 3 VWD are often given prophylactic infusions of VWF/FVIII concentrates to prevent musculoskeletal bleeding and subsequent joint damage.
See Treatment of Manifestations for discussion of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT).

Infection

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii (PCP) is indicated for infants with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as they are at risk of developing PCP. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy. Individuals with recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic use.

Intravenous immune globulin. Replacement therapy with IVIgG by age six months is administered every three to four weeks or subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis. IVIgG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies).

Routine childhood immunizations. Live vaccines should be avoided. Other “non-live” vaccinations can be given safely to individuals with a WAS-related disorder but may not generate protective levels of antibody.

Bleeding

Splenectomy. Splenectomy is palliative, and while it may be life-saving in an individual with severe bleeding, it does not prevent any of the other possible complications of the disorder [Mullen et al 1993]. In a survey of clinical immunologists performed by the European and Pan American Groups on Immunodeficiencies, respondents from centers treating the highest numbers of individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome did not recommend splenectomy [Conley et al 2003]. Because splenectomy significantly increases the risk of life-threatening infections in males with XLT [Albert et al 2011] as well as in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who subsequently undergo HCT [Ozsahin et al 2008], it should be used with caution.

Males who have had splenectomy must take antibiotics routinely for the rest of their lives because of the increased risk for overwhelming infection.

Platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions should be administered judiciously (e.g., for significant bleeding and surgical procedures).
Medical therapy is recommended for asymptomatic patients to prevent development of symptoms (see Treatment of Manifestations).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) ) is an option for boys and adolescents in early stages of symptom set 1 who have evidence of brain involvement on MRI.

Because HSCT is associated with a 20% risk for morbidity and mortality, it is recommended only for individuals with evidence of brain involvement by MRI but minimal neuropsychologic findings (performance IQ >80) and normal clinical neurologic examination.

HSCT is not recommended for individuals with severe neurologic and neuropsychologic dysfunction (i.e., performance IQ <80) [Shapiro et al 2000, Baumann et al 2003, Loes et al 2003, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2005, Resnick et al 2005].
It is recommended that boys with known or suspected XLP and hypogammaglobulinemia receive regular intravenous (IV) IgG replacement therapy every three to four weeks until definitive treatment can be provided.

HCT is the only curative therapy and should be considered in children with confirmed XLP as early in life as possible.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Prompt immune reconstitution is required for survival of children with X-SCID [Myers et al 2002]. BMT was first successful in 1968 and remains the standard means of immune reconstitution. The general experience is that genotypically HLA-identical marrow transplantation restores T-cell immunity in more than 90% of unconditioned individuals with SCID, although B-cell reconstitution occurs in only a limited subset of these individuals [O'Reilly et al 1989, Buckley et al 1999].

Although many centers have expertise in performing bone marrow transplantation in individuals with malignancy, the special issues arising in bone marrow transplantation for X-SCID require involvement of immunodeficiency specialists for an optimal outcome. Individuals with SCID have no immune system capable of rejecting the graft and, therefore, do not typically require fully ablative conditioning; regimens that do not employ agents at doses resulting in long-lasting marrow aplasia are referred to as reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens. Additionally, protocols including alpha/beta T-cell depletion in graft preparations are now being used to improve unrelated donor graft outcomes.

HLA-matched bone marrow transplantation from a relative is preferred; however, most individuals lack a matched, related donor.

For infants who do not have a matched, related donor, haploidentical parental bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T cells can be used [Buckley et al 1999, Pai et al 2014]. In this technique, the bone marrow is depleted of T cells in order to remove mismatched T cells, which would react against the baby's tissues and cause graft versus host disease (GVHD).

Matched, unrelated donor transplantation of peripherally harvested bone marrow (or less frequently cord blood hematopoietic stem cells) in association with partially myeloablative or RIC regimens is now being used at specialized transplantation centers, although GVHD can be a significant problem in some individuals.

Mismatched T cells can react against the baby's tissues and cause GVHD. Cord blood from normal infants is now being banked; frozen cells can be thawed and used in other unrelated donor transplants.

The best timing for BMT is immediately after birth because young infants are less likely than older infants to have had serious infections or failure to thrive. The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) found in 25 centers over the last decade significantly better outcomes (>90% survival) in children receiving transplantation in early infancy (age <3.5 months) without prior infections even after alternative donor grafts were used [Pai et al 2014]. Younger infants also have more rapid engraftment, fewer post-transplantation infections, less GVHD, and shorter hospitalizations than those in whom BMT is delayed [Kane et al 2001, Myers et al 2002]. The optimal age and RIC regimen in young infants, however, remains to be determined. BMT after age 3.5 months and/or a history of infections resulted in a dramatic decrease in survival post transplantation.

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells, chronic warts, and lymphocyte dysregulation.

Administration of immunoglobulin. Long-term periodic administration of immunoglobulin may be required in those who fail to develop allogeneic, functional B lymphocytes after transplantation.

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has been evaluated in individuals not eligible for BMT, after failed BMT, and in individuals with only haploidentical donors. Gene therapy performed using autologous bone marrow stem/progenitor cells transduced with gamma-retroviral vectors expressing a therapeutic gene resulted in significant T-cell reconstitution in the majority of young infants with X-SCID, but only limited success in those with severe infections at the time of transplantation [reviewed in Fischer et al 2011, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014].

B-cell reconstitution was less consistent with roughly half being able to discontinue gamma-globulin replacement therapy.

Unfortunately, between two early trials, five of 20 individuals developed leukemia-like disease requiring ALL-type therapy due to retroviral insertional activation of cellular growth regulatory genes [Howe et al 2008, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2010, Deichmann et al 2011]. Newer, second-generation vectors utilizing self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral vectors have shown similar efficacy in T-cell reconstitution with improved safety design, no adverse events reported in nine individuals over three years post transplantation, and significantly fewer insertions found in genes implicated in lymphoproliferation [Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. Clinical trials using an SIN-lentiviral vector in conjunction with busulfan-based partial myeloablative conditioning are underway for both infants and older individuals who have failed BMT. Initial results in a small number of older individuals have demonstrated sustained myeloid viral marking and restoration of T, B, and NK cell numbers and function [Author, personal communication].

See also Therapies Under Investigation.
See Treatment of Manifestations.
Bacterial Infections

Gammaglobulin substitution therapy is the mainstay of treatment for individuals with XLA. Most individuals in the United States are given approximately 400 mg/kg of gammaglobulin every four weeks. In the past, the majority of individuals received their gammaglobulin by intravenous infusion every two to four weeks. In the last few years, an increasing proportion of individuals have been receiving gammaglobulin by weekly subcutaneous injections. Both routes provide good therapeutic concentrations of serum IgG. The choice of route may depend on factors related to the convenience of the physician and patient [Berger 2004].

A variety of brands of gammaglobulin are available; none has proven to be superior to others as measured by efficacy or side effects. Occasionally, individuals with XLA have a reaction to gammaglobulin, consisting of headaches, chills, backache, or nausea. These reactions are more likely to occur when the individual has an intercurrent viral infection or when the brand of gammaglobulin has been changed. Such reactions may disappear over time.

Chronic prophylactic antibiotics are used in some centers for prevention of bacterial infections.
The following methods are used to prevent infection:

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP) is indicated because infants with HIGM1 are at high risk of developing PCP during the first two years of life. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy.

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG). IVIG replacement should be considered by the time the child is age six months, as individuals with HIGM1 cannot generate antibodies to encapsulated bacteria naturally and are at risk for overwhelming infection from these organisms. IVIG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies) that is typically given every three to four weeks or can be given subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis.

Additional antibiotic prophylaxis should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

Routine childhood immunizations (killed vaccines) may be safely administered but do not preclude the need for IVIG replacement.
Treatment of XP depends on early diagnosis and immediate, aggressive avoidance of sun and other UV exposure. This involves avoiding or minimizing outdoor exposure at times when UV radiation is present (when the sun is out or during daytime through clouds).

Clinical suspicion of XP should prompt immediate sun-protective measures until the diagnosis is confirmed or an alternative explanation is determined.

Individuals should be educated to protect all body surfaces from UV radiation by wearing protective clothing including hats, long sleeves, long pants and gloves, broad-spectrum, high sun-protective factor (SPF) sunscreens, UV-absorbing glasses, and long hair styles. The eyes should be protected by wearing UV-absorbing glasses with side shields. Some individuals have custom-made hats with UV-absorbing face shields to permit visibility outdoors while protecting the face from UV.

Because the cells of individuals with XP are hypersensitive to UVA and UVB (found in sunlight) and UVC (found in some artificial light sources), it is useful to measure UV light in an individual's home, school, or work environment with a light meter so that high levels of environmental UV (e.g., halogen lamps) can be identified and eliminated if possible. While no standards exist for perfectly safe UV exposure in individuals with XP, the use of UV meters can alert individuals to unexpected sources of high levels of environmental UV.
The only curative therapy for ZAP70-related CID is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Extrapolated data show that the outcome of HSCT in children with SCID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of infections [Pai et al 2014]. Children with ZAP70-related CID have been successfully transplanted using a variety of donors including haploidentical donors and unrelated umbilical cord blood [Noraz et al 2000, Elder et al 2001, Hönig et al 2012, Cuvelier et al 2016].

Outcomes are the best with HLA-matched, related donors.

If an HLA-matched, related donor is not available, alternatives include:

Matched unrelated donor;

Umbilical cord blood donor;

Haploidentical parental bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood stem cells that have been T-cell depleted.

In contrast to individuals with SCID, individuals with ZAP70-related CID are typically treated with a chemotherapeutic conditioning regimen prior to HSCT, although some individuals have received unconditioned transplants with variable success, suggesting that conditioning may not be essential in some circumstances [Hönig et al 2012, Kim et al 2013, Cuvelier et al 2016].

The largest series of eight individuals with ZAP70-related CID who received HSCT using a variety of stem cell sources showed the following:

All individuals were alive at a median of 13.5 years of follow up.

Two-thirds of the individuals who did not receive conditioning failed to have myeloid engraftment but have maintained stable mixed chimerism. In addition, three individuals who received stem cells from a matched sib did not receive conditioning prior to transplant and achieved engraftment.

75% of individuals developed acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and 50% developed chronic GVHD.

Seven of eight individuals achieved freedom from IVIG and show evidence of class switching with resolution of dysregulated immunoglobulin production and six of the eight show evidence of antibody production to both protein and polysaccharide vaccines.

Two individuals receiving myeloablative conditioning have developed premature ovarian failure.

Cellular reconstitution following HSCT takes up to one year, while restoration of humoral immunity can take significantly longer, and may not occur in some individuals.

Complications from HSCT include graft-versus-host disease, failure to reconstitute the humoral immune compartment, graft failure over time, and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease [Skoda-Smith et al 2001, Dvorak & Cowan 2008, Pai et al 2014].

Affected individuals with poor humoral reconstitution are maintained on long-term immunoglobulin replacement.

Individuals who do not undergo HSCT require close monitoring for worsening of immune function manifested by increased susceptibility to severe or opportunistic infections (see also Surveillance). If clinical status worsens, rapid transition to HSCT should be considered.
