Suggested serial monitoring to evaluate severity and rate of disease progression

Medical history (every 6-12 months) including number and type of infections, hearing, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression, change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities, ability to walk distances; diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (every 6-12 months) including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, and orthopedic evaluation. In children, attention to growth (height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts)

Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections

Audiometry. If intellectual disability makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing

Ophthalmologic examination to detect corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus

Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacities

Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of ALT for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Immunologic status, focusing on SLE, is recommended.

Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites

Bone densitometry every two to five years to assess osteopenia

CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema)
HbH disease

Hematologic evaluation every six to 12 months to determine the steady state levels of hemoglobin

In children, assessment of growth and development every six to 12 months

Monitoring of iron load with annual determination of serum ferritin concentration in individuals who have been transfused, in older individuals, and in those given inappropriate iron supplementation. Since serum ferritin may underestimate the degree of iron overload, a periodic quantitative measurement of liver iron concentration is also recommended [Musallam et al 2012].
Individuals with PORD should be seen by a specialist tertiary pediatric endocrine service throughout childhood to closely monitor their development and adjust steroid supplementation.

Because of the presence of developmental delays in many individuals with ABS, periodic formal developmental assessments may be indicated. However, interpretation of these assessments may be complicated by the physical limitations of the disorder. Screening evaluations are likely to underestimate cognitive abilities. Therefore, evaluations should be done in centers with expertise and experience in developmental testing.
The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic follow-up, especially during the early teens when significant scoliosis starts to appear

Monitoring in the late teens for psychiatric manifestations including psychosis and paranoid delusions
Ophthalmologic examination is indicated:

Every six to 12 months in children to monitor changes in refraction and to achieve the best possible corrected visual acuity;

Every two to three years in adults.
Guidelines for surveillance are incorporated into the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical report [Trotter et al 2005].

Growth. Monitor height and weight at each physician contact using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978, Hoover-Fong et al 2007]

Development. Screening of developmental milestones throughout infancy and early childhood should be performed and compared with those specific for achondroplasia [Fowler et al 1997, Ireland et al 2010].

Head growth and risk for hydrocephalus

Complete baseline CT scan (or MRI) of the brain in infancy

Monitoring of head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978] throughout childhood

Craniocervical junction

Every infant should have a CT scan (or MRI) of the craniocervical junction in infancy, with comparison of foramen magnum size to diagnostic-specific standards [Hecht et al 1989].

Overnight polysomnography should also be completed in infancy and interpreted with consideration of features important in assessing the craniocervical junction [Pauli et al 1995].

Neurologic examination including for signs of cervical myelopathy should be incorporated into each physical examination in infancy and childhood.

Sleep apnea

Inquiry should be made regarding signs and symptoms of sleep apnea.

If worrisome nighttime or daytime features arise, then polysomnography should be completed.

Ears and hearing

In addition to newborn screening, each infant should have tympanometric and behavioral audiometric evaluation by age approximately one year.

Evidence for middle ear problems or hearing loss should be sought throughout childhood.

Kyphosis

The spine of the infant and child should be clinically assessed every six months until age three years.

If severe kyphosis appears to be developing, radiologic assessment is needed (lateral in sitting or standing, depending on age, and lateral cross-table prone or cross-table supine over a bolster).

Legs. Clinical assessment for development of bowing and/or internal tibial torsion should be part of each physical assessment.

Spinal stenosis. Because adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk for spinal stenosis, a clinical history and neurologic examination is warranted every three to five years once the person with achondroplasia reaches adulthood.

Adaptation to difference. Inquiry regarding social adjustment should be part of each primary physician contact.
Marked accumulation of iron in parenchymal tissues including the liver, pancreas, heart, and thyroid can result in diabetes mellitus, cardiac failure, and hypothyroidism.

All affected individuals should have an annual glucose tolerance test starting at age 15 years to evaluate for the onset of diabetes mellitus.

ECG evaluation should be performed early in the course of the disease.

Evaluation of thyroid and liver function and complete blood count are indicated annually starting at the time of diagnosis.
For asymptomatic individuals with a KCNJ2 pathogenic variant, annual screening including a 12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitoring is desirable, followed by referral to a cardiologist if abnormalities are identified.
Surveillance should be individualized using a multidisciplinary approach.

Surveillance should take into account the link between fetal urinary tract dilation and long-term increased risk for impaired renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012].

Long-term dependence on parenteral nutrition requires routine surveillance of liver function.
Annual or more frequent evaluation of lymphocyte counts, serum immunoglobulin levels, and various in vitro tests of cellular and humoral immune function (i.e., as listed above for the evaluation of individuals suspected of having SCID) should be performed following BMT/SCT and during ERT [Gaspar et al 2009].

Individuals on ERT also require periodic monitoring as follows:

Plasma levels of PEG-ADA activity

Erythrocyte dAXP concentration

Development of neutralizing antibodies, particularly if plasma ADA activity or clinical or immunologic status declines unexpectedly

Monitoring for the appearance or recurrence of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Cardiovascular

Echocardiography annually until age three years for signs of pulmonary hypertension

Consideration of abdominal ultrasound examination for signs of portal hypertension in those with failure to thrive, persistent nausea, abdominal swelling, or black stools

Neurologic

Annual pediatric care, including neurologic examination and ongoing assessment of psychomotor development

Ocular

Annual assessment by pediatric ophthalmologist until age three years to identify those with abnormal retinal vascular development
Assessment of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure one to three times per year: adults who are stable may be examined yearly, whereas children require more frequent examinations. Ultrasonography may be necessary to evaluate for retinal detachment if the view of the fundus is limited
There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are reevaluated in neurology clinics and/ or clinical genetics clinics annually (or more frequently if medication trials are undertaken) to document disease progression and determine if other interventions are necessary.
Serial evaluation of EEGs to monitor disease progression is appropriate.
Regular evaluation with a multidisciplinary team is recommended for evaluation and prompt treatment of disease manifestations. In particular:

Dental findings over time may warrant use of dental prosthetics.

Periodic hearing evaluations should be performed as conductive hearing loss is common.
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring for signs of diabetes insipidus in the neonatal period

Assessment for glaucoma at least for the first few years of life

Monitoring of the spine for the development of scoliosis

Monitoring for signs of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and hypothyroidism
If puberty has not started by age 14 years, serum concentrations of LH and FSH (basal concentration and GnRH-stimulated concentration), testosterone, and inhibin B are monitored to evaluate for the possibility of HH.

Some children and parents prefer the induction of puberty at the same time as the affected boy’s peer-group; this should not be delayed unnecessarily.

If puberty does start spontaneously it is likely to arrest; thus, careful monitoring of testosterone levels is needed.

Psychological counseling should be available for families and young people if needed to discuss the issues related to hormone replacement therapy and future fertility.
The following are appropriate:

Routine dermatologic evaluation to monitor for vascular and other malignancies

Monitoring for and treatment of gastrointestinal complications at regular physician visits

Regular monitoring of the spine to assess the degree of scoliosis
In view of the high risk for HCC in individuals with AIP in Sweden, annual hepatic imaging is offered after age 50 years. It has been shown to improve survival [Innala & Andersson 2011]. A few other countries have also initiated screening. It is not yet clear whether similar testing should be offered more widely, since the risk appears to be low in some countries [Deybach & Puy 2011, Stewart 2012]. Note: Serum α-fetoprotein measurement is not helpful.
Growth should be monitored using standard growth charts so that nutritional intake can be adjusted to need.

Regular monitoring by cardiology, gastroenterology, and a nutritionist is appropriate.

At this time, the efficacy of presymptomatic screening for vascular anomalies in individuals with ALGS has not been formally evaluated. The possibility of a vascular accident should be considered in any symptomatic individual and MRI, magnetic resonance angiography, and/or angiography to identify aneurysms, dissections, or bleeds should be pursued aggressively as warranted.
Depending on age, affected individuals should be examined at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, orthopedic and neurologic status, gastrointestinal function, strength and mobility, communication skills, and psychological complications.
Asymptomatic children at risk. Large-scale, population-based studies in Japan, Europe, Canada, and the US that screened healthy infants with urinary catecholamines to identify neuroblastomas found no improvement in survival in children diagnosed before symptoms occurred [Schilling et al 2002, Woods et al 2002].

Because no data are available as yet on the effect of screening in families with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant and because tumor surveillance at the population level does not improve neuroblastoma outcome, there is currently no consensus on the proper frequency or type of tumor surveillance for individuals with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant. In the absence of published guidelines, the noninvasive measures of physical examination, abdominal ultrasound examination, and measurement of urine catecholamine metabolite levels have been performed on the following schedule; less frequent intervals may also be appropriate.

Every 1-2 months in infants age ≤12 months

Every 3-4 months in children age ≤10 years

After successful treatment of a neuroblastic tumor, screening for neuroblastic tumors should continue since children with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility are at risk of developing multiple primary tumors. Although no consensus exists, some recommend screening until age six years [Bourdeaut et al 2012].
Cardiac. Surveillance for cardiac complications every one to two years is advisable after age 40 years and should include:

Echocardiography to detect aortic dilation and aortic or mitral valve calcification and stenosis;

Surveillance CT scans (according to the recommendation of a cardiologist) in affected individuals with coronary artery calcification.

Urology. Urologic complications become more prevalent after age 40 years:

Routine surveillance is not recommended, but awareness of this potential complication is advised.

Ochronotic prostate stones appear on radiography; kidney stones can be identified by ultrasonography and helical abdominal CT.
Individuals with POLG-related disorders require frequent examination and interval evaluation by a team comprising the following:

Primary care provider

Neurologist

Clinical geneticist

Hepatologist or gastroenterologist

Physiatrist

Psychiatrist

Ophthalmologist

Pulmonologist

Laboratory tests. No standard of care guidelines are available to suggest the frequency for which the following tests should be obtained. Testing should be guided by clinical features and the proposed schedule should be modified if the clinical course is stable. For those with the most severe phenotypes, the following could be considered:

Every three months. CBC; electrolytes, liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT); CK, liver function tests including: preprandial serum glucose concentration; serum concentration of ammonia, albumin, bilirubin (free and conjugated), and cholesterol; and prothrombin time or INR as a measure of coagulation factors

Annually. Urine analysis; serum concentration of lactic acid

Biannually. Plasma amino acids; urine organic acids; plasma concentration of free and total carnitine (unless treated with levocarnitine, in which case measure annually)

Imaging and diagnostic procedures

Liver ultrasound examination annually

EEG and video EEG monitoring (e.g., for suspicion of subclinical status epilepticus; presence of epilepsia partialis continua; need to determine if events are seizures or non-epileptic movements)

Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked responses as clinically indicated

Barium swallow study as clinically indicated

Polysomnogram with CPAP titration as part of an evaluation of subacute mental status changes or every two to three years
Patients with severe AATD should undergo pulmonary function tests (including spirometry with bronchodilators and diffusing capacity measurements) every six to 12 months [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

All individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype (including those who did not manifest liver disease in childhood) should undergo periodic evaluation of liver function [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

While current guidelines from the American Thoracic Society recommend regular follow up of liver function tests in adults with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003], those tests may not reliably detect liver disease in these individuals [Clark et al 2012]. For instance, various liver function tests were not significantly different in persons with AATD with or without liver disease, and the sensitivity of the alanine transaminase (ALT) for alpha-1 antitrypsin-associated liver disease was only 12% [Clark et al 2012]

A combination of liver function tests, platelet count, and liver ultrasound examination may be an effective screening method to detect the presence of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis [Dawwas et al 2013].

All patients with established liver disease should have periodic (i.e., every 6-12 months) ultrasound examination of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and HCC [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003, Nelson et al 2012].
Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment and health surveillance of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013].

Individuals with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy should be followed by a nephrologist in addition to a primary care physician. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels), and blood pressure should be monitored.

Although most females with XLAS exhibit only asymptomatic microhematuria, recent data indicate a significant risk for progression to ESRD [Jais et al 2003]. For this reason, all women with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome need to be monitored regularly for the development of proteinuria and hypertension.

Children with Alport syndrome should have audiologic evaluation every one to two years beginning at age six to seven years (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview).

Periodic cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation for males with XLAS is appropriate.

Transplant recipients should be monitored for development of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis.
Clinical assessment, imaging, and laboratory studies outlined in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis can be used in surveillance for manifestations of lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity.

Specialized imaging studies such as combined PET and CT scanning in combination with clinical and laboratory surveillance may be helpful in detection of malignant transformation, keeping in mind that PET/CT scanning is often abnormal in ALPS, such that distinguishing between “typical” ALPS findings and a new malignancy (lymphoma) can be difficult [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. Because of this, careful consideration of imaging modalities that expose the patient to radiation is warranted.
Clinical, neurologic, and neuropsychological follow up is necessary.
Specialized multidisciplinary ALS clinic evaluations are suggested every three months.

Neurologic examination to establish the extent of weakness, atrophy, gait instability, involvement of fine motor and gross motor function and swallowing with attention to choking or coughing episodes and insensible aspiration manifesting as pneumonia

Pulmonary function tests

Nutritional status

PT/OT evaluation

Speech evaluation
Rod-cone dystrophy. Annual ophthalmologic follow-up is indicated as long as the affected individual has vision.

Obesity. Weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded annually and plotted on growth curves.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry should be performed yearly.

Cardiomyopathy

A detailed cardiac history and examination including echocardiography annually even in the absence of symptoms related to left ventricular dysfunction (signs of cardiac failure, such as sweating, fatigue, lethargy, asthma, decreased physical activity)

ECGs in parallel with echocardiography and 24-hour ECG monitoring if indicated

In individuals who have had infantile cardiomyopathy, annual monitoring by a pediatric cardiologist, even if the individual has recovered from cardiomyopathy and is asymptomatic

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes

Annual measurement of plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from early infancy

Measurement of fasting plasma glucose concentration every two to three months

If fasting blood glucose is greater than 7 mmol/L, or postprandial blood glucose is greater than 11 mmol/L, measurement of HbA1c concentration and serum glucose concentration regularly (every 6 months, although glucose estimations may be performed more frequently as determined by the 'diabetic control' of the affected individual)

Hyperlipidemia. Annual total lipid profile determination is appropriate unless hyperlipidemia is present, in which case more frequent monitoring may be indicated. When the affected individual is ill and/or dehydrated, pancreatitis precipitated by hyperlipidemia can be life threatening.

Renal disease

Urinalysis and measurement of plasma concentrations of electrolytes, uric acid, BUN, and creatinine twice yearly

Renal and bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal

Hepatic disease

Annual measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Ultrasonography to evaluate for possible steatosis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and portal hypertension

Pulmonary disease. Pulmonary function tests should be performed yearly to evaluate general lung function, even if symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis are not yet present.

Hypothyroidism. Patients should be monitored annually for thyroid abnormalities.
Monthly surveillance to identify and manage secondary complications is indicated.
Lifelong clinical follow up should include the following:

Neurologic

Monitoring of antiepileptic drug treatment (drug levels and clinical assessment of biological effects);

Periodic assessment of hearing by audiograms and BAEPs and of the peripheral nerves by NCV and needle EMG.

Renal function monitoring by measurement of: blood pressure; body weight; serum concentrations of creatinine, albumin, and cholesterol; 24-hour urinary protein; and creatinine clearance

Agents/Circumstances to avoid

Diphenylhydantoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and possibly lamotrigine increase myoclonus and should be avoided in any individual with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME), including AMRF.

Evaluation of relatives at risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Some antiepileptic drugs can lead to an increased risk of malformations, growth retardation, or neurodevelopmental disabilities in exposed fetuses. However, when pregnant women experience prolonged seizures during pregnancy, the risk of adverse fetal outcomes is increased. Therefore, it is recommended that women with a known seizure disorder continue to take antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy. Standard measures for prevention of fetopathy should be followed. These include:

Possible changes of medication prior to pregnancy;

Spacing of the antiepileptic drugs into four doses a day or taking extended release medications, so that the drug levels do not have significant peaks or troughs;

Monitoring the dosages and drug levels of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and after the delivery.

In addition, folic acid should be prescribed at 1 mg/day for all women of childbearing age and increased to 5 mg/day when planning a pregnancy (ideally 3 months prior to conception) and during the pregnancy, in order to prevent possible neural tube defects and other congenital malformations that can be associated with fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Monitoring of postnatal development of genitalia that were ambiguous at birth for changes that could lead to reconsideration of the assigned sex

For individuals assigned a male sex, evaluation during puberty for signs of gynecomastia

In adults, monitoring of bone mineral density through DEXA (dual-emission x-ray absorptiometry) scanning [Oakes et al 2008]
The following are appropriate:

Annual clinical examination for scoliosis

For older children, evaluation for the development of obesity associated with excessive appetite and decreased physical activity
Amblyopia and refractive error. Children younger than age eight years should be monitored every four to six months for refractive errors and detection and treatment of incipient or actual amblyopia (strabismic, refractive, or sensory). Glasses and other visual aids should be provided to be able to best access educational materials.

Detection of later-onset eye pathology. Individuals with aniridia should have an annual ophthalmology review to detect problems such as corneal changes and cataracts.

Glaucoma. Individuals with aniridia should undergo annual glaucoma screening throughout life including:

Measurement of intraocular pressure;

Optic disc examination;

Visual field assessment, when possible.

Note: Assessment of the optic disc and visual field may be difficult in the presence of media opacities and nystagmus.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Individuals with aniridia with a history of multiple ocular procedures (penetrating keratoplasty, IOLs, and drainage tube insertion) should be monitored for aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005].

Wilms tumor. Children with aniridia and a WT1 deletion require renal ultrasound examinations every three months and follow-up by a pediatric oncologist until they reach age eight years. See Wilms Tumor Overview. (Those without deletion of the WT1 locus are at very low risk for Wilms tumor and do not require such screening [Grønskov et al 2001, Muto et al 2002].)

Renal function. Because of the increased risk for renal impairment in WAGR syndrome, it has been suggested that renal function be evaluated every few years across the lifetime in those with WAGR syndrome, especially those with bilateral Wilms tumor [Breslow et al 2005].

Hearing. Children with WAGR syndrome and isolated aniridia may have abnormal hearing despite a normal audiogram; thus, detailed audiologic evaluation is recommended [Bamiou et al 2007].
For persons with muscle weakness, evaluate muscle strength and functional status every six to 12 months.

For asymptomatic persons, evaluate less frequently.
Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.
Routine visits to the attending neurologist are indicated.
Periodic assessment of the following:

Bladder function

Gait

Sensation in the distal lower extremities

Cognition (e.g., executive function)
There are no formal guidelines regarding surveillance. The authors suggest obtaining the following:

Lipoprotein profile one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). If abnormal, follow at regular intervals for treatment of hyperlipidemia.

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time) one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients regarding the signs of liver dysfunction.

Platelet count one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients to notify their provider immediately in the event of bleeding or petechial rash.
No surveillance guidelines have been developed. However, all individuals with APRT deficiency should see their physician every six to 12 months to:

Monitor kidney function;

Assess the urinary excretion of DHA crystals (disappearance of the crystals is considered an adequate treatment response);

Facilitate medication compliance.

Periodic renal ultrasound examinations may be considered to evaluate for new kidney stones.
Patients are seen at regular intervals determined by their age and degree of metabolic stability.

Infants should be seen monthly or more frequently, with monitoring of plasma concentration of ammonia and amino acids, growth, and neurologic function. If treatment fails to arrest the neurologic deterioration or if spasticity is symptomatic, appropriate orthopedic and physical therapy interventions are indicated.
Regular monitoring of the concentration of plasma amino acids to identify deficiency of essential amino acids as well as impending hyperammonemia is indicated. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical scenario, but need to be more frequent in neonates and in those with frequent metabolic decompensations. The authors prefer to evaluate neonates every one to two weeks, infants between age two months and one year every one to three months, and children older than age two years every three to four months.

Early signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes in older individuals include mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, ankle clonus, and elevated plasma concentrations of glutamine, alanine, and glycine. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration in such individuals.

Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic dietician and clinical biochemical geneticist is preferred when possible.

Annual measurement of blood pressure using the appropriate-sized cuff and plotting the centile values for age and stature is indicated.

Periodic evaluation of liver function tests may be necessary; the appropriate frequency is unknown.

Periodic evaluation of serum electrolytes is appropriate; the frequency unknown.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular follow up with echocardiography, and MRI- angiography or CT scan with 3D reconstructions from head to pelvis starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis, and repeated at regular intervals depending on the initial findings and the disease course. Under stable conditions (in the absence of aneurysms, stenosis, or dilatation of the aortic root), echocardiography could be performed on a yearly basis and MRI angiography or CT scan at least every three years in older children and adults.

Pulmonary hypertension may develop secondary to pulmonary artery stenosis, requiring regular echocardiographic follow-up.

Pulmonary follow up. Increased vigilance for emphysema is appropriate

Routine follow-up for refractive errors and keratoconus, when possible with an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders

Evaluation for orthopedic complications especially during periods of rapid growth (first two years of life and during puberty), e.g., serial radiographs to evaluate for progression of scoliosis

Orthodontic follow-up, especially during eruption of permanent dentition because of the increased risk of dental crowding secondary to palatal abnormalities
Cognitive impairment appears to be non-progressive, but repeat neuropsychologic assessments are recommended to help guide educational support programs.

Although the sensorineural deafness appears to be static (albeit very severe), regular audiologic assessment is recommended so that educational support can be optimized.

Visual impairment appears to be progressive; thus, regular evaluation by an ophthalmologist is recommended.
Screening for degree of cardiac involvement in persons diagnosed with ARVC is essential to ascertain severity and disease progression over time. Screening recommendations:

ECG, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Echocardiogram, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Holter monitoring, event monitoring, implantable loop recorder

Exercise stress testing

Cardiac MRI, with frequency depending on symptoms and findings
The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which could contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Parents should be counseled to monitor for – and report to a physician – the early warning signs of malignancy (which can occur at any age) including weight loss, bruising, and localized pain or swelling. Periodic CBCs are warranted.

Immune status needs to be monitored if severe recurrent infections occur or immunomodulatory therapy is in progress.
During vitamin E therapy, the plasma vitamin E concentration should be measured at regular intervals (e.g., every 6 months), especially in children. Ideally the plasma vitamin E concentration should be maintained in the high normal range.

Some protocols call for measuring the total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter of plasma (TRAP). Although α-tocopherol only contributes 5%-10% to TRAP, this parameter appears to be the best surrogate marker for clinical improvement [Schuelke et al 1999]. Discontinuation of vitamin E supplementation, even temporarily, leads to a drop in plasma vitamin E concentration within two to three days and to a prolonged drop in TRAP, even after reinitiating vitamin E supplementation [Kohlschütter et al 1997, Schuelke et al 2000b].
A general timetable for clinical and laboratory evaluation in thalassemia major has been provided by Thalassemia International Federation [Cappellini et al 2014] and is available at the TIF web site.

For individuals with thalassemia major, follow up to monitor the effectiveness of transfusion therapy and chelation therapy and their side effects includes the following:

Monthly physical examination by a physician familiar with the affected individual and the disease

Every three months: assessment of liver function tests (serum concentration of ALT), determination of serum ferritin concentration, and assessment of growth and development (during childhood)

Annual

Ophthalmologic and audiologic examinations

Complete cardiac evaluation, and evaluation of thyroid, endocrine pancreas, parathyroid, adrenal, and pituitary function

Liver ultrasound evaluation and determination of serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration in adults with hepatitis C and iron overload for early detection of hepatocarcinoma

Bone densitometry to assess for osteoporosis in the adult

Regular gallbladder echography for early detection of cholelithiasis [Origa et al 2009], particularly in individuals with the Gilbert syndrome genotype (i.e., presence of the (TA)7/(TA)7 motif in the UGT1Apromoter)
Consensus management recommendations have not been established; however, several groups have proposed variations of the following [Carbone et al 2012, Battaglia 2014, Rai et al 2016]:

Uveal melanoma. Yearly dilated eye examinations and imaging by an ocular oncologist beginning around age 11 years

Malignant mesothelioma. No reliable early disease symptoms or screening modalities

Annual evaluation is recommended for late manifestations of mesothelioma, which can include chest pain, cough, fever, shortness of breath, dysphagia, hoarseness, weight loss, fever, upper body and face edema (chest mesothelioma) and abdominal pain, ascites, nausea, vomiting, and/or constipation (peritoneal mesothelioma). Annual physical examination is recommended to look for signs of pleurisy (pleural inflammation), peritonitis, ascites and/or pleural effusion.

If an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure.

Cutaneous melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and atypical Spitz tumors. Annual full body dermatologic examinations beginning around age 20 years

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Protocol similar to von Hippel Lindau disease with annual abdominal ultrasound examination; consideration of annual urinalysis and abdominal MRI every two years
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Neurodevelopmental follow up by a multidisciplinary team involved in cognitive impairment and appropriate support

Coloboma or microphthalmia: ophthalmologic follow-up (at least yearly) with systematic screening for intraocular hypertension and glaucoma. Although glaucoma has not been reported to date, it is a known complication of colobomatous microphthalmia. Early detection allows specific treatment of intraocular hypertension.

Routine follow up of deafness for any evidence of progression

Cardiac defect: cardiology follow up (adapted to the type of congenital heart disease identified)

Renal tract anomaly: nephrology follow up adapted to the anomaly and the risk of renal insufficiency

Screening for malignancies. The risk of malignancies is not established for BWCFF syndrome; screening for hematologic malignancies must be considered in case of physical deterioration or unexplained chronic fever.
Height and weight should be monitored on a regular basis with consideration of Barth syndrome-specific growth patterns [Roberts et al 2012].

Standardized cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitoring should be considered at least yearly [Spencer et al 2005].

A low threshold for performing an electrophysiologic study to assess for a potentially serious arrhythmia is appropriate, especially in the presence of symptoms such as palpitations and syncope, abnormal arrhythmia screening tests, or a family history of sudden death [Spencer et al 2005].
A multidisciplinary approach is required to effectively manage this pleiotropic condition. Suggested surveillance is summarized here:

Annual ophthalmologic evaluations with annual electroretinogram in those older than age five years

Routine (at least annual) measurement of blood pressure

A baseline renal ultrasound scan and annual renal function tests for all individuals with BBS. If a structural renal malformation is detected, review by a nephrologist and follow-up sonography is indicated.

Monitor BUN and serum concentration of creatinine if a progressive obstructive urinary tract anomaly is detected or if bilateral renal malformations are observed and satisfactory renal growth is not observed on follow-up ultrasonography.

In individuals with renal impairment (elevated serum creatinine) as a result of an underlying structural malformation, six-month to annual monitoring by a nephrologist for complications of chronic kidney disease is indicated.

Annual endocrinology review

Regular testing for diabetes mellitus by measurement of fasting glucose concentration or glucose tolerance testing

Annual thyroid function tests, liver function tests and lipid profile
Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computed tomography (CT) scans should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity. A recent consensus meeting has suggested annual head MRI scans until age eight years in affected children [Bree et al 2011], but this would require general anesthesia for many children and is probably not now justified in PTCH1-related NBCCS with only a 2% risk. However, it may well be justified in infants with SUFU pathogenic variants [Smith et al 2014].

No other tumors occur at a frequency that warrants surveillance above that offered to members of the general population.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.
Bethlem myopathy

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry)

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly annually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.

Ullrich CMD

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, scoliosis, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Once scoliosis is evident, regular orthopedic follow up

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry);

Clinical assessment of nutritional status

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly biannually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.
KCNQ2-BFNE. EEG at age three, 12, and 24 months is appropriate. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

KCNQ2-NEE. Video-EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Serial neuropsychological evaluation of neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral problems is advised.

Regular follow up by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to nutritional intake, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills is recommended.
Thorough neurologic and neuropsychiatric assessment is indicated annually.
Evaluation every six months by the treating subspecialists (pediatric neurologist, metabolic genetic specialist, physiotherapist, and psychologists) is appropriate.
For persons with pathogenic RECQL4 variants that correlate with an increased risk for osteosarcoma, attention to clinical findings such as bone pain, limp, and fracture is warranted. Currently no data are available regarding the effectiveness of routine screening such as x-rays, MRI, and bone scan. Furthermore, the risk of added radiation exposure from diagnostic studies and the benefit of "early" detection of osteosarcoma are unknown.

Because lymphoma has been observed in individuals with BGS [Debeljak et al 2009] and its allelic disorders RAPADILINO syndrome (4/14 cases) [Siitonen et al 2009] and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome [Simon et al 2010], it seems reasonable to monitor individuals for lymph node swelling and /or mediastinal enlargement on chest radiographs.
There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the recommendations given are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with known BHDS, individuals known to have a pathogenic variant in FLCN without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone genetic testing should have regular monitoring by physicians familiar with the spectrum of BHDS.

Renal tumor screening

Renal imaging is appropriate for individuals age 18 years or older when the clinical diagnosis of BHDS is established or if a pathogenic variant in FLCN is confirmed. However, earlier testing and surveillance for renal tumors should be personalized based on family history of renal tumor development, when available.

Yearly MRI of the kidneys is the optimal screening modality to assess for kidney lesions.

Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast is an alternative when MRI is not an option. However, the long-term effects of cumulative radiation exposure in individuals with BHDS is unknown and has not been studied.

As a result of the low aggressiveness of kidney tumors and the 3.0-cm rule used by surgeons in treating renal tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005], affected individuals without a family history of kidney tumors who have had two to three consecutive annual MRI examinations without the detection of kidney lesions may be screened every two years until a suspicious lesion is identified.

Note: The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in further characterization of kidney lesions but should not be used as a primary screening modality.

If any suspicious lesion (<1.0 cm in diameter, indeterminate lesion, or complex cysts) is noted on screening examination, annual MRI should be instituted. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast may be used as an alternative in those for whom MRI is not an option.

Renal tumors less than 3.0 cm in diameter are monitor by periodic imaging. When the largest renal tumor reaches 3 cm in maximal diameter evaluation by a urologic surgeon is appropriate with consideration of nephron-sparing surgery [Stamatakis et al 2013].

Rapidly growing lesions and/or symptoms including pain, blood in the urine, or atypical presentations require a more individualized approach. PET-CT scan is an option for evaluation of these lesions.

Melanoma. Because of a concern for a possible increased risk of melanoma in those with BHDS, full body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be considered.
Ophthalmologic examination is recommended every one to two years to monitor disease progression. Examination should include visual field testing particularly as it relates to determination of driving eligibility and eligibility for government programs and/or disability.

Patients should be aware of the possibility of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) and the option of self-monitoring using an Amsler grid under direction of their primary care ophthalmologist.
For all children with biotinidase deficiency:

Yearly ophthalmologic examination and auditory testing for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Regularly scheduled appointments with primary care physicians or as needed

Yearly evaluation by a clinical geneticist or metabolic specialist for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Symptomatic children with residual clinical problems should be seen as directed by the appropriate sub-specialists:

Evaluation of urinary organic acids if return of symptoms with biotin therapy (most commonly the result of non-compliance)Note: Measurement of biotin concentrations in blood or urine is not useful except to determine compliance with therapy.
Families benefit from counseling regarding the risk of cancer in persons with BSyn. The wide variety of types and sites of cancer in Bsyn – plus the unusually early onset of solid tumors such as carcinomas and sarcomas – makes surveillance for cancer a life-long undertaking, requiring planning and cooperation among the affected person, the family, and the physician in charge.

In persons younger than age 20 years, leukemia is the main type of cancer. Until evidence becomes available that treatment at the earliest stages of leukemia is more effective than treatment after full-blown symptoms appear, hematologic surveillance other than that used in general pediatrics appears unnecessary, if not contraindicated.

Close contact between individuals age 20 years and older and their physicians is advisable, and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated promptly as potential early indicators of cancer.

Screening for colon cancer, the most common solid tumor in individuals with BSyn (see Table 2), should begin decades earlier than in others, and should be carried out more frequently.

In adults, colon cancer screening may include colonoscopy every one to two years, and stool guaiac testing for blood every three to six months.
Monitor for changes related to the major findings over time.

Monitor older children as they enter adolescence for signs of low self-esteem and other psychologic issues.
Surveillance for otologic and renal anomalies should be offered as described below.

Otologic anomalies. Serial audiometry to survey for progression of hearing loss:

Annual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual examination for hearing impairment and annual audiometry to assess stability of hearing loss (more frequent if fluctuation or progression is described by the affected individual)

Renal anomalies

Regular assessment of renal function to prevent progression to ESRD

Semiannual/annual examination by a nephrologist and/or urologist if indicated, based on level of renal function and type of renal and/or collecting system malformation
Routine follow up by a neurologist for medication management and interval assessment of ambulation, seizure activity, speech, and swallowing. Often done every three to six months, follow up may be annual for those who are more stable.

For those receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism), monitoring for adverse neuropsychiatric effects and disabling motor fluctuations and dyskinesias

Follow-up ophthalmologic examination every one to two years
The frequency of ophthalmic follow-up should be individualized depending on age, procedures performed in the past, and results of visual acuity testing.

Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are advised in females in whom the BPES type is unknown or in whom BPES type I is suspected based on a positive family history or FOXL2 pathogenic variant. Frequency of endocrinologic follow-up to monitor ovarian status is individualized and can involve pelvic ultrasound examination, measurement of serum FSH concentrations, and assessment of menstrual pattern (ages of menarche and onset of oligomenorrhea and secondary amenorrhea).
Women

Monthly breast self-examination

Clinical breast examination every 6-12 months beginning at age 25

Annual breast MRI beginning at age 25, or individualized based on family history if a breast cancer diagnosis before age 30 is present

Annual mammogram beginning at age 30

Annual transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125 concentration beginning at age 35 years (or individualized based on the earliest age of onset in the family) may be considered for those women who have not elected to undergo prophylactic oophorectomy.

Note: Annual pelvic ultrasound and/or CA-125 concentration has not been effective in detecting early-stage ovarian cancer, either in high-risk or average-risk women.

Men

Breast self-examination training and regular monthly breast self-examination beginning at age 35

Annual clinical breast examination beginning at age 35

Annual prostate cancer screening beginning at age 45

Women and men

Screening for melanoma should be individualized based on the family history.

Screening of asymptomatic individuals for pancreatic cancer is not generally recommended, but is possible in research settings.
At-risk individuals with a family history of Brugada syndrome or a known pathogenic variant should undergo ECG monitoring every one to two years beginning at birth [Oe et al 2005]. The presence of type I ECG changes should be further investigated.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic screening for glycosuria as a manifestation of diabetes mellitus

For individuals with diabetes mellitus, follow-up in a diabetes clinic every six months to monitor for possible retinal, peripheral nerve, and renal complications

Yearly cardiac ultrasound and EKG

Yearly or biennial liver ultrasound examination to detect fatty infiltration

Ultrasound surveillance is a noninvasive procedure that can, along with serum lipid concentrations and liver enzymes, provide information on the degree of lipid control and compliance with the fat-restricted diet.
Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in craniofacial disorders. Clinical follow up should include body measurements, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination.
Ophthalmologic examination should be performed annually to monitor the progression of the fundus lesions; in childhood, annual examinations are important in preventing the development of amblyopia. Affected individuals should be advised to see their ophthalmologist in the event of decreased vision or metamorphopsia, which could be signs of CNV.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia, especially in the neonatal period

Screening for embryonal tumors, which has traditionally involved the following(see also Note):

Abdominal ultrasound examination every three months until age eight years [Beckwith 1998, Tan & Amor 2006, Clericuzio & Martin 2009, Zarate et al 2009]

Measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration every two to three months in the first four years of life for early detection of hepatoblastoma [Clericuzio & Martin 2009]. AFP serum concentration may be elevated in children with BWS in the first year of life [Everman et al 2000]. If the AFP is elevated and imaging reveals no suspicious lesion, follow-up measurement of serum AFP concentration plus baseline liver function tests one month later can be used to determine the trend in serum AFP concentrations over time. If the concentration is not decreasing, it is appropriate to undertake an exhaustive search for an underlying tumor [Clericuzio et al 2003]. Note: (1) Some have proposed revising the tumor surveillance guidelines based on the molecular alteration detected. Scott et al [2006] suggested that children with BWS and IC2 alterations did not require Wilms tumor screening. Brioude et al [2013] proposed that children with BWS and loss of methylation at IC2 should have an ultrasound evaluation at the time of clinical diagnosis and only continue with ultrasound surveillance if visceromegaly or ‘severe’ hemihyperplasia are present; otherwise, clinical examination alone was recommended. Mussa et al [2016b] questioned the rationale for ultrasound surveillance and ‘tumor markers’ for individuals with loss of methylation at IC2 but subsequently, in their guidelines from the Italian Scientific Committee on BWS, suggested that in the near future, tumor screening in clinical practice will cease. Based on personal experience, the present authors continue to recommend tumor surveillance for all children with BWS regardless of the molecular etiology. (2) Although periodic chest x-ray and urinary VMA and VHA assays to screen for neuroblastoma have been suggested, they have not been incorporated into most screening protocols because of their low yield.

Annual renal ultrasound examination between age eight years and mid-adolescence to identify those requiring further evaluation for findings such as nephrocalcinosis and medullary sponge kidney disease. Those with positive findings should be referred to a nephrologist for further assessment and follow up. Since the natural history of renal disease in adults has not as yet been evaluated, adult-onset renal disease without early findings remains a possibility. Therefore, consideration should be given to periodic renal evaluation in adulthood.

Consideration of annual or biannual measurement of urinary calcium/creatinine ratio from the time of BWS diagnosis as it may be abnormal in individuals with BWS who have normal findings on ultrasound examination [Goldman et al 2003]

Developmental screening as part of routine childcare
Follow up with a metabolic disease specialist every three to six months for physical and neurologic examinations. Consider neurodevelopmental testing and measurement of: plasma ammonia and amino acids (to check for chronic hyperammonemia and citrulline deficiency as well as general nutritional state); serum lactate and glucose; blood gases; liver parameters; and urine organic acids.
Close surveillance for several days following head trauma or major surgical procedure with anesthesia is indicated because neurologic deterioration (presumably stress related) may follow.
There are no standard international surveillance guidelines for CADASIL. Several countries have developed CADASIL guidelines which can be referred to, such as the medical guideline for CADASIL published (in French) by the French Health Authority (HAS).

Yearly follow up by a neurologist with expertise in CADASIL is recommended from the time of diagnosis.

A consultation with a neuropsychiatrist is recommended when there are symptoms of depression or other psychiatric manifestations.

Consultation of other medical specialists (e.g., rehabilitation physician, physical therapist, and psychologist) is as required.

The interval at which individuals with CADASIL should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the patients and their care givers.
Currently, no standard surveillance protocols exist. However, given that Caffey disease is a collagenopathy, yearly evaluation of stature, joint extensibility, hernias, fracture history, and dental health is recommended.

Although no systematic reviews of bone mineral density in adults with the defining pathogenic variant have been performed, reports of fractures and short stature in adults with other COL1A1 pathogenic variants suggest that assessment of bone mineral density may be prudent in adults with a history of Caffey disease in childhood.
The following evaluations should be performed every three to four months when children are actively growing. Evaluation may be less often thereafter. The frequency of evaluation should vary depending on individual needs [Speiser et al 2010].

Efficacy of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Early-morning serum concentrations of 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone approximately every three months during infancy and every three to six months thereafter. (In some instances, measurement of urinary pregnantriols and 17 ketosteroids in a 24-hour urine sample may help assess hormonal control. However, the process of urine collection makes it less practical than a simple blood draw.)

Linear growth, weight gain, pubertal development, and clinical signs of cortisol and androgen excess

Bone age to assess osseous maturation (at 6- to 12-month intervals)

Efficacy of mineralocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Blood pressure

Early morning plasma renin activity or direct renin assay in a controlled position (usually upright)

Monitoring for testicular abnormalities in males. Periodic imaging of the testes either by ultrasonography or MRI should begin after puberty and be repeated every three to five years.

Monitoring fertility and metabolic risks in adults. In affected adults, periodic measurements and/or monitoring of the following should be performed:

Fecundity and fertility

Weight

Lipid profile

Blood pressure

Bone mineral density

Imaging studies. No routine adrenal imaging or bone mineral density is recommended [Speiser et al 2010].
Most long-term survivors require annual monitoring of growth and spinal curvature by clinical and radiographic measurements.
Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease. Follow up at six-month intervals to evaluate developmental status and evidence of any new problems is suggested.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. Annual routine follow up is indicated.
If cardiac abnormalities are present, follow-up intervals should be determined by the cardiologist according to the specific clinical manifestations. Otherwise, yearly echocardiogram and electrocardiogram are recommended to monitor cardiac size and function, as well as for evidence of pericardial effusion. These studies should be started in infancy, or as soon as the diagnosis is made, and continued throughout life.

Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis should be performed if there is concern based on physical examination. If scoliosis is present, continued monitoring by an orthopedist is recommended.

Consider brain MRI with magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) to evaluate persistent headaches or other neurological symptoms, given the increased risk for cerebral vascular abnormalities.

Affected individuals should be monitored for edema –which often develops in adolescence or early adulthood- by reviewing the medical history regarding swelling of the limbs, and by physical examination.
The interval at which a person with CARASIL are followed depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the affected individual and care givers.
Recommended clinical surveillance for individuals with CNC include the following:

Pre-pubertal pediatric individuals

Echocardiogram (annually; biannually for those with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound for boys; close monitoring of growth rate and pubertal staging (annually)

Post-pubertal pediatric and adult individuals

Echocardiogram (annually or biannually for adolescent individuals with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound (annually)

Thyroid ultrasound (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Transabdominal ultrasound of the ovaries (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Urinary free cortisol levels (annually)

Serum IGF-1 levels (annually)

Further evaluation of affected individuals of all age groups, as needed

For primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, in addition to urinary free cortisol levels:

Diurnal cortisol levels (11:30 pm, 12:00 am and 7:30 am, 8:00 am sampling)

Dexamethasone-stimulation test (modified Liddle’s test, as per Stratakis et al [1999])

Adrenal computed tomography

For gigantism/acromegaly, in addition to serum IGF-1 levels:

Pituitary MRI

Three-hour oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT)

90-minute thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) testing

For psammomatous melanotic schwannoma: MRI (brain, spine, chest, abdomen, retroperitoneum, pelvis)
Annual monitoring of hearing loss is not required in individuals with DIS because hearing loss is non-progressive.
Periodic monitoring of the following is recommended:

Spine: orthopedic consultation and, if needed, x-ray analysis

Respiratory function: spirometry

Cardiac function: 24-hour electrocardiography and echocardiography

Mobility and muscle function: physiatrist and physical therapist consultation

The interval between visits is determined based on the symptoms and signs observed in the individual patient.
The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on age and disease severity.

During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated once or twice a month by a metabolic specialist.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of:

Growth including weight, linear growth, and head circumference;

Nutritional status;

Feeding ability;

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate.

Laboratory evaluation should include:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, plasma MMA concentration, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma tHcy concentration;

Complete blood count (CBC) to monitor for cytopenias;

Nutritional studies, if indicated: electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels (including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D), and trace minerals.

Routine evaluations should include:

Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal and optic nerve changes in patients with cblC and cblG and if visual symptoms are present;

Neurologic evaluations for early signs of psychomotor retardation, behavioral disturbances, seizures, and myelopathy;

Brain MRI and/or EEG as clinically indicated.
Annual evaluations including:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Audiologic assessment

MRI follow up can be performed once every few years, in the event that the neurologic manifestations change.
The following are appropriate:

Echocardiogram every two years until it is clear that the aorta is not involved

At least annual physical examination for evidence of kyphosis/scoliosis
Children with CCD should be monitored for the following:

Orthopedic complications

Dental abnormalities

Upper-airway obstruction. Because of the craniofacial involvement, signs and symptoms of obstructive upper-airway disease should be elicited. When symptoms are suggestive, a sleep study is indicated and surgical intervention may be required.

Sinus and ear infections

Hearing loss. Regular audiometry in individuals with repeated ear infections allows the identification and early management of hearing loss if it develops.

Osteoporosis. DEXA to measure bone mineral density should be done early in adolescence and every five to ten years thereafter. If there are clinical signs of osteopenia (increased number of fractures), evaluation and treatment should be started earlier.
Annual examinations to monitor for possible ophthalmologic, neurologic, and endocrine complications are warranted.
Brain MRI imaging with GRE or SWI is indicated in individuals experiencing new neurologic symptoms. Interpretation can be difficult because new hemorrhages may be asymptomatic.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of the spine for scoliosis and joints for contractures

Routine assessment of respiratory parameters such as respiratory rate, peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)

Sleep studies especially when patients show signs of nocturnal hypoxia

Regular assessment of motor abilities in order to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and assistive devices for ambulation, such as a wheelchair
Thus far, heart valve dysplasia has not required correction; thus, no firm guidelines for appropriate surveillance have been developed. Echocardiogram is suggested at time of diagnosis and, if normal, should probably be repeated at intervals of five years.
Recommended monitoring for iron overload:

Measurement of hemoglobin, bilirubin, iron, transferrin and serum ferritin concentration every three months starting at age ten years

Annual myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI, if available, starting at age ten years
Annual

Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and referral for speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy

Eye examination

Liver function tests, thyroid panel, protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III

Other

Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis and counseling about the risk of fractures

Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident
Annual

Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and possible need for referral for speech, occupational, and physical therapy

Eye examination

Liver function tests; thyroid panel; serum concentrations of the clotting factors protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III

Other

Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist

Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident
Since both pre- and postnatal advances in treatment have increased survival of high-risk patients, it is important to provide close follow-up and support for potential long-term morbidities. Long-term follow-up for infants with CDH is ideally provided at a specialized center by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a pediatric surgeon, surgical nurse specialist, cardiologist, nutritionist, pulmonologist, and developmental pediatrician. This type of team can recognize, treat, and coordinate care for the many medical complications frequently found in long-term survivors with CDH.
The following are appropriate:

Annual gastrointestinal evaluation including monitoring of growth

Annual evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and to target therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Routine monitoring of existing cardiac or renal anomalies
The following evaluations have been suggested [Magoulas & El-Hattab 2012]:

Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. Perform annually during childhood and less frequently in adulthood. Individuals with cardiomyopathy require management and follow up by specialists in cardiology.

Plasma carnitine concentration. Monitor frequently until levels reach the normal range, thereafter, measure three times a year during infancy and early childhood, twice a year in older children, and annually in adults.

Serum CK concentration and liver transaminases. Consider measuring during acute illnesses.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring growth and development during infancy and childhood starting at the time of diagnosis

Beginning at age one year, examination of teeth with regular follow-up during to detect tooth damage and oligodontia

Periodic monitoring starting at the time of diagnosis for signs of nephronophthisis (renal insufficiency, renal cyst formation), including osmolarity testing in morning urine, urine collection assays to test for polyuria, measurement of blood pressure, determination of serum creatinine and blood urea concentrations to establish renal function, and periodic renal ultrasound examination to establish kidney size and presence of cysts. Periodic measurement of liver enzymes starting at the time of diagnosis.

Annual ophthalmologic examinations starting at age four years. Note: Electroretinography (ERG) and fundoscopy can be performed at an earlier age if it is evident that vision is reduced.

Evaluation for respiratory infection (with x-rays and sputum analysis) when clinical findings suggest pneumonia

In those with structural heart defects, periodic monitoring of cardiac function including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography.
Affected individuals. Surveillance for CEBPA-associated familial AML is similar to that for other forms of AML. There are no generally accepted minimal residual disease (MRD) markers in CEBPA-associated AML or in most other AML subtypes with normal karyotypes.

Individuals are monitored and evaluated in accordance with administered treatment, clinical course, symptoms, and protocol, if enrolled in clinical trials. When complete remission is achieved and intensification therapy is complete, individuals are monitored with:

CBC and platelet counts every one to three months for two years with the frequency decreasing to every three to six months for up to five years;

Bone marrow aspiration when cytopenia and/or an abnormal peripheral blood smear are present.

Note: The use of flow cytometry for MRD monitoring is controversial.

Individuals with a germline CEBPA pathogenic variant who are cured of their initial disease episode may be at risk for new leukemic episodes, often occurring after a prolonged period of remission (>3 years post presentation) [Pabst et al 2009, Tawana et al 2015]. In light of these data, lifelong clinical surveillance is warranted to ensure prompt recognition and appropriate management of disease recurrence. Repeat testing of CEBPA at recurrence is important to help distinguish conventional relapse from new, independent leukemic episodes.

Asymptomatic carriers. Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic CEBPA germline variant may be reviewed with CBC profiling every six to 12 months. Bone marrow examination may be performed if there is an appropriate clinical indication (e.g., abnormalities in CBC). Referral for post-testing genetic counseling should be considered as appropriate.
After initiating corticosteroids, affected individuals should be followed monthly, with efforts to taper the steroids to the lowest tolerated dose. Blood pressure should be monitored at each visit, as hypertension can develop following the initiation of steroid therapy.

When a maintenance steroid dose is achieved, ongoing evaluations should include the following:

Annual:

Complete neurologic examination

CBC

Measurement of blood pressure

Hearing screen

Evaluation of bone mineral densityNote: CED does not appear to cause an increase in spine density; therefore steroid therapy could lead to osteoporosis of the spine [Author, personal observation].

Routine monitoring of linear growth in children due to the possible side effect of delayed or stunted growth

The authors are aware of one affected teenage individual who died of a dilated ascending aorta dissection. Whether this is related to CED is unknown. Because the mechanism of CED involves increased TGFB1 signaling, also found in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, this death is of some concern. The authors are unaware of any other similar cases. Note: No recommendations for routine evaluation of the aorta can be made at this time.
For individuals with celiac disease, abnormal celiac disease serologies should be followed to normalization, which usually occurs within six to 12 months of starting a strict gluten-free diet.

Follow-up biopsy can be considered to confirm healing of intestinal villi. Because some patients on a strict gluten-free diet can heal gradually, this should typically be done at least two years after the initial diagnosis.

For asymptomatic relatives who have the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 celiac disease-susceptibility haplotype on molecular genetic testing and negative antibody results, tTG IgA testing should be performed at three- to five-year intervals to screen for the development of celiac disease-associated antibodies [Hill et al 2005, NIH Consensus Committee 2005, Pietzak 2005].
Monitor the following:

Hematologic indices including iron profile, reticulocyte count, and bilirubin to assess hemolysis every six months

Note: Individuals receiving transfusion therapy need closer monitoring.

Iron profile on a regular basis to assess for iron overload for those who are transfusion dependent

Hepatic function every six to twelve months

Vitamin D 25-OH levels in all patients whether or not they are receiving vitamin D supplements
If anomalies are identified in any organ system, lifelong periodic follow up is warranted. Consensus guidelines for surveillance in CFC syndrome have been established [Pierpont et al 2014].

Gastrointestinal. Monitor for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal reflux, constipation, and generalized dysmotility.

Endocrine. Monitor growth parameters to identify evidence of growth failure that may be associated with growth hormone deficiency. Monitor for signs of precocious puberty.

Cognitive development. Assess periodically to be certain that school programs or other supports are addressing learning needs.

Neurologic. Monitor neurologic signs and symptoms with period neurologic evaluations and MRI if indicated. Chiari malformation and later onset of seizures have been observed.

Audiologic. Annual evaluation of hearing is recommended.

Ophthalmologic. Periodic evaluation by an ophthalmologist to monitor for ocular issues (such as myopia, hyperopia, cataracts) is recommended.

Cardiac. If the initial cardiac evaluation is normal, periodic follow-up evaluations including an echocardiogram and an electrocardiogram are necessary as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and rhythm disturbances may develop later in life.

Dermatologic. As affected individuals age, formation of nevi may be progressive. At present, the natural history of the nevi is unknown. Periodic and routine dermatologic evaluation of nevi may be warranted to monitor for malignant change, although no individuals with CFC syndrome have been reported to have a malignant change.

Musculoskeletal. Periodic evaluation for scoliosis during young childhood is recommended.

Malignancy. No screening protocol exists at present, as it is unclear if individuals with CFC syndrome are at an increased risk for malignancies.
CFEOM is congenital and is believed to be non-progressive.

Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia and complications of corneal exposure [Yazdani & Traboulsi 2004].

Routine ophthalmologic care is indicated, with visits every three to four months during the first years of life, and annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals not at risk for amblyopia.

In individuals with specific TUBB3 variants, surveillance for endocrine abnormalities, facial or vocal cord weakness, and interventions for developmental delays are indicated.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring for scoliosis [North 2004], particularly in childhood and adolescence

Regular pulmonary monitoring including assessment for evidence of decreased nocturnal ventilation, such as morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, and decreased appetite or school performance; sleep studies; and lung function tests, including FEV1 and FVC

After an initial cardiac evaluation, consideration of ongoing cardiac monitoring on a case-by-case basis. Monitoring is advisable in those who have been found to have pathogenic variants in MYH7 and TPM2 and/or baseline cardiac abnormalities. Other subsets of individuals with CFTD may require cardiac monitoring in the future as more data are gathered regarding the incidence of cardiac complications in these people.

Regular assessment of motor abilities to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and physical support, such as walkers or wheelchairs
Regular follow-up visits can aid in early detection and treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic infections and non-infectious complications such as colitis, pulmonary granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis [Roesler et al 2005].

Laboratory examinations include CBC, chemistries, CRP, and ESR.

Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection.

Presence of microcytic anemia and hypoalbuminemia may indicate development of colitis.

Monitor liver chemistries for transaminase and alkaline phosphatase elevation, especially drug-related hepatotoxicity.

Although imaging is also important in detection of infectious and non-infectious manifestations, no specific guidelines address the intervals at which imaging should be used. CT or MRI should be followed closely to monitor progression of disease or until resolution of infections.

Frequent follow-up visits also provide the treating clinician opportunities to encourage compliance with prophylaxis and educate the patient and family about the disease.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of nutritional status and adaptation of diet to assure adequate caloric intake and to prevent aspiration

EEG approximately every third year
Children with Char syndrome need pediatric attention during infancy and childhood.

Although certain medical concerns including hearing loss, visual problems, and developmental delay are relatively rare among affected children, their prevalence is greater than in the general population. Ongoing developmental assessment for affected children by a pediatrician may be beneficial so that early intervention can be provided as needed.
Regular ophthalmologic evaluations are appropriate to follow changes in acuity and risks for retinal detachment and/or cataract. Monitoring nonverbal infants and children who are unable to report subjective loss of vision can permit timely detection of retinal detachment and appropriate surgical repair where necessary.

Frequent retesting of hearing by a pediatric audiologist may be necessary to determine the exact type and extent of hearing loss and to assess the success of hearing habilitation.

Frequent clinical and radiologic dental evaluations should be performed.

Wheeler et al [2000] recommended that LH and FSH be obtained between age two and three months, or by age 13-14 years if puberty has not occurred. If there is reason to suspect hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation test may be helpful.
The following regular evaluations are indicated to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Neurologic deficits. Neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities. Assessment for signs including depression and suicidal ideation

Impaired respiratory function. Monitoring of forced vital capacity (FEV) and other aspects of respiratory function performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation

Sensorineural hearing loss. Audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing
No guidelines for surveillance of classic CHS exist. Current standard of care initiates evaluation for bone marrow transplantation as quickly as feasible after the diagnosis is confirmed.

For atypical or adolescent- or adult-onset CHS, annual screening should include the following:

Abdominal ultrasound examination to monitor for hepatosplenomegaly

CBC to evaluate for cytopenias

Evaluation for signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia

Measurement of serum ferritin concentration

Soluble interleukin-2 receptor measurement

Consideration of bone marrow biopsy and/or lumbar puncture if history or physical examination suggests CNS involvement or other manifestations of the accelerated phase

If clinical status changes, the above tests should be repeated.

For both classic and atypical CHS, annual ophthalmologic examination is appropriate.
Generally, long-term follow up including clinical, radiographic, dental, orthodontic, and ophthalmologic evaluations is indicated [Silva et al 2007].
Skeletal dysplasia

Children with CHH require annual measurement of linear growth and body proportions; comparison with published disease-specific growth curves [Mäkitie et al 1992a] is helpful.

Pubertal development should be monitored during yearly follow-up visits and hypogonadism excluded if puberty is significantly delayed.

Clinical assessment for deformities of the lower extremities and joints is appropriate. Radiographic evaluation and orthopaedic consultation is necessary if symptomatic misalignment, restricted knee or hip mobility, or symptomatic joint laxity is present.

Individuals with AD require annual clinical and radiographic monitoring of the spine.

Anemia

Observe for clinical signs of anemia starting from the time of the initial diagnosis until early adolescence.

Follow RBC, hematocrit, and hemoglobin levels in those in remission after treatment for anemia at least every six months or when clinical signs of anemia reappear.

Note: (1) No data are available on the likely timing of recurrence of anemia after successful treatment; (2) severe anemia in adolescents and adults with CHH can be the presenting symptom of malignancy and may require extensive investigations with bone marrow evaluation and imaging studies.

Immunodeficiency and infection

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to infection in children, ongoing follow up by physicians with experience in this condition is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of infection.

Particularly in the first two years of life, children with normal initial immunologic assessment should be monitored for recurrent infections, especially life-threatening varicella infections [Notarangelo et al 2008, Rider et al 2009].

Laboratory markers for immunodeficiency may fluctuate in children with CHH, thus emphasizing the need for regular yearly follow up [Kainulainen et al 2014].

Bronchiectasis should be suspected especially in subjects with frequent respiratory tract infections and combined immune deficiency; high-resolution computed tomography should be used for diagnosis [Toiviainen-Salo et al 2008].

Malignancy

Although no specific recommendations exist, it is advised that children be checked on a regular basis (once yearly) by their pediatrician or primary healthcare provider for lymphomas and other associated malignancies by careful clinical examination and routine blood tests.

Skin should be inspected for abnormal changes, lymph nodes for enlargement, and abdomen for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or other abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at a regular one- to two-year interval, as well as yearly laboratory tests including blood counts with differential, LDH, and uric acid.

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to malignancy in adults, ongoing regular follow up beyond adolescence is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of malignancy, as described above. The frequency of follow-up visits need to be determined on an individual basis.
Regular ophthalmologic examination to monitor progression of CHM is recommended as affected individuals need advice regarding their levels of visual function. Goldmann visual field examinations provide practical information for both the clinician and the affected individual.

Spectral domain-OCT (SD-OCT) is useful during therapeutic trials to measure macular thickness and the presence of cystoid macular edema [Genead & Fishman 2011].
Whenever any unusual spells or any developmental regression is noted, a child neurology consultation should be performed, and EEG considered.
Surveillance includes monitoring for evidence of scoliosis and its progression.
To monitor for emergence of the FTTDCD phenotype in persons with citrin deficiency older than age one year, close surveillance of anthropometric indices (e.g., height, weight, and head circumference; serum lipid levels including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and LDL-cholesterol) is appropriate.

It is recommended that the following be measured every several months:

Plasma ammonia concentration (especially in the evening or 2 hours after feeding)

Plasma citrulline concentration

Serum PSTI concentration

Increases in plasma citrulline concentration and serum PSTI suggest onset of CTLN2 [Tsuboi et al 2001, Mutoh et al 2008] and should prompt initiation of treatment.
ARO

The possible manifestations and complications of osteopetrosis require repeat investigations; however, no general recommendations are available for the extent and frequency of investigations. A blood cell count and an ophthalmologic examination should be performed once a year at a minimum in all individuals with ARO.

In individuals who have undergone HSCT, surveillance should be coordinated by the transplantation center; chimerism analysis should be performed repeatedly, as secondary graft failures have been reported. However, such individuals may be free of disease manifestation even in the case of stable mixed chimerism, if a substantial part of blood cells are donor derived (i.e., coexistence of hematopoietic cells of donor and recipient origin).

ADOII. In ADOII, skeletal manifestations do not progress and therefore no special surveillance is necessary.
Neurologic, ophthalmologic, immunologic/hematologic, and orthopedic evaluations are based on individual findings as needed.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic tests of hearing and vision

Annual physical cardiac examination, with echocardiogram by age ten years. Even if normal, the latter should be repeated every five to ten years in light of uncertainty as to the incidence and range in age of onset of cardiomyopathy [Massin et al 1999, Facher et al 2004].

Monitoring of the spine for the development of progressive kyphoscoliosis. There should be a high index of suspicion for narrowing of the spinal canal with attention to change in gait and bowel/bladder habits, expression of pain, and focal neurologic changes such as clonus or abnormal tendon reflexes.

Routine dental evaluation as in the general population but with particular attention to the risk of tooth loss

Note: A table containing suggested guidelines for follow-up of individuals with CLS is provided in Hunter [2010].
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of respiratory function using pulmonary function testing or spirometry with measurements in sitting and supine positions to detect diaphragmatic involvement that increases the risk of nocturnal hypoventilation. When the forced vital capacity in the supine position is less than 60% of normal values, respiratory function should be monitored by pulse oximetry and/or arterial blood gases and, where available, polysomnography.

Clinical examination and x-rays as needed to monitor for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity (scoliosis, thoracic lordosis or kyphosis, lumbar hyperlordosis)

Monitoring of cardiac function every six to 12 months (by echocardiography, ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording) in those individuals with respiratory insufficiency with or without mechanical ventilation and/or CMD subtypes prone to cardiomyopathy (L-CMD, dystroglycanopathies) and cardiac rhythm disturbances (L-CMD)

Monitoring of neurologic function and EEG in those with CMD subtypes associated with seizures or if clinically indicated

Routine complete eye examinations in those with dystroglycanopathies to monitor for changes in vision and/or changes that suggest development of cataracts and/or evidence of retinal detachment

Note: In those with laminin alpha-2 deficiency the white matter changes do not require follow-up brain MRI.
Routine surveillance of muscle strength and respiratory function is recommended. In some patients, especially those with COLQ and DOK7 pathogenic variants, slowly progressive respiratory impairment is seen with increasing age. Symptoms of nighttime hypoventilation should be considered.
Regular evaluations to determine:

Neurologic status and need for treatment (or change in treatment) for musculoskeletal and/or neuropathic pain;

Functional disability and need for change in physical therapy regime and/or augmentative devices for activities of daily living and mobility;

Need for change in diet to control weight;

Need to involve specialists to evaluate and treat potential complications.
Surveillance includes regular evaluation by the multidisciplinary team to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
Gait and condition of feet should be monitored to determine need for bracing, special shoes, or surgery.
Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, and visual acuity is appropriate.
TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders. Annual:

Neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, and sensory loss

Physical therapy examination to monitor feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery

ENT consultation with laryngoscopy

Dynamic breathing chest x-ray

Hearing assessment

TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias

Annual assessment for the development of joint pain and scoliosis

Cervical spinal films to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia before:

A child reaches school age;

Surgical procedures involving general anesthesia
Surveillance includes periodic assessment by a neurologist and/or a neuromuscular disorders specialist to assess progression of weakness in the limbs and determine the need for use of prosthetic and assistive devices.
Monitoring of gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, surgery is appropriate.
Children's feet should be watched at regular intervals to provide for properly fitting shoes and avoid sores and skin breakdown.

It is appropriate to monitor gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery.
Scoliosis needs to be closely followed. Monitoring four times a year is recommended.

Hand function and foot strength should be evaluated by an orthopedist every six months starting from the date of diagnosis.
Appropriate surveillance includes annual evaluation by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
The following are appropriate:

Annual follow up with a neurologist for overall evaluation of neurologic deficits

Annual follow up with occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) to assess fine motor and gross motor function

Annual follow up with a pulmonologist for evaluation of respiratory function
Regular foot examination for pressure sores or poorly fitting footwear is appropriate.
Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising otologists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, physiatrists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability. While profound hearing loss begins during infancy, optic neuropathy and peripheral neuropathy in CMTX5 vary in age of onset of manifestations and progression. Thus, regular ophthalmologic and neurologic exams are warranted to monitor symptom development and progression.
Yearly reassessment for known potential complications (e.g., hypertension; renal or hepatic dysfunction; declining vision and hearing) is appropriate.
Surveillance includes the following:

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Annual follow up with a gastroenterologist and feeding specialists as needed to monitor feeding and weight gain

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Because of the rarity of tumors in CSS, the utility of tumor surveillance has not been determined.
Annual ophthalmologic evaluation should assess visual acuity, refractive error, cataracts in older individuals, and/or retinal dystrophy.

Annual hematologic evaluation should include complete blood count and differential to assess neutropenia. More frequent monitoring may be needed for individuals with lower ANC or more frequent infections.

Growth and weight gain should be monitored.
The interval at which individuals with COL4A1-related disorders should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms.

Annual clinical evaluation is reasonable.

Regular brain imaging can be proposed, especially to evaluate the size of asymptomatic cerebral aneurysms.
While surveillance depends on the specific genetic defect and on the clinical manifestations (see Table 1), it should always include periodic evaluations of the following: neurologic findings, urine analysis (for proteinuria) and renal function, ophthalmologic findings, and hearing.

Note: Because cardiomyopathy to date has been found only in the most severe phenotype (i.e., neonatal onset), cardiac evaluation should be performed at the time of diagnosis, but not periodically unless cardiac involvement has been documented.
Hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Monitoring of blood glucose concentration should follow typical protocols for neonates at risk for hypoglycemia.

Cardiac. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with a cardiovascular abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history. Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we advise providers and families to receive individualized care by a pediatric cardiologist, transitioning to an adult specialist following the “best practices” for the particular defect. General guidelines [Lin et al 2011(see Figure 4)] can be pragmatically dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with close evaluation in the first two years of life depending on the severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations and appropriate risk stratification. It is beyond the scope of this review to delineate the complex decision making involved in treating HCM or atrial tachycardia.

Tumor screening consisting of abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and urine testing for catecholamine metabolites and hematuria was proposed by Gripp et al [2002]. However, a subsequent report [Gripp et al 2004] on elevated catecholamine metabolites in individuals with Costello syndrome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful.

Serial abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma was proposed every three to six months until age eight to ten years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annually beginning at age ten years to screen for bladder cancer [Gripp et al 2002].

Neither of the above screening approaches has yet been shown to be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important factor for early tumor detection continues to be parental and physician awareness of the increased cancer risk.

Bone density. Osteoporosis is common in young adults with Costello syndrome [White et al 2005]. Bone density assessment is recommended as a baseline, with follow up depending on the initial result.
At clinic appointments and during periods of reduced caloric intake and febrile illness that could precipitate metabolic decompensation, individuals with CPT1A deficiency should undergo liver function testing whether they are symptomatic or not. Tests should include liver enzymes, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and functional liver tests (including the blood-clotting tests PT and PTT).
Annual or more frequent monitoring to regulate medication and diet is indicated.
Because progressive thickening of craniofacial bones continues throughout life, regular neurologic evaluation, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination are required for early diagnosis and management of complications of narrowing of the cranial foramina, including the foramen magnum.

The frequency of neurologic evaluations depends on the individual's history of skeletal changes.
Persons with a known risk for significant complications, including hydrocephalus, should be monitored from birth throughout life at intervals and by methods appropriate for the severity of the clinical findings.

Six of 29 persons with the FGFR3 pathogenic variant p.Pro250Arg required reoperation for increased intracranial pressure, emphasizing the need for continued long-term monitoring [Thomas et al 2005].
For patients undergoing treatment:

Determination of cerebral creatine level by in vivo 1H-MRS should be performed:

For individuals with GAMT and AGAT deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels during creatine supplementation therapy;

For individuals with CRTR deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels for the assessment of treatment outcome [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010b, van de Kamp et al 2012].

For GAMT deficiency: growth and nutritional status (plasma GAA levels, amino acids, ammonia, protein, albumin, pre-albumin levels) should be monitored every three to six months.

For CRTR deficiency: plasma GAA levels and plasma amino acids should be monitored every three to six months as high-dose arginine and glycine supplementation can result in increased GAA levels.

Repeat GFR annually for assessment of kidney function while on creatine supplementation therapy to detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy [Barisic et al 2002].

Perform neuropsychological assessment of cognitive functions and speech.
Visual acuity and routine ophthalmologic examination should be performed at least every year in children. Regular surveillance in adults is not necessary unless they have undergone penetrating keratoplasty. Affected individuals should be informed about penetrating keratoplasty and advised to contact their eye doctor in case of reduced visual acuity or increased glare.
Regular (yearly) eye examinations are recommended with refraction at a young age to monitor for the development of myopia.
Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic nutritionist and clinical biochemical geneticist is required. Monitoring should include:

Evaluation of early warning signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes including mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, and ankle clonus;

Plasma ammonia and amino acid analysis to identify hyperammonemia and deficiency of essential amino acids and impending hyperammonemia, respectively. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration [Brusilow & Horwich 2001].

Monitoring should occur frequently in neonates and infants, based on disease severity.

As affected individuals become older (teenage years and adulthood), clinical and biochemical monitoring can be extended to every six months to annually depending on clinical stability.
Clinical and laboratory examinations should be performed in individuals with nephropathic cystinosis according to disease severity and may include renal, endocrine, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and cardiac examinations [Kleta et al 2005]:

Evaluation by a nephrologist every three to six months depending on the severity of renal impairment

Renal function tests, electrolytes, and thyroid function tests at least every three to six months in those who are stable

Serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and intact parathyroid hormone; plain bone radiographs as well as DEXA scans to detect osteopenia and bone fragility predisposing to fractures, starting as soon as diagnosis is made and continued throughout the course of the disease

Ophthalmologic evaluation with fundoscopic examination to screen for increased intracranial pressure every one to two years for those being treated appropriately

Fasting blood glucose concentration throughout the course of the disease and testosterone concentration (in males) every two to three years, starting before puberty

In advanced disease (i.e., poorly treated adults) and in late stages of disease, perform every two to three years:

Chest CT for detection of coronary and other vascular calcification

ECG

Brain CT or MRI for evaluation of cerebral atrophy or calcifications

Evaluation for the presence of progressive muscle weakness and swallowing difficulties using electromyography (EMG), oral sensorimotor examination, and modified barium swallowing studies with videofluoroscopy

Pulmonary function tests

Neurologic and neurocognitive evaluations including visual-motor integration, visual memory, planning, sustained attention, and motor speed beginning at age seven to eight years [Besouw et al 2010a]
Recommended annual surveillance includes the following:

Neurologic and neuropsychologic evaluation

Cholestanol plasma concentration

Brain MRI

Echocardiography

Measurement of total body density (TBD)
Perform annual ophthalmologic examination, including refraction for evidence of myopia (which can be progressive) and fundus examination to inspect Bruch’s membrane.
Regular follow-up visits to the cardiologist every six to twelve months (depending on the severity of clinical manifestations) are required in order to monitor therapy efficacy. These visits should include the following:

Resting ECG

Exercise stress test, performed at the maximal age-predicted heart rate. For individuals on beta-blocker therapy (in whom maximal heart rate cannot be reached), the test should be performed at the highest tolerated workload.

Holter monitoring

Echo and MRI at least every two years

The limit for any allowed physical activity can be defined on the basis of exercise stress test done in the hospital setting; the use of commercially available heart rate monitoring devices for sports participation can be helpful in keeping the heart rate in a safe range during physical activity but should not be considered as an alternative to medical follow-up visits.
For those individuals with congenital neutropenia not undergoing HSCT, surveillance for evidence of malignant transformation to MDS/AML is critical to allow early therapeutic intervention. Observation should include the following:

General evaluations by parents and medical personnel several times a year

Blood counts several times a year

Annual bone marrow cytogenetic studies because of the frequent association of monosomy 7 and malignant transformation

Note: Although sequencing of the receptor for G-CSF (G-CSF-R) from peripheral blood may also provide evidence of evolution to MDS/AML [Ancliff et al 2003a], its clinical utility is not yet clearly established [Freedman & Alter 2002, Cassinat et al 2004, Beekman & Touw 2010].
Renal function should be assessed by BUN and plasma creatinine at a minimum of every two years and more often if a loss of function is evident. Plasma magnesium and potassium should also be assessed.

Individuals on droxidopa should be encouraged to report any adverse events to their physician.

Affected individuals should be queried at least yearly about continued efficacy of droxidopa against orthostatic hypotension and symptoms. Adjustment of dosage may be required.
Cardiac. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for optimal cardiac care in persons with DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] (full text) and consensus guidelines published in 2010 [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) include the following:

DMD

Complete cardiac evaluation at least every two years, beginning at the time of diagnosis or by the age of six until the age of ten years or at the onset of cardiac symptoms if they occur earlier

Note: At minimum, the evaluation should include an electrocardiogram and a noninvasive cardiac imaging study such as echocardiography or cardiac MRI.

At approximately age ten years, or at the onset of cardiac signs and symptoms, annual complete cardiac evaluation

Note: Most individuals with DMD demonstrating cardiac signs and symptoms are relatively late in their course.

If evaluation reveals ventricular dysfunction, the 2010 consensus guidelines recommend initiation of pharmacologic therapy and surveillance at least every six months

BMD. Complete cardiac evaluations beginning at approximately age ten years or at the onset of signs and symptoms. Evaluations should continue at least every two years.

The AAP recommendations for optimal cardiac care of female carriers for DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] include the following:

Education about the risk of developing cardiomyopathy and about the signs and symptoms of heart failure

Complete cardiac evaluation by a cardiac specialist with experience in the treatment of heart failure and/or neuromuscular disorders, with the initial evaluation to take place in late adolescence or early adulthood, or earlier at the appearance of cardiac signs and symptoms

Starting at age 25 to 30 years, screening with a complete cardiac evaluation at least every five years

Treatment of cardiac disease similar to that for boys with DMD or BMD

Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function testing before confinement to a wheelchair (usually age ~9-10 years)

Evaluation by a pediatric pulmonologist twice yearly after ANY of the following [Finder et al 2004]:

Confinement to a wheelchair

Reduction in vital capacity below 80% predicted

Age 12 years

The 2010 consensus guidelines [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) make detailed recommendations regarding pulmonary care, including:

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device;

Manual and mechanically assisted cough techniques;

Indications for nocturnal and then daytime noninvasive ventilation as well as for tracheostomy.

Orthopedic

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures and scoliosis in those with DMD and BMD

Evaluation for surgical interventions as needed
Screening and identification of DCM before the onset of symptoms enables the initiation of medical therapy that may delay disease progression.

Individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant who are found to have any ECG abnormality should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation for disease progression at least annually [Brodt et al 2013]. This should include, minimally, an ECG, 24- or 48-hour rhythm monitoring, and measurement of ventricular function.

Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic LMNA variant should undergo cardiovascular evaluation (medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every one to two years and/or whenever new symptoms arise.
An asymptomatic person with a known pathogenic variant. Cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) should be performed every one to three years.

An asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relative in a kindred with an established diagnosis of FDC in which the family pathogenic variant is unknown. Depending on age, cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) is indicated every three to five years. If an at-risk first-degree relative has evidence of idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy, the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

An asymptomatic first-degree relative of an individual with IDC in whom it is unknown if the IDC is familial should undergo cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every three to five years starting in childhood. If a first-degree at-risk relative shows evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy, a diagnosis of FDC is made and the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

For at-risk relatives with abnormal evaluation results that do not meet criteria for DCM but could be consistent with early DCM (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal systolic function, decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle, normal echocardiogram with ECG abnormality) [Burkett & Hershberger 2005, Hershberger et al 2010a, Hershberger & Siegfried 2011], full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease with history of myocardial infarction or history of exposure to cardiotoxic medications) and subsequent yearly screening are indicated.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of seizure activity by regular neurologic examination and EEG

In the event of new neurologic findings or neurologic deterioration, evaluation for seizures

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference as well as assessment of psychomotor development as a part of regular health maintenance evaluations

Monitoring of orthopedic complications including foot deformity and scoliosis
The following are appropriate:

Long-term follow-up to monitor the highly variable rate of progression and degree of involvement of different organ systems

Regular neurologic evaluations to follow the progression of dystonia and consider pharmacologic treatment

Annual developmental and speech/language assessment in childhood, with appropriate adaptation of educational programming

Annual audiologic assessment

Regular assessment for dementia and/or psychiatric manifestations, with initiation of appropriate care or treatment
Sequential audiologic examinations are essential to:

Document the stability or progression of the hearing loss;

Identify and treat superimposed hearing losses, such as middle ear effusion.

In a person with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss caused by pathogenic variants in SLC26A4, the hearing loss can progress and annual audiometric testing may be warranted. Additionally, thyroid function should be followed if the diagnosis is consistent with Pendred syndrome.
Routine developmental surveillance and screening are recommended because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism. See the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines on surveillance and screening to identify patients with developmental disorders in general [Council on Children with Disabilities 2006] and autism in particular [Johnson et al 2007] and recommendations for management of children with ASD [Myers et al 2007] (Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Surveillance should include the following:

Monitoring of height, weight, and BMI

Monitoring for abnormal movements, staring spells, or other events of concern for possible seizures

Monitoring for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, and other symptoms of brain stem or spinal cord dysfunction that could indicate Chiari malformations/cerebellar ectopia, and neurologic consultation and brain MRI if indicated

Clinical screening for scoliosis until the age of skeletal maturity

Annual evaluation and monitoring of hearing in first three years of life

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations and facilitate long-term monitoring for emerging medical or mental health concerns
Systematic follow-up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Battaglia et al 2008].
Jones et al [2011] suggested that individuals with 2q deletions sparing 2q37.1 likely have a less than 5% risk of developing Wilms tumor; therefore, they do not recommend surveillance for the development of Wilms tumor in these individuals. Wilms tumor screening can be considered for individuals with deletions including 2q37.1, although screening intervals are not delineated. Wilms tumor screening protocols in individuals with WAGR syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome include abdominal ultrasounds every three months until mid-childhood [Beckwith 1998]. The practitioner caring for an infant or young child with a 2q37 deletion is encouraged to monitor the literature for updates.

When the 2q37 microdeletion is identified in early childhood, screening for the development of renal cysts at age four years and again at puberty is suggested [Falk & Casas 2007].

The following are also appropriate:

Ongoing routine pediatric care

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information about the syndrome

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric evaluation to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems
Renal function measured as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) should be monitored at least annually together with the parameters used to stage chronic kidney disease (i.e., blood pressure, hematocrit/hemoglobin, urinary calcium excretion, and serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations).

More frequent visits and monitoring for complications of chronic kidney disease (i.e., hypertension, anemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism) as well as consideration of intensified treatment of cardiovascular risk factors may be indicated if GFR falls below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD Stage 3B).
Serial EEGs are appropriate when seizure frequency increases or when seizures of new symptomatology occur.

Repeat brain MRI with a higher resolution technique is recommended in individuals with treatment-resistant seizures whose first brain MRI was normal.
Yearly evaluations by the multi-disciplinary team mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

ENT and audiology evaluations at least yearly

Regular speech and language evaluation to monitor language development

Regular ophthalmology evaluations to monitor for potential complications from high myopia including cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal detachment

Yearly evaluations by a clinical geneticist familiar with hereditary forms of deafness
Audiograms should be obtained on an annual basis to follow progression of hearing loss.
The following are appropriate:

Semiannual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss
The following are appropriate:

Annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss
For individuals with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss:

Examine semiannually or annually by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment.

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months to determine whether hearing loss is progressive.
Hearing loss in DFNX1 is prelingual or postlingual and progressive, regular audiologic evaluation is recommended to assess hearing status and progression of hearing loss.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition.

Neonatal multisystem disease:

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Developmental and neurologic assessment

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Isolated hepatic disease

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Evidence of renal disease (proteinuria and aminoaciduria)

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma
The following are indicated:

Complete blood counts several times a year

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity periodically and if evidence of another cytopenia or failure of current treatment is noted

Monitoring of blood pressure in individuals who are steroid dependent

Monitoring of growth individuals who are steroid dependent and in those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Evaluation by an endocrinologist; recommended for individuals who are steroid dependent and those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Cancer surveillance includes the following:

In individuals with DBA who are otherwise healthy, every four to six months: an interim history, physical examination, and measurement of blood count

If red blood-cell, white blood-cell, or platelet counts fall rapidly, bone marrow aspirate with biopsy and cytogenetic studies (including karyotype and FISH analysis) to look for acquired abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7, and 8 that are associated with certain cancers [Vlachos et al 2008]
Annual monitoring of spinal curvature to prevent neurologic complications and joint contractures is appropriate.
The recommendations in this section were discussed at the first DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and updated in 2014 at a consensus conference that led to publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015]. Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials.

Bone marrow failure

Consider repeating a complete blood count (CBC) once a year if CBCs are normal. CBCs should be obtained more frequently at the discretion of the treating hematologist.

Consider annual bone marrow aspirate and biopsy that includes morphologic examination and cytogenetic studies.

Individuals on androgen therapy for bone marrow failure

Check liver function tests prior to starting and then every three months.

Perform liver ultrasound examination semiannually for adenomas.

Check cholesterol and triglycerides prior to starting and every six months.

Cancer surveillance. Most solid tumors develop after the first decade (median age of onset: 28 years).

Monthly self-examination for oral, head, and neck cancer

Annual cancer screening by an otolaryngologist

Annual gynecologic examination

Annual skin cancer screening by a dermatologist

Pulmonary fibrosis. Perform annual pulmonary function tests starting either at diagnosis or at an age when the individual is able to appropriately perform the test (typically age ~8 years).

Oral and dental surveillance

Schedule routine screening and dental hygiene visits every six months.

Maintain good oral hygiene.

The individual’s dentist should be made aware of the increased risk of head and neck squamous cell cancers and perform a thorough examination at each visit.

Oral leukoplakia should be monitored carefully and suspicious lesions should be biopsied.
A patient’s primary care physician and biochemical geneticist should follow growth and development regularly. Developmental delays should be identified and treated as early as possible.

Plasma amino acid levels should be regularly followed to guide dietary management by the biochemical geneticist in conjunction with a qualified metabolic nutritionist.

Complications of DLD deficiency including hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, and CNS changes require regular surveillance if present.

Patients receiving dichloroacetate (DCA) need to be monitored for the development of peripheral neuropathy [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].
Lifelong monitoring (≥4x/day) of blood glucose concentrations is indicated to achieve the goals of therapy.

Children with PNDM, particularly those with a pathogenic variant in KCNJ11 or ABCC8, should undergo periodic developmental evaluations.

Yearly screening for chronic complications associated with diabetes mellitus should be started after age ten years and should include the following:

Urinalysis for microalbuminuria

Ophthalmologic examination to screen for retinopathy
Periodic glucose tolerance tests can be used to assess insulin secretion. Most children with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus in remission have no evidence of beta cell dysfunction or insulin resistance in the fasting state. Insulin response to intravenous glucose loading is often normal but suggests future recurrence if abnormal [Shield et al 2004].

Measure growth (height, weight, head circumference) at regular intervals (i.e., at least every six months)

Developmental assessment to identify any special educational needs is appropriate.

Children with HIL need to be monitored for developmental delay and special educational needs.
Sensory impairment. Examine feet on a daily basis to screen for skin injury.

Dementia. Perform annual routine clinical testing for dementia:

Observation of behavior

Use of tools such as the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)

Hearing loss. Perform annual audiogram.
Formal ophthalmic examination should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Frequent and serial monitoring is needed; the schedule should be determined by the findings present. Treatments (e.g., peripheral laser photocoagulation) may minimize the risk of retinal detachment resulting from high myopia.

Hearing evaluations should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Data on the natural history and possible progression of hearing loss are not currently available and thus no timetable for monitoring has been established.

Periodic monitoring of renal function seems prudent, based on the report of Shaheen et al [2010]. However the frequency of DBS-associated renal dysfunction is not currently known.
Examination by a movement disorder specialist at least several times yearly is recommended.
Surveillance is individualized based on disease progression.
In those with cardiac malformations or conduction defects:

ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of a known cardiac malformation, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

In those with renal anomalies:

Renal function should be monitored by routine laboratory parameters for renal function (ie, serum creatinine), even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination. In the first years of life, renal function should be performed every six months or once per year. If renal function remains normal, the screening intervals may be extended.

Renal ultrasound should be repeated if renal position anomalies could cause obstruction. The frequency depends on the clinical situation.

In those affected individuals with thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis, blood counts should be monitored at least yearly. However, data are sparse on the natural history of thrombocytopenia in individuals with SALL4 pathogenic variants and so it is unknown at present if more severe complications may occur.
Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia if it occurs.

Routine ophthalmologic visits every three to six months during the first years of life

Annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals older than age seven to 12 years who have good binocular vision and thus are no longer at risk for amblyopia
Most individuals diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia as infants who are followed by a genetics or metabolic specialist are discharged from follow up after a successful galactose challenge at age one year (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Among children with Duarte variant galactosemia who have been restricted for dietary galactose as infants, if the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is >1.0 mg/dL following a galactose challenge at age one year, galactose restriction may be resumed, and the galactose challenge and measurement of erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level repeated every four to six months until the level can be stabilized at <1.0 mg/dL.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral assessments

Periodic monitoring for evidence of seizures and/or change in seizure type
Regular assessment of psychomotor development is recommended for all children with the 17q12 recurrent duplication. Referral to an early intervention program will likely be of considerable benefit.
Table 2. 

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome 

Interval/Age

Test/Measurement

Infancy

Measurement of head circumference at every visit or at least every 3 monthsHearing evaluation

Annual

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors & strabismusCardiology evaluationEchocardiogram to measure the aortic root & ascending aorta with calculation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation. Significant dilation may require more frequent monitoring and/or CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography.Occupational & physical therapy assessment (through age 6 years)Speech & language assessment (through age 6 years; annual assessment beyond age 6 years if moderate or severe speech/language disorder is present)Behavior assessment (attention, anxiety, opposition, aggression)

Every 3 years

Assessment of intellectual abilities & academic achievement

Adolescents/adults

Genetic counseling

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]
Periodic developmental assessment to assure that educational needs are being met is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring and guidance as needed for educational and behavior problems

Regular lifelong dietary evaluation to assure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring for complications of hypertonic musculature such as scoliosis and the development of a stiff gait

Regular lifelong evaluations of the following:

Teeth: frequency determined by a dentist, based on the dental condition

Heart: based on the type of congenital anomaly. If no congenital cardiac anomaly is present, ongoing cardiac surveillance is not needed.

Eyes
Follow up several times a year with a neurologist specializing in movement disorders is recommended (especially if there is progression) to prevent secondary complications, although little information regarding the benefit of this approach is available.

Individuals treated with GPi DBS surgery require regular follow up, more frequent in the first year after surgery, for programming of the stimulation parameters and monitoring of battery life.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
Perform annual screening for iron deficiency anemia with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screen annually for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration to provide zinc supplementation when necessary for enhanced wound healing.

Periodic echocardiographic screening to evaluate for the development of dilated cardiomyopathy is appropriate.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/ or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.
Because the lifetime risk of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma is greater than 90% in individuals with RDEB, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions may be necessary followed by local excision.

Screening for anemia should be routine with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration in order to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measurement of serum zinc concentration should be routine in order to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening for predisposition to dilated cardiomyopathy secondary to selenium deficiency and carnitine deficiency is possible by measurement of serum concentrations of selenium and carnitine. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy by transthoracic echocardiogram is also useful [Sidwell et al 2000]. No guidelines regarding the age at which such screening should begin have been established.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may pick up early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.
Screening for iron-deficiency anemia should be routine, with complete blood counts and measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration should be routine to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should be initiated.

Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy can be accomplished with regular echocardiograms [Lara-Corrales et al 2010].

Because of the risk for squamous cell carcinoma, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions followed by local excision may be necessary.
Surveillance for infection and proper wound healing is indicated.
Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon is recommended if the affected individual has chronic pain or limb deformities (genu varum, genu valgum).
Radiographic surveillance by an orthopedist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Annual cardiac assessment consisting of ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography in order to detect asymptomatic cardiac disease. More advanced and invasive cardiac assessment may be required.

Monitoring of respiratory function
If no abnormalities are found on echocardiogram in an adult, a follow-up echocardiogram is not necessary. (Because longitudinal data on progression of aortic dilation are not available, specific recommendations for follow-up in individuals with a normal aortic diameter are not available.)

Yearly echocardiogram is warranted if an abnormality such as aortic dilatation or mitral valve prolapse is present.
DEXA should be repeated approximately every other year if bone loss is confirmed. Otherwise, routine population surveillance of bone density is all that is necessary.

Annual echocardiography is not necessary in those with a normal initial echocardiogram [Atzinger et al 2011]. In children and adolescents with a normal aortic root diameter, it is the author's practice to repeat every two to three years until young adulthood (age ~25 years). If the aortic root diameter is increased or accelerating faster than body surface area, more frequent monitoring is appropriate. In adults with a normal aortic root diameter, no further monitoring is needed.
The use of surveillance of the arterial vasculature assumes that effective interventions will decrease the risk of arterial dissection or rupture and prolong life. At a time when an open surgical approach was the only option, the benefit of surveillance could not be established. As endovascular approaches to management of aneurysms and dissection become more available, intervention is considered earlier and surveillance is seen to have greater benefit. There are, however, no published data that assess the efficacy of screening strategies to identify the regions in the arterial vasculature at highest risk; conversely, there are examples in which regions of concern in the arterial vasculature failed to progress and arterial rupture occurred at other more distant sites. Thus, the benefit of controlled studies cannot be overemphasized.

If undertaken, noninvasive imaging such as ultrasound examination, magnetic resonance angiogram, or computed tomography angiogram with and without venous contrast is preferred to identify aneurysms, dissections, and vascular ruptures [Chu et al 2014]. Because arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter and at sites of high pressure injection, conventional arteriograms are not recommended.

Blood pressure monitoring on a regular basis is recommended to allow for early treatment if hypertension develops, which will presumably reduce vascular stress and injury.
The following are appropriate:

Routine ophthalmologic examination for management of myopia and early detection of glaucoma or retinal detachment

Routine examination for inguinal hernia and surgical referral as necessary

Vigilant observation of blood pressure

Regular follow up by an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis

Echocardiogram at five-year intervals, even if the initial echocardiogram is normal

Females should be made aware of complications associated with pregnancy (see Pregnancy Management).
Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.

Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

System

Evaluation/Action

Frequency

Growth

Assess growth and monitor for failure to thrive

At each visit

Gastrointestinal

Monitor feeding and electrolyte status, particularly in those with severe diarrhea

Neurologic

Monitor for epileptic crisis; modify therapy according to clinical presentation and EEG findings

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular and pulmonary follow up starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis

Annual MRA from head to pelvis
The following are appropriate:

Follow up as needed based on the extent of systemic involvement in the affected individual

Regular assessment of developmental progress to guide therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations
Neonates with HS require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus.

Infants with HS require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion

Those dependent on frequent transfusions require at least annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration.

If iron chelation is required secondary to frequent transfusions in children too young to undergo splenectomy, appropriate monitoring for toxicity and effectiveness of chelation treatment is necessary [Musallam et al 2013].

When hemolysis is significant, ultrasound examination to evaluate for cholelithiasis is indicated by age ten to twelve years, and every five to ten years thereafter.
Patients need lifelong clinical follow up and psychosocial support including evaluation of the drug treatment and comprehensive rehabilitation.
Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies including abdominal sonogram are indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.
Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies such as an abdominal sonogram is indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.
There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are treated in dermatology clinics, neurology clinics, or pain clinics, or by anesthesiologists specializing in the management of chronic pain. It is important to monitor for side effects of treatment.
Regular examinations to address:

Growth and nutritional status, including problems with feeding and risk of aspiration

Respiratory function

Joint contractures and scoliosis

Development or management of epileptic seizures
Monitoring of the size of adult osteochondromas, in particular those involving the pelvis or scapula, may aid in early identification of malignant degeneration, but no cost/benefit analyses are available to support routine surveillance.

Radiography, CT scanning, MRI, positron emission tomography and technicium-99 radionuclide imaging can be used to evaluate centrally located osteochondromas, but it is not known whether the benefits outweigh the risks of irradiation and the potential for false positive results that lead to unnecessary interventions. In addition, optimal screening intervals have not been determined.

A single screening MRI of the spine in children with HMO has been recommended by some [Roach et al 2009] to identify spinal lesions that may cause pressure on the spinal cord. The presence of osteochondromas in the canal would then warrant close clinical follow up; encroaching lesions and those causing symptoms may merit excision.
See 2014 consensus guidelines [Frohnmayer et al 2014] (full text).

Annual evaluation with a multidisciplinary team including an endocrinologist

Regular blood counts, every three to four months while stable and more often as needed

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy at least annually to evaluate morphology, cellularity (from the biopsy), FISH, and cytogenetics (the latter two for emergence of a malignant clone). Individuals on GCSF need to have a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy every six months, if possible.

In individuals who develop Sweet syndrome (neutrophilic skin infiltration), prompt investigation for hematologic disease progression including bone marrow evaluation

Notes: (1) Progressively changing blood counts without a potential cause (e.g., acute infection or suppression from medication) require immediate evaluation with a complete blood count and bone marrow examination with FISH and cytogenetics. (2) It is important to recognize that rising blood counts can be due to either the development of MDS/AML or, rarely, reversion of a germline mutation in a stem cell, which repopulates the marrow with normal cells (somatic stem cell mosaicism). These individuals may require immediate HSCT (for MDS/AML) or continued close monitoring with complete blood counts at least every one to two months and a bone marrow examination with cytogenetics every six months.

Individuals receiving androgen therapy

Liver function tests every three to six months

Liver ultrasound examination every six to 12 months for androgen-related changes, including tumors

Cancer surveillance

Annual gynecologic assessment for genital lesions beginning at age 13. Thorough vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear can begin when women become sexually active or by age 18 years, whichever is earlier. Suspicious genital tract lesions should be biopsied.

Examination every six months for oral, head, and neck cancers beginning by age nine to ten years. Screening should be performed by a dentist, oral surgeon, or ENT familiar with FA. Nasolaryngoscopy starting at age ten years, or within the first year after HSCT. Individuals with difficulty or pain with swallowing should be evaluated for esophageal cancer.

For individuals with a history of premalignant or malignant lesions: surveillance examinations every two to three months

For individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants in BRCA2: screening for neuroblastomas, brain tumors, and kidney tumors every six months (see also Risk to Family Members – Autosomal Recessive FA)
The following are appropriate:

Annual or more frequent renal function studies

Annual cardiology evaluation

Annual audiology evaluation

Biennial brain MRI/MRA
Individuals on long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation of their clinical course to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected factor V Leiden heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment. Fundus photography may be helpful in characterizing changes in the optic nerve over time.

Assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing

Regular review of communication needs and environmental adaptations
Multiple professional societies have published guidelines based on the available evidence to date as well as expert consensus [Church et al 2003b, Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. The following surveillance recommendations are based on these expert society guidelines.

In individuals known to have FAP

Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy every one to two years, beginning at age ten to 12 years

Colonoscopy, once polyps are detected

Annual colonoscopy thereafter if colectomy is delayed more than a year after polyps emerge. In individuals age ten to 20 years in whom adenomas are smaller than 6.0 mm and without villous component or high grade dysplasia, delay in colectomy may be considered.

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) including complete visualization of the ampulla of Vater (using a duodenoscope if necessary) is recommended, though the age of initiation is variable. The American College of Gastroenterology recommends beginning screening at age 23 to 30 years, whereas the NCCN recommends starting at age 20 to 25 years or prior to colectomy. Surveillance is recommended every six months to four years depending on duodenal adenoma burden. The frequency of EGD depends on the severity of duodenal adenomas; Spigelman staging criteria can help determine the frequency. The Spigelman staging criteria are summarized by Syngal et al [2015] (see Table 9). The NCCN recommends examination of the stomach at time of upper endoscopy (frequency determined by duodenal polyp surveillance). Fundic gland polyps are common in FAP and low-grade dysplasia can be found, but rarely progresses. Specific gastric polyp screening or surgery should be considered in the setting of high-grade dysplasia only. Non-fundic gland polyps should be removed endoscopically.

Annual physical examination including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations and neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm) and palpation of the thyroid starting in the late teenage years

Thyroid cancer. In addition to annual thyroid examination, starting in late teenage years [NCCN 2016], annual thyroid ultrasound may be considered with fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]; however, data supporting this recommendation are limited [NCCN 2016].

Annual abdominal palpation for desmoids. If family history of desmoids, consider MRI or CT scan within one to three years post colectomy and then every five to ten years. Data to support screening and treatment of desmoid tumors are limited.

Small-bowel polyps and cancer. Although the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] does not recommend routine small bowel screening distal to the duodenum, the NCCN recommends considering adding small bowel visualization to CT or MRI for desmoids (if applicable), especially if duodenal polyposis is advanced.

Screening for hepatoblastoma. Efficacy in individuals with FAP is unclear. Screening protocols in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, in which the risk for hepatoblastoma is also increased, often include frequent (every 2-3 months) abdominal ultrasound examinations and measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations, and have resulted in early detection of hepatoblastomas [Tan & Amor 2006]. Screening for hepatoblastoma in FAP using liver palpation, abdominal ultrasound, and measurement of AFP every three to six months during the first five years of life has been suggested [NCCN 2016].

Adrenal tumors. Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

In individuals who have undergone colectomy

If total colectomy with IPAA is performed, routine endoscopic surveillance of the ileal pouch is recommended every two years [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016].

If subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is performed, surveillance of the remaining rectum every six to 12 months, depending on the number of polyps that develop [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. Cancer may still occur in the remaining rectum, but the risk is low with current management [Church et al 2003a].

If total colectomy with end ileostomy is performed, ileoscopy is recommended every two years [NCCN 2016].

In individuals known to have attenuated FAP

Colonoscopy every two to three years, beginning in late teens

Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy with polypectomy every one to two years depending on polyp burden

Colectomy. The absolute and relative indications for colectomy are the same as for FAP (see Surveillance).

Screening and surveillance of the upper gastrointestinal tract as for FAP (see Surveillance)

Annual physical examination, including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations, neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm), and palpation of the thyroid with consideration of follow-up ultrasound examination and fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011].

Due to the lower risk of desmoid tumors and hepatoblastomas in attenuated FAP compared to FAP, screening of these tumors is currently not recommended.

In individuals known to have GAPPS. It is currently unknown if screening for gastric cancer or prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Due to the extent of gastric polyposis, in addition to reports of rapid progression of fundic gland polyposis, gastric cancer surveillance in this condition may have limited effectiveness [Repak et al 2016].
Routine surveillance of the urinary tract for evidence of bladder diverticula and/or vesicoureteral reflux is indicated.
No surveillance guidelines have been published. The following evaluations should be performed on a regular basis, with the treating physician determining the frequency based on initial presentation and severity of the condition.

Table 6. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Eyes

Ophthalmologic evaluation

ENT/Mouth

Hearing evaluation

Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram & electrocardiogram to monitor for development of cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, respectively

Gastrointestinal

Continued assessment of nutrition and growth

Measurement of serum lactate, electrolytes, & liver function tests w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile

Neurologic

Regular neurologic evaluations & developmental assessments

Immunologic

Complete blood count

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome
Surveillance includes:

Monitoring of respiratory function in individuals with advanced FCMD over age ten years. Those who survive beyond age 20 years may require tracheostomy or noninvasive respiratory support.

Monitoring of myocardial involvement by chest x-ray, ECG, and echocardiography in individuals over age ten years.

Observation/evaluation of gastrointestinal function by a qualified specialist, using a video-fluoroscopic swallow assessment, upper gastrointestinal tract image and pH monitor for gastroesophageal reflux

Monitoring for foot deformities and scoliosis
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of growth in children

Periodic evaluation of chronic respiratory disease: spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study. Follow-up frequency depends on findings.

Regular monitoring of blood pressure and optimal management of blood pressure lability to help prevent some of the neurologic progression with age, which can be associated with compromised cerebral perfusion

Routine monitoring of other cardiovascular problems that can worsen with age (e.g., a greater degree of postural hypotension, worsening of supine hypertension, development of ischemic glomerulosclerosis, and cardiac arrhythmias) [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]

Monitoring for adequate hydration by measurement of blood urea nitrogen levels

Screening for sleep-disordered breathing with polysomnography

Periodic eye examination for strabismus, corneal opacities, or abnormal eye movements

Annual examination of the spine for early evidence of scoliosis to permit timely institution of bracing and exercise therapy

Periodic assessment of psychomotor development and behavior in children
Routine follow up for any of the above-listed medical issues by the appropriate specialist is warranted.
Children who are at risk based on family history should undergo regular fundus examination to evaluate for the development of retinal neovascularization, traction, or exudate.

Asymptomatic individuals with a small region of peripheral avascularity may require annual review only. Those with active neovascularization or exudate may well require treatment and close observation thereafter.

Individuals with retinal traction require review at intervals depending on the degree of stability of the clinical findings. The frequency of the review varies by individual depending on the assessment of the examining clinician.
The following are appropriate:

Growth parameters followed on a regular basis and plotted on age-appropriate curves

Regular follow up to monitor developmental progress, behavior concerns, gastrointestinal functioning, and neurologic issues

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of strabismus and any visual issues

Annual audiology evaluation for evidence of hearing loss in XLOS

Regular dental evaluations for individuals with XLOS and LS
Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual:

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Audiologic screening; more frequent evaluation if there is a history of multiple episodes of otitis media

Blood pressure measurement and assessment of renal function

Standard monitoring for renal anomalies

Monitoring of bone age and for early puberty especially in cases of growth hormone use

Sonographic evaluation for renal cysts in teenage/adult years as indicated by abnormalities on the renal function tests and/or blood pressure measurement
Vertebral anomalies can lead to progressive scoliosis; orthopedic monitoring is therefore indicated.

If an individual with Larsen syndrome is born without dislocated hips, careful surveillance should be maintained to ensure that dislocation does not occur.
All individuals with FMF including those not currently being treated, those being treated with colchicine, and those receiving medication other than colchicine should undergo an annual physical examination, a urine spot test for protein, and an evaluation for hematuria [Twig et al 2014]. Kosan et al [2013] additionally recommended monitoring acute-phase reactants (ESR and fibrinogen levels) at regular intervals during attack-free periods, particularly in those with the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant.
The following should be considered as part of routine medical care for individuals with focal dermal hypoplasia:

Skin. Routine follow-up with a dermatologist to anticipate and manage common skin problems

Papillomatosis

Monitoring for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease and swallowing difficulties at routine health visits. When present, refer to an otolaryngologist for evaluation of possible verrucoid papillomas and management with surgical or laser therapy as needed.

Routine monitoring for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea (snoring, gasping, breathing pauses). If present, a sleep study should be performed [Bostwick et al 2016].

Skeletal. Routine physical examinations and/or spine radiographs to evaluate for scoliosis, particularly in individuals with costovertebral segmentation abnormalities

Dental. Regular examinations

Other

Routine monitoring of growth and body composition to determine if early nutritional intervention is needed [Motil et al 2016]

Regular eye examinations to monitor for changes in visual acuity and risks for retinal detachment in individuals with retinal colobomas. Any acute changes in vision should be considered a medical emergency as retinal detachment can lead to total blindness.

Routine screening of cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and adaptive ability, with appropriate referrals to therapeutic interventions as indicated [Deidrick et al 2016]
The following should be monitored periodically to assess the adequacy of treatment, and more frequently following initial diagnosis when treatment is being optimized:

Complete blood count

Serum and CSF folate concentrations. In particular, monitoring the trough CSF folate concentration is critical to assure that the dose of folate is sufficient to achieve CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to what is normal for the affected individual’s age.

Neurologic/cognitive status to ensure that CSF folate levels are adequate

Serum and CSF homocysteine concentrations. A high homocysteine concentration is the most sensitive indicator of folate deficiency.

Serum immunoglobulin concentrations until they are within the normal range and the hemoglobin and serum folate levels are normal and stable
The following are appropriate:

Routine care by a general pediatrician

Follow-up evaluations with standardized tests by a speech and language pathologist
Published clinical management guidelines provide detailed discussion of recommended surveillance [Corben et al 2014, www.curefa.org].

The following are appropriate.

If ECG and echocardiogram performed at the time of initial diagnosis are normal, annual repeat testing

Annual fasting blood sugar to monitor for diabetes mellitus

Hearing assessment every two to three years or more often if symptoms are present. This should include testing of hearing in background noise, as it is more often abnormal than the common audiogram assessed in a quiet environment [Rance et al 2008]

Sleep study to investigate for obstructive sleep apnea if concerns are raised by clinical history or a screening test such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale
There are no specific surveillance guidelines for Fryns syndrome. In those who survive the neonatal period, surveillance depends on the types of malformations present and is specific to the individual.

Infants with successful CDH repair should be followed by a multidisciplinary team at a specialized center, with periodic evaluations by a pediatric surgeon, nurse specialist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, and nutritionist.
For those with a confirmed diagnosis of FSHD, the following surveillance applies:

Pain. Pain should be assessed at regular visits to primary care physicians and physical therapists.

Respiratory dysfunction

Affected individuals with moderate to severe FSHD, defined as those with proximal lower extremity weakness, should be routinely screened for hypoventilation.

Yearly forced vital capacity (FVC) measurements should be monitored for all affected individuals who are wheelchair bound, have pelvic girdle weakness and superimposed pulmonary disease, and/or have moderate to severe kyphoscoliosis, lumbar hyperlordosis, or chest wall deformities.

Hearing loss

As in children who are at risk for hearing loss for other reasons, hearing can be followed routinely by periodic assessment as part of school-based testing.

Hearing screens are particularly important in severe infantile onset forms of FSHD, as hearing loss can result in delayed language acquisition.

Adults should have a formal hearing evaluation based purely on symptoms. No additional audiometry screening of asymptomatic individuals is necessary.

Ophthalmologic disease

Annual dilated ophthalmoscopy in childhood is indicated.

In adults, a dilated retinal exam should be performed at the time of diagnosis; if vascular disease is absent, follow-up exams are only necessary if visual symptoms develop.

In children known to be at risk for FSHD (because of family history) but for whom the diagnosis has not yet been confirmed, annual dilated ophthalmoscopy is indicated.
Members of the Danish family with FTD3 are followed in the Copenhagen Memory Disorders Clinic, a multidisciplinary clinic involving neurologic and psychiatric services, genetic counseling, molecular genetic testing, and clinical diagnostic and follow-up medical service.
Specific recommendations should be provided after evaluating the individual needs of each affected person. However, the authors would recommend at least annual visits with pediatric neurology (most importantly, to monitor for and/or treat epilepsy) and physical medicine (most importantly, to monitor for equipment needs and to monitor for and/or treat manifestations of spasticity). As part of a special needs program, periodic visits with genetics, ophthalmology, and orthopedic surgery will also be required.
The following are appropriate:

Routine management of congenital heart disease, renal and urinary tract malformations

Routine management of hormone deficiencies

Consideration of oral steroids for inflammatory bowel disease [Desplantes et al 2014] or anti-TNF treatment [Bégin et al 2013]. Some complications of IBD such as bowel stenosis may require appropriate surgical intervention.

Consideration of pancreatic enzyme supplementation if steatorrhea is present [Desplantes et al 2014]

Chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for acute myelogeneous leukemia

Frequent follow up by a hematologist or immunologist to monitor infection frequency and neutrophil counts to ensure an adequate response to G-CSF (i.e., absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L)

Monitoring of growth in children and pubertal development in adolescents

Biochemical profile including lipid profile

Monitoring for development of varicose veins, especially in adults

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the following evaluations can be used to help clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs: full blood count, bone marrow examination (if persistent severe neutropenia is detected on full blood count), directed general examination for prominence of superficial veins, echocardiogram, and a renal and pelvic ultrasound examination.
No specific guidelines address the issue of surveillance. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical findings, and need to be more frequent in those with a more severe presentation.

One individual reported in the literature was followed with clinical evaluation and assessment of mineral homeostasis every three months; echocardiography, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), and low-dose radiation CT every six months; and x-rays of the wrists and knees every year [Edouard et al 2011].

Another individual was followed with weekly assessment of mineral homeostasis and troponin, monthly echocardiograms, and CT every three to four months [Michael A Levine, personal communication].

When individuals with GACI develop hypophosphatemic rickets that requires treatment with calcitriol and phosphorus supplementation, urine calcium should be followed regularly so as to avoid hypercalciuria.
See also the management guidelines published by Welling et al [2017] (full text).

Biochemical Testing

Individuals with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia should be monitored routinely [Walter et al 1999] for the accumulation of analytes:

Measure erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at each clinic visit and as needed (e.g., during the introduction of a new food). Concentrations <5 mg/dL are considered within the therapeutic range.

Note: Erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate is a good way to evaluate for acute ingestion of galactose.

Urinary galactitol (a product of an alternate pathway for galactose metabolism) levels may be performed but are not necessary for long-term monitoring.

Note that erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate and urine galactitol may provide comparable information regarding compliance with a lactose restricted diet.

Urinary galactitol analysis is especially valuable in affected individuals who have been given red blood cell transfusions; values >78 mmol/mol creatinine are abnormal.

Urinary galactitol is often not affected by acute dietary ingestion of galactose.

If sudden increases in either erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate or urinary galactitol are detected, dietary sources of excess galactose should be sought or evaluation undertaken for other causes.

Schedule for Individuals with Classic or Clinical Variant Galactosemia

Biochemical genetics clinic visits

Every three months for the first year of life or as needed depending on the nature of potential acute complications

Every six months during the second year of life

Yearly thereafter

Metabolic dietician clinic visits. As above, plus interim visits and phone consultations as necessary

Ophthalmologic evaluations. The timing of follow-up examinations depends on the presence or absence of neonatal cataracts. If absent, an examination may be performed at age one year, age five years, and during adolescence. Note: It is very unusual for a person with classic galactosemia to present after early infancy with cataracts, as cataract development probably requires significant intake of cow’s milk and dairy products.

Speech evaluations

Evaluation by a speech expert at age 18 months (recommended for all affected children)

If the initial evaluation does not reveal a diagnosis of a speech or language disorder, reevaluation every three to 12 months during infancy and early childhood depending on the assessments performed by the developmental specialists and physicians

Developmental evaluations. Affected individuals should undergo a developmental examination by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician at age one year and thereafter every one to three years depending on the extent of delay in one or more spheres of development.

Evaluations for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). Measurement of plasma 17-beta-estradiol and FSH in females is recommended if they reach age 12 years with insufficient secondary sex characteristics or age 14 years with no regular menses [Welling et al 2017].

Evaluations for osteopenia

Measure plasma calcium, phosphorous, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D on a yearly basis and as needed.

Because decreased bone mineral density is prevalent in individuals with classic galactosemia, a DEXA scan is recommended for surveillance at age six years, during puberty, through adolescence, and then every five years during adult life.

Routine metabolic dietetic visits should verify that calcium and vitamin D intake is adequate for age and that plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range. Even so, bone mineral density may be decreased in certain affected individuals for reasons that are not understood. Under these circumstances, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.
The following are appropriate:

Monitor hemolysate gal-1P or urinary galactitol, especially if the diet is to be normalized. Acceptable levels of gal-1P in GALE deficiency are not known but are estimated from experience with classic galactosemia to be <3.5 mg/100 mL in red blood cells.

Follow growth.

Monitor developmental milestones; propose supportive intervention as needed.
The following should be monitored in persons with GAN:

Intellectual development/deterioration

Progression of the peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, spasticity, and cranial nerve dysfunction

The frequency of the monitoring should depend on disease progression; annual or more frequent evaluation is recommended.
Depending on the phenotype of the disease, complete blood counts should be monitored so that supportive care can be provided as needed. Individuals with mild cytopenias require infrequent monitoring (yearly), while those with severe cytopenias who require transfusions should have complete blood counts monthly or as indicated by clinical signs and symptoms.

Individuals undergoing repeated erythrocyte transfusions should be monitored for iron overload and managed appropriately with iron chelation therapy.
Physicians who are the US regional coordinators for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry (ICGG) and other groups have published recommendations for comprehensive serial monitoring of the severity and rate of disease progression [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004, Vom Dahl et al 2006]:

Medical history (at least every 6-12 months) including weight loss, fatigue, depression, change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities, bleeding from the nose or gums, menorrhagia, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, early satiety as a result of abdominal pressure, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (at least every 6-12 months) including: heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, evidence of bleeding (bruises, petechiae). In children, attention should be given to growth (height, weight, and head circumference using standardized growth charts) and pubertal changes (using the Tanner staging system). Neurologic evaluation is particularly important in the early detection of type 2 and type 3 disease in children. A severity scoring tool has been developed to evaluate neurologic features of neuronopathic GD [Davies et al 2007].

Assessment of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count (with frequency based on symptoms and treatment status). Hemoglobin, platelet count, and coagulation indices should also be assessed prior to surgical or dental procedures.

Other blood tests at the physician's discretion may include measurement of the following:

Serum concentrations of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferanse or alanine amino transferase), iron, ferritin, and vitamins B12 and D.

Plasma activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage-derived chitin-fragmenting hydrolase, and plasma concentration of PARC/CCL18. Levels are typically elevated, and are felt to correlate with body-wide burden of disease. An enzyme dose-dependent decrease in plasma chitotriosidase activity has been observed in affected individuals on ERT; however, up to 40% of affected individuals of European origin are homozygous or heterozygous for a common null variant, confounding interpretation of test results [Grace et al 2007].

Assessment of spleen and liver volumes by MRI or volumetric computed tomography (CT). Parenchymal abnormalities can be identified as well. In situations in which access to an MRI or CT is problematic, abdominal ultrasonography (US) may be performed. Abdominal US may provide information on organ volume and parenchymal abnormalities and also call attention to the presence of gallstones [Patlas et al 2002]. MRI or US are the preferred modalities in the pediatric population.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension. EKG and echocardiography with Doppler studies to identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure

Skeletal assessment

Plain radiographs of the femur (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view), and any symptomatic sites. Radiographs can reflect the status of both the compact/mineralized compartment and medullary compartment. In children, particularly those with signs of growth and pubertal delay, x-ray of the left hand and wrist to determine bone age is appropriate.

Coronal T1- and T2-weighted MR images of the hips to the distal femur. T1-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for following bone marrow infiltration. T2-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for detecting active bone infarcts, osteonecrosis, and osteomyelitis [Maas et al 2002b]. The developmental transition from cellular (red) to fatty (yellow) bone marrow, which normally occurs from childhood to early adulthood, may confound interpretation of the extent of long bone infiltration by Gaucher cells (lipid-engorged macrophages) in affected children younger than age 15 years [McHugh et al 2004]. Semiquantitative methods (BMB score and S-MRI score) have been developed to facilitate serial assessments [Robertson et al 2007, Roca et al 2007].

Other methods include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to identify osteoporosis and risk for pathologic fractures, technetium Tc-99 sulfur colloid nuclear scanning to assess location and extent of infiltration [Mariani et al 2003], and quantitative chemical-shift MRI or spectroscopy to quantify decrease in bone marrow fat content as a marker of bone marrow infiltration [Maas et al 2002a].

Assessment of disease severity. Two recent reports have delineated a means for scoring disease severity, incorporating standard assessments of disease severity [Di Rocco et al 2008, Weinreb et al 2010]. With increasing therapeutic options, the ability to benchmark response may inform the modality of choice and selected regimen [Weinreb et al 2008].
Serial neuropsychological evaluation for neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral deterioration is appropriate.

EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.
Annual multidisciplinary examination to assess:

Height

Joint range of motion by an orthopedist/physiotherapist

Heart by echocardiography for evidence of valvular stenosis and/or arterial narrowing

Trachea for evidence of stenosis and respiratory compromise

Liver size for evidence of hepatomegaly
Lifelong monitoring is necessary to ensure control of IOP to preserve remaining vision and to prevent further loss of vision; the intervals at which monitoring needs to be performed vary depending on the severity of disease and control of IOP.

Once IOP is controlled and the child is visually rehabilitated, follow up is typically every three months to keep IOP at the "target" level, which depends on the severity of the glaucomatous optic nerve damage and the age of the individual. Standard clinical follow-up tests include optic nerve photography and visual field testing. The complete ophthalmic evaluation often requires examination under anesthesia or sedation in infants and in young and uncooperative children. This process may be challenging to the individual, the family, and the treating physician [deLuise & Anderson 1983, Ho & Walton 2004].
The following are appropriate:

Blood ketone concentrations should be monitored daily, weekly or as needed to document the state of ketosis. A blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 3-5 mmol/L is recommended to insure a proper ketotic state.

Urinary measurement of ketonuria is only qualitative, and may be falsely reassuring as a strongly positive urine test for ketones may correlate with hypoketonemia. Blood measurement of ketone concentration is the preferred method.
GM1 Gangliosidosis

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist; yearly and before/after major medical events

Musculoskeletal

Yearly history and physical examination to evaluate for new skeletal abnormalities that might lead to decreased quality of life

Yearly evaluation for cervical spine instability including detailed physical examination and assessment for new neurologic findings, followed by imaging if indicated

Monitoring of hip joint stability re risk of hip dislocation. Obtain straight and frog-leg imaging if there is pain with movement or a change in mobility (which in neurologically compromised patients can present as inability to ambulate, unexplained crying, or pain).

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years, if there is a history of cardiac dysfunction and/or new symptoms

Growth. Monitoring of growth and nutrition by a nutritionist with knowledge of neurodegenerative or metabolic disease

Eye. Evaluation for visual acuity and corneal clouding every 1-3 years

Seizures. Yearly evaluation by a neurologist; consideration of EEG if there is an acute change in mental status, a sudden decline in activity/milestones, or abnormal movements

MPS IVB

Note: The recommendations for MPS IVA are appropriate for MPS IVB since MPS IVA and MPS IVB are clinically indistinguishable.

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist:

Yearly: track progress and optimize ambulation

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, and as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) and three-minute stair climb test (3MSC) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal and nervous systems

Musculoskeletal. Assessment for the following:

Lower-extremity misalignment: yearly clinical examinations to assess lower extremity alignment

Hip dysplasia/subluxation: yearly radiographs of the hips, as clinically warranted

Cervical spine instability

Note: Solanki et al [2013] recommend the following guidelines for monitoring spinal involvement in those with MPS IVA:

Neurologic examination every six months

Plain x-rays of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion/extension) every six months

Plain x-rays of the spine (AP and lateral thoracolumbar) every two to three years if there is evidence of kyphosis and/or scoliosis

MRI neutral position: whole spine every year

MRI: flexion/extension of the cervical spine every one to three years

These guidelines can be modified as appropriate.

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Respiratory. Assessment for the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea: yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Polysomnography if any clinical suspicion exists.

Restrictive lung disease: assessment of pulmonary function when age-appropriate at diagnosis and then yearly. Note: The benefit of non-invasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use of MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Eye

Yearly: measurement of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination of cornea; examination of the posterior segment

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy: Retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions at onset, then every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Dental. Evaluation every six months

Hearing. Yearly audiogram
Regular follow up with an interdisciplinary DSD team including endocrinology, clinical genetics, obstetrics/gynecology, psychology, and urology is indicated.
Affected individuals require follow up as needed on a "system by system" basis:

Monitoring for hypocalcemia, including ionized calcium level every three to six months in infancy, every five years through childhood, and every one to two years thereafter

Monitoring of calcium levels preoperatively and postoperatively, and regularly during pregnancy

Thyroid studies annually

Reevaluation of immunologic status between age nine and 12 months; consideration of repeat immunologic evaluation prior to any live virus vaccine

Annual complete blood count and differential

Repeat ophthalmologic evaluation between age one and five years, or as needed based on symptoms

Evaluation of nasal speech quality after language emersion to screen for VPI

Repeat audiology evaluation in infancy and prior to school enrollment

Routine surveillance for the development of scoliosis

Routine dental care with consideration of sealants in those individuals with enamel hypoplasia/increased incidence of caries

Regular developmental assessments benefit the child and assist the school in providing appropriate remediation.

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist can apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations.
The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations

Evaluation by a neurologist for changes in behavior or regression of skills

Monitoring for symptoms (e.g., vomiting, incessant crying, irritability, severe headaches) that may indicate increased intracranial pressure secondary to a subarachnoid cyst

Routine monitoring of cardiac abnormalities

Monitoring for lymphedema that may occur in teenage or adult years; in severe cases, monitoring by a vascular surgeon

Routine dental examinations to monitor problems such as malocclusion, crowding, and accelerated tooth decay caused by poor enamel formation attributable to recurrent antibiotic therapy, acid reflux, and extended use of bottle feeding

Ophthalmologic examination at routine intervals by a specialist trained in evaluating individuals with developmental delay
Monitoring of growth every six to 12 months on standard growth charts with special attention to growth velocity is recommended.
Routine monitoring of speech and language by a speech pathologist should be considered for all children, particularly those diagnosed before reaching school age.

Developmental surveillance should be conducted in all affected children.
Follow GSDI guidelines published recently through a group of experts in the field [Kishnani et al 2014].

Annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys for nephrocalcinosis should be initiated after the first decade of life.

Surveillance of the liver may include the following:

In younger children (age <16 years), liver ultrasound performed at diagnosis and thereafter every 12 to 24 months. In affected individuals who are 16 years and older, liver computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning using intravenous contrast should be done every six to 12 months to monitor for hepatic adenoma formation [Franco et al 2005].

Hepatic profile: serum AST, ALT, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR, and aPTT, and creatinine every six to 12 months to monitor for liver damage

When hepatic adenoma is detected. Abdominal CT/MRI with contrast should be performed in older individuals or individuals within the pediatric age group once adenomas are detected on ultrasound. Imaging should be repeated every 6-12 months or more often depending on laboratory and clinical findings. Liver imaging studies (MRI/CT scan) should evaluate liver size, adenomas, evidence of portal hypertension, or features suggestive of liver carcinoma (nodules, heterogeneous echogenic shadows) [Franco et al 2005].

Note: Serum AFP and CEA levels are not reliable markers of hepatocellular carcinoma [Shieh et al 2012].

For those individuals treated with G-CSF serial blood counts should be performed approximately every three months to assess response to treatment and, although the risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is low, to evaluate for the presence of myeloblasts in the blood. Any imaging performed for liver surveillance (e.g., ultrasound, CT, or MRI) should include measurements of the spleen to identify and monitor splenomegaly.

Cardiovascular surveillance

Systemic blood pressure measurements should be obtained at all clinic visits beginning in infancy.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension by echocardiography every three years beginning at age ten years (or earlier if symptoms are present) is appropriate.

25(OH)-vitamin D levels should be monitored routinely and treated as needed.
Close follow up is indicated. Management and surveillance guidelines have been proposed by the ACMG Work Group on Management of Pompe Disease [Kishnani et al 2006b]. Given the wide age range in individuals with LOPD, most of the recommendations can be applied to both IOPD and LOPD.

Twice-yearly clinical review of development, clinical status, growth, and use of adaptive equipment

Assessment of respiratory status with each visit with regard to cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise tolerance:

Chest x-rays at regular intervals

Pulmonary function tests; yearly or more frequently as indicated

Periodic sleep evaluation, which may include regular capnography and pulse oximetry

Monitoring of overall musculoskeletal and functional status to guide therapies aimed at preventing or minimizing physical impairment and its complications. This may include assessment for scoliosis and bone densitometry.

Regular nutritional and feeding assessment

At least annual renal function studies to monitor for secondary complications related to cardiac and/or pulmonary impairment as well as medication effects

Annual cardiology evaluation in those with LOPD and as needed for those with IOPD:

Periodic echocardiography. Aortic dilatation has been detected by echocardiography in late-onset Pompe disease [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring) at regular intervals [Cook et al 2006]. Sacconi et al [2014] noted that enzyme replacement therapy did not prevent development of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD.

Screening for cerebral arteriopathy with aneurysmal dilation and rupture leading to cerebral infarcts (strokes) and death, which have also been reported [Laforêt et al 2008, Sacconi et al 2010]. Screening strategies for these findings are being developed, but care teams should have a high index of suspicion for cerebral arteriopathy if an individual with late-onset Pompe disease develops unexplained stroke-like symptoms [Sacconi et al 2010].

Note: Individuals with LOPD may not be able to tolerate supine positioning in an MRI scanner due to diaphragmatic weakness.

Annual hearing evaluation
To identify periods of suboptimal metabolic control, blood glucose should be measured between 2 AM and 4 AM or urine ketones should be measured upon awakening at least several times per month.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon in older children and adults upon awakening since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring blood glucose concentrations at 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations less than 0.3 mmol/L. Alternatively morning urine ketone measurements may be assessed with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

The following are appropriate annually:

Measurement of height and weight to monitor growth

Liver ultrasound examination to screen for adenomas and evidence of liver scarring. MRI scans are limited to those individuals with abnormalities on the primary ultrasound screen.

Laboratory studies: LFTs, CK, lipid profile

Echocardiogram to monitor for cardiomyopathy; ECG

Bone density measurements are recommended after growth is complete.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases, albumin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Note: If cardiomyopathy was not observed on the baseline screening echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiograms are recommended every three months during infancy, every six months during early childhood, and annually thereafter.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual routine physical examination

Annual review of diet
Routine monitoring of blood glucose concentration and blood ketones to assess control is recommended as well as monitoring of both around periods of increased activity and illness. Note: Since ketosis is usually more severe than hypoglycemia, blood ketone level is more indicative of control than blood glucose concentration.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations lower than 0.3 mmol/L.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon on waking since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring of blood glucose concentrations at 2 AM to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Height and weight should be measured annually to monitor growth.

Although formal studies are lacking, the theoretic small risk of hepatic adenoma increases with age; thus, annual liver ultrasound examinations are recommended beginning at age five years.

Bone density determinations are recommended after growth is complete.

During pregnancy, women with GSD VI should monitor blood glucose concentrations, given that exacerbations of hypoglycemia may occur.
Liver PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement

Regular monitoring of blood glucose concentration and ketones, as recommended by a metabolic physician and nutritionist. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during times of stress including illness, intense activity, rapid growth, puberty, and pregnancy; and at any time in which intake of food is reduced or meal and/or cornstarch dose or scheduling is altered. Note: It is possible that blood glucose concentrations may be normal when moderate to large ketosis in liver PhK deficiency results from increased fatty acid oxidation and upregulated gluconeogenesis. The role of ketone monitoring in this setting as a marker of metabolic control requires further systematic investigation.

Liver imaging. In children younger than age 18 years, liver ultrasound examination every 12 to 24 months. With increasing age, consideration of CT or MRI using intravenous contrast to evaluate for complications of liver disease

Follow-up echocardiogram. No guidelines established. Follow up approximately every two years or earlier if symptoms are present

Muscle PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement.

Regular evaluation by a physical therapist to look for progression in symptoms and to guide exercise program
For those who have chronically elevated ALA (which is infrequent in those who are asymptomatic) and/or are older than age 60 years, an annual check of liver and kidney function is recommended.

Current noninvasive techniques for assessment of fibrosis in the liver include transient elastography (FibroScan®) and a blood-based test (FibroTest® or FibroSure®). Note: They have been vetted mainly for people with chronic viral hepatitis or steatohepatitis but may also be useful in porphyria.

For anyone with evidence of chronic liver injury, annual screening for hepatocellular carcinoma with abdominal imaging (such as ultrasound) and serum alpha-fetoprotein is indicated.
Nutrition and swallowing should be monitored. Feeding changes should be implemented when necessary to minimize the risk of aspiration.

Gait should be monitored, with consultation as needed from physical therapists to provide the most appropriate strategies or devices to minimize falls.

Driving safety should be monitored, with consideration of formal driving safety evaluations if safety is uncertain.

Monitor mood and irritability so that measures to decrease the risk of suicide, other behavioral abnormalities, and distress may be implemented.
Periodic clinical evaluation to monitor for the following is appropriate:

Changes in mobility, communication, and behavior, which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (wheelchair/ personal assistance)

Onset of seizures and need for antiepileptic therapy

Contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions and actions, problems following directions, memory loss, incontinence, which indicate curtailing of independence

Difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration for gastrostomy

Need for physical therapy to minimize contractures and maintain locomotion

Longitudinal MRI studies can potentially help with prognosis, as during the disease course the more rapid the confluence of patchy or focal T2 hyperintensities and the progression of cortical atrophy, the poorer the prognosis appears to be [Van Gerpen et al 2008, Sundal et al 2012c].
Persons with hemophilia who are followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia A should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by their parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is indicated at least once during the first ten to 20 treatment days in children with severe hemophilia, and then every three to six months after treatment with factor VIII concentrates has been initiated either for bleeding or prophylaxis. After 50 to 100 exposure days, annual screening and screening prior to elective surgical procedures is sufficient. Testing for inhibitors should be performed in any individual with hemophilia whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia A benefit from at least yearly contact with an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia A can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years. Affected individuals with comorbidities and other complications or treatment challenges may require more frequent visits.
Persons with hemophilia followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia B should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by the parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, viral testing if indicated, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is usually done in those with severe hemophilia B after treatment with factor IX concentrates has been initiated for either bleeding or prophylaxis. Affected individuals at increased risk for inhibitor formation should be closely monitored during initial infusions and additional screening is usually performed up to a few years of age when the genotype is a large partial deletion, complete F9 deletion, or early termination variant (<100 predicted amino acids) (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations and Molecular Genetics, Pathogenic variants). Testing for inhibitors should also be performed in any individual with hemophilia B whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity; with hemophilia B, the onset may be heralded by an allergic reaction to infused factor IX concentrate.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia B benefit from at least yearly assessments at an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia B can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years.
Clinical HFE-HH

Once the serum ferritin concentration is <50 ng/mL, monitor serum ferritin concentration every three to four months.

It is reasonable to perform follow-up T2* MRI for assessment of cardiac iron among persons with a history of cardiac involvement or known cardiac iron deposition.

Since cirrhosis is a crucial stage in the natural history of hemochromatosis, the diagnosis of cirrhosis is important because management changes. Individuals with cirrhosis should be followed regularly and screened for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) [Tavill 2001]. The AASLD Practice Guidelines recommend imaging every six months with good ultrasonography [Sherman 2010]. This may be accompanied with measurement of alpha fetoprotein. Noninvasive methods that use results derived from values of serum markers such as HepaScore® and FibroMeter™ can also be used to assess the stage of liver fibrosis [Martínez et al 2011].

Although the gold standard for the diagnosis of cirrhosis is biopsy, FibroScan® has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for cirrhosis [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. FibroScan (also known as transient elastography) quantifies fibrosis with ultrasound in a non-invasive manner [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. The results from a meta-analysis suggested a cut-off value for diagnosis of cirrhosis of 13.01 kPa [Friedrich-Rust et al 2008]. Individuals with normal transient elastography (TE) values on FibroScan would not need a biopsy while individuals with intermediate or high TE values should have biopsies to confirm cirrhosis. These results should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical and biochemical parameters.

Note: The AASLD Guidelines recommend that individuals with cirrhosis undergo surveillance regardless of whether or not they have been iron depleted [Bacon et al 2011] (full text).

Biochemical HFE-HH

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010].
There are currently no recommendations or guidelines for surveillance in those with HEP.
General health should be closely followed. Decreased growth rate should be investigated as it is less likely to be the result of PH than of other associated problems, such as reduced renal function.

Extrapolating from studies in persons with cirrhosis, individuals with CHF should be screened for esophageal varices particularly when the platelet count decreases significantly over time or prior to interventions such as renal transplantation [Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Screening is controversial in children and should only be undertaken if a therapeutic intervention (e.g., beta-blocker therapy, variceal banding) is being considered.

Small varices warrant a repeat esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) in a year.

If no varices are identified when EGD is performed because of a decline in platelet count, EGD should be repeated every two to three years.

Screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome is achieved by measuring upright oxygen saturation; screening for portopulmonary hypertension is performed with echocardiogram to estimate pulmonary artery pressure [Whitworth & Sokol 2005] in the presence of sustained platelet decrease and/or prior to an intervention.

Imaging allows:

Assessment of spleen size to indirectly follow PH;

Visualization of bile duct abnormalities (e.g. cysts in the liver) that could identify individuals at greater risk for cholangitis, bile duct stones, and cholangiocarcinoma.

The appropriate frequency of surveillance imaging is not well defined, and depends on disease severity. For individuals with mild disease, ultrasound examination every two years would be adequate; for those with more severe disease, an annual ultrasound examination could enable adequate monitoring of disease progression.

Note: No data on surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma in this setting are available. However, the incidence in children is thought to be extremely rare (see Definition, Clinical Manifestations of Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis).
Follow-up with a urologist in the presence of vesicoureteral reflux and/or documented urinary tract infection is warranted.
There are no formal guidelines for surveillance for individuals with HFI (e.g., frequency of subspecialty visits with physicians and/or dieticians with expertise in management of inherited metabolic diseases).

Once the diagnosis of HFI has been made, periodic evaluation of liver function, renal function, and growth is reasonable, particularly if there are concerns regarding compliance with the fructose/sucrose/sorbitol-restricted diet.

While isoelectric focusing of transferrin and/or monitoring of aspartylglucosaminidase (elevated in untreated HFI) have been suggested as markers of disease control in HFI, neither of these clinically available tests has definitively proven utility in diagnosis or surveillance [Pronicka et al 2007, Michelakakis et al 2009, Quintana et al 2009].
Annual surveillance beginning at the time of diagnosis (to be adapted to patient’s symptoms):

Dermatologic evaluation for poikiloderma, lymphedema of the limbs, eczema-like lesions, changes in the nails and hair

Physical therapy assessment for muscle weakness or contractures

Pulmonary function testing

Blood test:

Complete blood count with differential

Liver function testing: SGOT, SGPT, ALP, GGT

Ophthalmologic examination

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures (with attention to Achilles tendon contractures) and scoliosis
Gastric Cancer

Although it has been proposed that individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant undergo routine surveillance for gastric cancer, the optimal management of individuals at risk for a gastric cancer is controversial because of the unproven value of surveillance regime. In most cases, the gastric cancer is not detected until it reaches an incurable, advanced stage. Samples obtained at the time of prophylactic gastrectomy of six asymptomatic individuals with a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant revealed occult disease on microscopic analysis even though each individual had had normal screening tests prior to surgery [Norton et al 2007].

Due to the highly penetrant nature of HDGC caused by a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant, it is recommended that at-risk individuals who are not ready to undergo PTG or who have declined it be screened every six to 12 months by upper endoscopy with multiple random biopsies [Norton et al 2007, Barber et al 2008, Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text). Screening should begin five to ten years prior to the earliest cancer diagnosis in the family.

Several screening modalities have been tested:

Endoscopy. The effectiveness of endoscopy (currently the only method in use) in detecting the early lesions of gastric cancer has not been proven. Endoscopy permits direct inspection and biopsy of suspicious areas; however, diffuse gastric cancer is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage because the lesions tend to spread in the submucosa rather than as exophytic masses. The submucosal lesions are difficult to identify; an additional challenge is sampling bias in a macroscopically normal-appearing gastric mucosa [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004, Norton et al 2007]. It is recommended that individuals at risk who do not wish to have prophylactic gastrectomy undergo a detailed 30-minute endoscopic examination of the gastric mucosa with multiple random biopsies and biopsies of subtle lesions at six- to 12-month intervals [Caldas et al 1999].

Chromoendoscopy, using indigo-carmine staining, has been shown to improve the detection rate of early gastric cancer [Stepp et al 1998, Fennerty 1999]. Charlton et al [2004] studied six stomachs removed prophylactically after macroscopically normal gastric endoscopies. A pH-sensitive Congo red dye followed by pentagastric stimulation revealed signet ring foci that were five times more prevalent in the transitional zone of the distal stomach, a finding in contrast with other studies [Carneiro et al 2004]. The transitional zone occupies less than 10% of the stomach and lacks gastric-secreting G cells. The authors suggest that chromoendoscopy using Congo red dye and pentagastric stimulation may highlight this area during endoscopy and thus increase the chances of detecting cancer foci. Further research is needed to evaluate this possibility.

The same group of investigators reported a year later on a follow up of 99 surveillance endoscopies over five years [Shaw et al 2005]:

69 of 99 (70%) endoscopies were normal.

23 lesions with signet ring cell cancer were identified in ten individuals.

The Congo red/methylene blue dye detected foci between 4 and 10 mm, not less than 4 mm.

These findings need to be evaluated in a larger group of heterozygotes for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. However, concerns over the toxicity of Congo red have precluded the use of this stain in chromoendoscopy.

Endoscopic ultrasound examination is important in the detection and staging of gastrointestinal cancers [Pfau & Chak 2002], but is not believed to be useful in detecting precursor lesions [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004].

Other. Several other tools utilized include PET scan [van Kouwen et al 2004], endoscopic ultrasound, stool for guaiac, abdominal CT, and multiple random stomach biopsies [Barber et al 2008]. However, none of these reliably detects DGC, as demonstrated by the finding – one week after a number of these screening investigations were performed – of multiple small cancer foci in six of six gastrectomy specimens from individuals who were heterozygous for a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Norton et al 2007].

Lobular Breast Cancer (LBC)

Currently the data on women with germline CDH1 pathogenic variants and development of lobular breast cancer are insufficient to determine the best cancer screening strategies. Recommendations for LBC risk management in CDH1 heterozygotes or at-risk women are based on recommendations for women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant (see BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer). At-risk women should undergo regular breast screening as determined by their physicians, including monthly breast self-examinations and a clinical breast examination every six months.

Because lobular breast cancer is often difficult to diagnose on clinical examination and mammography, it may also be prudent to refer a woman who has a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant to a high-risk breast cancer screening program and to consider use of MRI, which appears to be more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in such women [Schelfout et al 2004; Lehman 2006; Schelfout, personal communication].

The screening should begin by age 35 years or five to ten years prior to the youngest age of breast cancer diagnosis in the family [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Colon Cancer

Although evidence is insufficient to conclude that colon cancer is a manifestation of HDGC, it is prudent to recommend colonoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 40 years or ten years prior to the youngest age at diagnosis of colon cancer in families in which both DGC and colon cancer have occurred [Fitzgerald et al 2010].
The following are appropriate:

ECG, measurement of blood pressure, echocardiogram, and carotid duplex scans annually or semi-annually to monitor for cardiovascular disease. Note: Children may experience severe carotid artery atherosclerotic blockage prior to any significant ECG changes.

Annually:

Neurologic assessment

MRI/MRA of head and neck to assess for vascular changes and silent strokes, which are true strokes that do not result in any clinical symptoms

Lipid profiles

Dental examination, x-ray, and cleaning

Hip x-rays to evaluate for avascular necrosis and progressing coxa valga

Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and/or peripheral cutaneous computed tomography scan of spine, hips, and total body to assess bone density and body fat composition

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment for joint contractures and activities of daily living

Complete audiologic assessment with special attention to possible low-frequency conductive hearing loss

Complete ophthalmologic examination with special attention to possible exposure keratopathy
All surveillance of patients with HHH syndrome should be a combined effort of the general pediatrician or adult practitioner and a metabolic specialist.

Height, weight, and head circumference should be assessed routinely in children from the time of diagnosis to adolescence.

Plasma ammonia concentration, plasma and urine amino acid concentrations, urine organic acids, and urine orotic acid need to be monitored routinely, based on age and history of compliance and metabolic decompensation.

Low plasma concentrations of essential amino acids could trigger a catabolic state, requiring readjustment of the diet/formulas.

Low plasma concentrations of lysine may lead to delays in growth and development in infants.

Parents of infants and small children should be alert to subtle changes in mood, behavior, and eating and/or the onset of vomiting, which may suggest that plasma concentrations of glutamine and ammonia are increasing.

School performance should be monitored since poor school performance may lead to low self-esteem and/or behavioral problems that could influence compliance with a protein-restricted diet.

Periodic neurologic evaluation is warranted to monitor for neurologic deterioration even when metabolic control is optimal.
The following protocol is recommended for follow up of all individuals for whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite and for all individuals at risk for HHT based on family history in whom HHT has not been ruled out by molecular diagnosis [Faughnan et al 2011]:

Annual evaluation by a health care provider familiar with HHT, including interval history for epistaxis or other bleeding, shortness of breath or decreased exercise tolerance, and headache or other neurologic symptoms

Periodic hematocrit/hemoglobin and ferritin determination with appropriate treatment for iron deficiency anemia

Reevaluation for pulmonary AVM at approximately five-year intervals [Nawaz et al 2008]:

Contrast echocardiogram is used (if available) if the previous contrast echocardiogram did not reveal evidence of a pulmonary or intracardiac right to left shunt.

Chest CT with contrast rather than pulmonary angiography is used if the previous contrast echocardiogram revealed evidence of a right to left shunt.

Reevaluation for cerebral AVM. While cerebral AVMs are nearly always congenital, development or evolution of cerebral AVMs in the first two decades of life has been reported [Hetts et al 2014]. Accordingly, many HHT experts recommend rescreening the brain once more after puberty if the initial brain MRI was done in childhood.

Periodic screening for gastrointestinal polyps and malignant change in persons with juvenile polyps

Childhood

Because serious complications of pulmonary and cerebral AVM can occur at any age [Mei-Zahav et al 2006, Curie et al 2007], screening for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs is recommended in children from families with HHT, especially those with ENG pathogenic variants [Al-Saleh et al 2009].

Head MRI with and without gadolinium is recommended as early as the first few months of life [Faughnan et al 2011].

Pulse oximetry in the supine and sitting positions every one to two years during childhood is recommended as a minimum to screen for pulmonary AVMs. It may be of concern if the sitting value is even a few percentage points below that of the supine value. (Since most pulmonary AVMs are in the lower lobes, many individuals with pulmonary AVMs have higher oxygen saturation when lying than when sitting because of the effect of gravity.) Oxygen saturations below 97% should be followed up with contrast echocardiography. Many, but not all, serious complications of pulmonary AVM during childhood have occurred in hypoxemic children.

By at least age ten years, additional evaluation should be performed by contrast echocardiography, with a follow-up CT if positive.
In persons with clinically mild disease, episodes of subtle, undiagnosed hypoglycemia can cause permanent brain damage. Therefore close monitoring and vigilance is just as critical in mild cases as it is in severe cases. Furthermore, in persons with mild disease and in those with severe disease in clinical remission, severe hypoglycemia may be precipitated by intercurrent viral illness. Thus, it is imperative that parents monitor glucose concentrations closely especially during intercurrent illness, even in the absence of symptomatic hypoglycemia.
Individuals with AD-HIES often lack systemic signs of infection and feel better than one would expect when actively infected; therefore, a high index of suspicion for infection is necessary to permit recognition of pneumonias and institution of antibiotic treatment prior to development of extensive lung damage.

Periodic chest imaging is helpful, especially if pneumonias have occurred, to assess whether structural lesions to the lung (e.g., pneumatocoeles) have formed.

Because the microbiology of damaged lung tissue may change over time, it is important to obtain sputum samples intermittently and with acute infections, to direct therapy. Sputum samples should be obtained for microbiology during lung infections.

Scoliosis screening of adolescents is indicated to guide any necessary intervention.

Dental visits should ensure that primary teeth are removed in a timely fashion if necessary to allow secondary teeth to emerge.

Periodic laboratory monitoring should be performed for individuals on chronic antimicrobial therapy.

Individuals with AD-HIES have an increased incidence of lymphoma, which should be considered in the evaluation of lymphadenopathy, masses, or bony lesions.
The following are recommended annually after HCT:

Neuropsychological evaluation

Regular follow-up by transplant specialists to monitor for late complications relating to growth and hormone function
There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the following recommendations are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with the clinical diagnosis of HLRCC, individuals with heterozygous pathogenic variants in FH without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone molecular genetic testing should have the following regular surveillance by physicians familiar with the clinical manifestations of HLRCC.

Skin. Full skin examination is recommended annually to every two years to assess the extent of disease and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Uterus. Annual gynecologic consultation is recommended to assess severity of uterine fibroids and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Renal

Yearly examination with abdominal MRI is recommended for individuals with normal initial baseline or follow-up abdominal MRI. MRI is preferred because of the potential added radiation exposure associated with CT over lifetime. Abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated.

Any suspicious renal lesion (indeterminate lesion, questionable or complex cysts) detected at a previous examination should be followed with a CT scan with and without contrast. The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in the characterization of cystic lesions. PET-CT may be added to identify metabolically active lesions suggesting possible malignant growth. Caution: Ultrasound examination alone is never sufficient.

Renal tumors should be evaluated by a urologic oncology surgeon familiar with the renal cancer of HLRCC.
Close monitoring of liver function and disease markers such as hemoglobin, iron indices, and whole-blood manganese is required at three-month intervals.

Routine follow up with a neurologist and hepatologist should be provided with repeat assessment of MRI brain, and liver ultrasound and biopsy when clinically indicated (e.g., worsening of liver function) and for monitoring of treatment.

Adverse effects of chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate include hypocalcemia, nephrotoxicity, trace metal and vitamin deficiency, and thrombocytopenia and leukopenia [Lamas et al 2012].

Complete blood count and renal function including urinalysis are assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose. Additionally, the following need to be monitored: trace metal levels including manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium; liver function; electrolytes; calcium, magnesium, and phosphate concentrations; and iron status. Trace metal supplements are provided as needed.

Treatment may need to be discontinued if:

White blood count <3.5x10^9/L

Neutrophils <2.0x10^9/L

Platelets <150x10^9/L

>2+ proteinuria on >1 occasion (and no evidence of infection)

The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent mortality and morbidity in SLC39A14-related early-onset parkinsonism-dystonia, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. The clinical treatment benefit needs to be carefully weighed against occurring adverse effects for each affected individual.

Toxicity of iron supplementation. In order to avoid iron toxicity, serum iron and total iron binding capacity need to be monitored regularly. If serum iron exceeds 80% of total iron binding capacity, iron supplementation should be stopped or reduced.
The following are appropriate:

Pulmonary function testing at intervals of 6-12 months, or guided by patient findings

Reassessment of muscle strength and clinical status annually with a neurologist who can coordinate any additional required services
As chronic pain resulting from altered biomechanics of the shoulder or upper extremity tends to develop during the first one to two years, follow up every six to 12 months after the initial diagnosis is recommended.
Colon cancer. Regular colonoscopy with removal of precancerous polyps reduces the incidence of colon cancer in individuals with Lynch syndrome. A 2009 study of a Finish cohort with high compliance with screening found no increase in mortality for individuals with Lynch syndrome over their mutation-negative relatives, indicating that annual colonoscopy could help with the prevention and detection of colon cancer [Järvinen et al 2009]. In this study four individuals were diagnosed with colon cancer and lymph node metastases: one was diagnosed during baseline colonoscopy; the other three were diagnosed more than two years after their last colonoscopy. Therefore, the current recommendation is colonoscopy every one to two years beginning between ages 20 and 25 years or two to five years before the earliest diagnosis in the family, whichever is earlier [Järvinen et al 2009, Engel et al 2010, NCCN 2013].

In MSH6 and PMS2 heterozygotes the risk for colon cancer is lower; thus colonoscopy screening may be delayed until age 30 years [Senter et al 2008, Baglietto et al 2010].

Note: Colonoscopy is recommended rather than flexible sigmoidoscopy because of the predominance of proximal colon cancers in Lynch syndrome [Lynch & Smyrk 1996].

Endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer surveillance is less well established than that for colon cancer.

Because many endometrial cancers can be diagnosed at early stages on the basis of symptoms, women should be educated about the signs of endometrial cancers.

Currently the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does not recommend any specific screening for endometrial or ovarian cancer [NCCN 2013].

Studies on the effectiveness of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy have had conflicting results. Further studies are needed to determine if the combination of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy detect endometrial cancers at an early age.

In a study of the use of transvaginal ultrasound examination to screen for endometrial cancer, no cancers were detected; however, two cancers were detected on the basis of symptoms manifest during the course of the study [Dove-Edwin et al 2002].

A report from a Finnish cohort found that endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasound every two to three years resulted in the diagnosis of early stage cancers. However, because endometrial cancer often presents with symptoms at an early stage, it was not clear that the screening improved detection [Järvinen et al 2009].

Ovarian cancer. No specific ovarian cancer screening trials have been conducted in women with Lynch syndrome. Of note, screening for ovarian cancer using CA-125 blood tests and transvaginal ultrasound examination has not been effective in other high-risk populations such as women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant [Evans et al 2009].

Gastric and duodenal cancers. Upper endoscopy surveillance can be used to screen for cancers of the stomach and duodenum. Currently the NCCN recommends beginning upper endoscopy with a side-viewing scope and extended duodenoscopy between ages 30 and 35 years and repeating them every three to five years depending on the findings. Those with evidence of chronic inflammation, atrophic gastropathy, and/or intestinal metaplasia would be candidates for more frequent evaluation. Note: Biopsies should be evaluated for H pylori infections so that appropriate treatment can be given as needed [NCCN 2013].

Data regarding the effectiveness of upper endoscopy examination for the early detection of gastric cancer in Lynch syndrome are limited.

One study suggested no benefit from this screening for gastric cancer because of the lack of identifiable precursor lesions [Renkonen-Sinisalo et al 2002].

A study looking at gastric cancer risk in a Dutch study suggested that the level of risk is sufficient to warrant screening; however, since 87% of the cancers occurred after age 45 years, it may be most cost effective to initiate screening at age 45 years [Capelle et al 2010].

Schulmann et al [2005] found that approximately 50% of the small bowel cancers in a cohort with Lynch syndrome were located in the duodenum, suggesting that upper endoscopy may be useful for screening. However, no trials to determine the efficacy of upper endoscopy for screening for duodenal cancers have been conducted.

Distal small bowel. At this time data are limited regarding screening for cancer development in the distal small bowel. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enterography are available for evaluating the small bowel, but at this time there is no recommendation for routine use of these approaches for small bowel screening, although they may be helpful for evaluating symptomatic individuals.

Urinary tract. NCCN recommends consideration of annual urine analysis beginning between age 25 and 30 years [NCCN 2013].

Other cancers. At this time, no specific screening recommendations for other Lynch syndrome associated cancers exist. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow other general population screening guidelines and to seek prompt medical attention for changes in health or persistent symptoms.
Affected individuals should be monitored at regular intervals to detect any clinical complications that may develop, to assess dietary compliance, and to measure plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations. Infants should be monitored monthly for the first six months of life and bimonthly until age one year, then every three months until age three years. Semiannual monitoring through the remainder of childhood and annual monitoring in adolescence and adulthood are indicated. Complications should be promptly addressed with appropriate therapy.

Plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations should be monitored in all persons receiving betaine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Betaine treatment).

Vitamin B12 and folate levels should be monitored.

Regular ophthalmology assessments can identify eye complications such as progressive myopia and ectopia lentis and allow for early treatment and prevention of further complications such as retinal detachment.

DXA scans should be performed every three to five years following adolescence to monitor for osteoporosis [Morris et al 2017].
Children with hypophosphatasia should be seen by a pediatric dentist twice yearly, beginning at age one year.

Children with the infantile type of hypophosphatasia are at elevated risk for increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis, and should be monitored for this complication.
ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of potential septal defects, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.
Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured during health maintenance evaluations.

Evaluation for endocrine deficiencies should be undertaken at appropriate intervals and during health maintenance visits.
The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's signs and symptoms and response to preventive treatment. Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness associated with myopathy.

Questionnaires completed by the affected individual may be used to evaluate disease severity without treatment and with treatment.

For those individuals who take acetazolamide the following parameters should be evaluated every three months: complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, uric acid, and liver enzyme levels. Renal ultrasound should be performed annually.
Eyes. Annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error, is indicated.

Skin. Over many years, exposure to the sun of lightly pigmented skin can result in coarse, rough, thickened skin (pachydermia), solar keratoses (premalignant lesions), and skin cancer. Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma can develop. Although skin melanocytes are present in individuals with HPS, melanoma is rare. Examination for these findings should be performed at least annually.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary function testing should be performed annually in adults.

Colitis. Colitis is suspected in those with a history of cramping, increased mucus in the stool, and rectal bleeding; colonoscopy is used to confirm the diagnosis.
There are currently no well-established surveillance guidelines for individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant. Based on an extensive literature review, the authors make the following management recommendations:

Measure serum concentrations of calcium, iPTH, and 25-(OH) vitamin D (to evaluate for possible coexisting vitamin D deficiency as a cause of elevated iPTH levels or unexpectedly “normal” calcium concentrations) every 12 months starting at age five to ten years.

In patients with a history of parathyroid carcinoma who develop a rise in calcium levels, consider the possibility of a new primary parathyroid tumor in addition to recurrence/progression of malignant disease.

Consider periodic parathyroid ultrasound examination for the detection of non-functioning parathyroid carcinoma, which has developed on rare occasion in individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant [Guarnieri et al 2006].

Obtain panoramic x-ray dental imaging with neck shielding at least every five years, in addition to regular dental hygiene maintenance, starting at age ten years. Dental providers should be notified of the presence of a CDC73-related disorder and the need for monitoring for osseous fibromas of the maxilla and mandible.

Monitor for kidney lesions by renal ultrasound examination at least every five years starting at the age of diagnosis. Serum creatinine concentrations should be monitored in those individuals with renal cysts. Individuals with solid lesions should be referred for appropriate subspecialty care.

Starting at reproductive age, women with a CDC73-related disorder should undergo regular gynecologic care (including pelvic examination). Care providers in obstetrics and gynecology should be notified of the risk of uterine tumors. Pelvic ultrasound examination should be obtained in any woman with a menstrual disorder (particularly abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia) with further imaging studies (CT or MRI) as clinically indicated.

The age at which genetic testing and surveillance should begin for at-risk relatives is also not well established.

The authors recommend considering testing and surveillance for primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumors beginning at around age five to ten years, as this is the age of the youngest reported case of hyperparathyroidism and is ten years younger than the earliest reported age of parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis.

The age at onset of kidney lesions is not well described; renal ultrasound examination can be considered at time of diagnosis.

Uterine tumors have only been reported in adults; surveillance can begin at reproductive age.
The feet in particular should be inspected daily for injuries and sources of wear.

Patients should be followed annually by centers with comprehensive care for diabetes and/or CMT.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury;

Regular examinations by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology to identify serious injuries and initiate early treatment;

Annual follow up at a center that fosters comprehensive care and communication between the various subspecialties that are needed for optimal care.
Feet should be inspected at least daily for injuries or sources of wear.
Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist and physiatrist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies to maximize walking ability and reduce symptoms.
Guidelines for surveillance have been developed [Scarpa et al 2011].

Modes of surveillance for complications over time depend, like treatment, on organ system and disease severity. Because all persons with MPS II face the same organ failure issues, with the time of failure being dependent on severity, when and how often to monitor for change cannot be generalized. However, the following studies/evaluations are likely indicated on at least a yearly basis beginning in early to mid-childhood:

Cardiology visit with echocardiogram

Pulmonary clinic visit with pulmonary function testing

Audiogram

Eye examination, including examination through a dilated pupil to view the optic disc

Developmental assessment

Neurologic examination

The following are appropriate at baseline and/or when symptoms/age dictates:

Sleep study for obstructive sleep apnea

NCV study for evidence of carpal tunnel syndrome

Head/neck MRI to document ventricular size and cervicomedullary narrowing

Opening pressure on lumbar puncture

Orthopedic evaluation to monitor hip disease
Regular evaluations should be made to address the appearance and severity of chorea, rigidity, gait problems, depression, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline [Anderson & Marshall 2005, Skirton 2005].

The Behavior Observation Scale Huntington (BOSH) is a scale developed for the rapid and longitudinal assessment of functional abilities of persons with HD in a nursing home environment [Timman et al 2005]. For longitudinal studies, the Unified HD Rating Scale is used (UHDRS) [Huntington Study Group 1996, Siesling et al 1998, Youssov et al 2013]. The total functional capacity (TFC) scale is used to describe the progression of HD, the patient level of functioning, and requirements for additional caregiver aid (TFC scale).
Individuals with known aHUS. Measure serum concentration of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, and C4, and haptoglobin:

Every month in the first year after an aHUS episode, then every three to six months in the following years, particularly for persons with normal renal function or chronic renal insufficiency as they are at risk for relapse. Note: Individuals with ESRD usually do not relapse.

Every two weeks for those rare individuals with homozygous CFH pathogenic variants that result in very low or undetectable levels of the CFH protein

Note: The proposed time intervals for checking hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin are suggestions [Authors, personal observation]; each center may follow different guidelines based on their own experience.
For individuals with HCM who do not currently meet criteria for placement of an ICD for primary prevention, risk for SCD should be reassessed approximately every 12-24 months (or sooner if any clinical parameters change) [Gersh et al 2011].

For relatives at risk for HCM. Screening guidelines for HCM have been proposed for the longitudinal evaluation of clinically unaffected at-risk family members (see Table 2). Note that the following screening guidelines apply both to relatives in whom a pathogenic variant has been identified and to asymptomatic first-degree relatives (adults and children) of an individual with primary HCM in whom a pathogenic variant has not been identified.

Because penetrance of diagnostic features (i.e., LVH) is age dependent, a single unremarkable evaluation does not exclude the possibility of future development of HCM. Diagnostic clinical manifestations are often not present in infancy/early childhood; they commonly develop during adolescence and early adulthood, but may also develop late in life. Therefore, longitudinal follow up is required at a frequency based on the individual’s age and family history, and physician discretion. Screening should be performed in response to any symptoms that develop or any change in clinical status.

Table 2. 

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Age

Screening Guideline

<12 yrs

Optional unless any of the following are present:

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complicationsCompetitive athlete in intense training programSymptomsOther clinical findings that suggest early LVH

12-18 yrs

Repeat evaluation every 12-18 months

>18-21 yrs

Repeat evaluation every ≤5 years or in response to any change in symptomsMore frequent evaluation if the family has late-onset LVH or HCM-related complications

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complications

Competitive athlete in intense training program

Symptoms

Other clinical findings that suggest early LVH

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]
Measure hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine annually starting at the time of diagnosis.
The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's clinical features and the response to preventive treatment.

During prophylactic treatment, measure serum potassium concentration twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia.

Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness.

Permanent weakness requires continuous medication, eg. with a thiazide diuretic, and MRI of the leg muscles once every one to three years. During treatment, serum potassium concentration should be measured twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia. The value should be between 3.0 and 3.5 mmol/L.

Annual monitoring of thyroid function is appropriate.
Children. Guidelines for the management of children have been published by multiple national and international organizations [Daniels et al 2008, DeMott et al 2008, Descamps et al 2011, Martin et al 2013] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full texts).

A child who has a family history of FH or of premature CAD, who is heterozygous for the FH pathogenic variant in his or her family, or who has an elevated serum cholesterol concentration should have lipid levels checked starting as early as age two years [Goldberg et al 2011]. It is reasonable to check a non-fasting lipid level first and, if borderline, to follow with measurement of LDL-C. Some guidelines state that elevation of two consecutive measures of LDL-C are needed to confirm a diagnosis of FH [Martin et al 2013].

An LDL-C level of >130 mg/dL (>3.4 mmol/L) in a child is suspicious for FH and an LDL of >160 mg/dL (>4.1 mmol/L) is relatively specific for FH.

During treatment, individuals of any age with:

FH should have lipid levels monitored as recommended;

HoFH should be monitored with various imaging modalities (including echocardiogram, CT angiogram, and cardiac catheterization) as recommended [Raal & Santos 2012].
Surveillance includes periodic:

Neurologic evaluation to identify neurologic complications;

Evaluation by a physiatrist to aid with assistive devices as needed;

Eye examination if cataracts were not identified in the neonatal period.
Height, weight, and head circumference should be monitored using achondroplasia-standardized growth curves.

Because an increased prevalence of mild-to-moderate intellectual disability and/or learning disabilities in children with hypochondroplasia appears likely, developmental milestones should be followed closely during early childhood and a timely referral to an appropriate professional made if there are any indications of learning difficulties during school-age years.

Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression should be performed at routine well-child visits, with referral to a pediatric neurologist if needed.

History for evidence of sleep apnea should be taken at routine visits, with formal sleep study obtained when indicated.

MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum is indicated if there is evidence of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression or central sleep apnea.

Affected individuals should be evaluated for emerging leg bowing at routine visits, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking.

Social adjustment should be monitored.
No schedule for eye examinations has been established, but the following has been suggested [Holmström & Thoren 2000]:

Monthly until age three to four months

Every three months between ages four months and one year

Every six months between ages one and three years

Annually after age three years

Neurologic function should be assessed at routine visits with a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, or developmental pediatrician.

Ongoing evaluation by a pedodontist or dentist is appropriate.
Routine monitoring:

For feeding difficulties and assessment of diet to assure that the risk of aspiration is reduced

For early detection and treatment of hip dislocation and/or spine deformities
Annual routine follow-up with the multidisciplinary team is recommended. Affected individuals should be screened for signs and symptoms of cardiac dysfunction, as two affected siblings with cardiomyopathy have been reported [Chai et al 2011]. Affected individuals should also be evaluated for respiratory dysfunction, with appropriate investigations and treatment as needed.
At periodic intervals:

Echocardiogram and EKG to monitor for evidence of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function studies

Alkaline phosphatase, skeletal x-rays, and bone scans for monitoring of the PDB if symptomatic and for monitoring of therapy

Monitoring of behavior and mental status
No standard tests allow prediction of the triggering of an ANE event or progression of an event once one occurs.

In intervals between ANE events neurologic function is stable. Follow-up evaluations focus on developmental progression and addressing functional deficits related to neurologic damage. In the absence of other risks for seizures, anticonvulsant therapy started during an ANE event can often be discontinued.
Surveillance includes:

Frequent evaluations by an endocrinologist for management of adrenal insufficiency and growth hormone therapy;

Evaluation by an orthopedist as needed to monitor skeletal complications such as scoliosis, tibial/femoral bowing, or pain associated with the skeletal dysplasia;

Neurologic follow up as needed for evaluation of developmental delay and/or hypotonia.
Periodic assessment of vision and hearing of nonverbal children is indicated as needed to determine the level of sensory deficits.
No guidelines regarding surveillance of persons with AIP-related FIPA have been established. The following recommendations are based on the authors’ personal experience with more than 200 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic AIP-related FIPA.

Persons with AIP-related FIPA who have had a pituitary adenoma. The following are recommended to monitor for recurrence of the previous adenoma and development of new adenomas.

Yearly clinical assessment and basal pituitary function (IGF-1, spot GH, prolactin, LH/FSH, estradiol/testosterone, TSH, fT4, morning cortisol) and if necessary dynamic testing (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test) to evaluate for hormone excess or deficiency

Repeat pituitary MRI. Note: Frequency depends on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor, and treatment modality.

Persons with acromegaly. Follow established guidelines regarding clinical monitoring for related complications including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and colon cancer.

Persons with hypogonadism. Follow established guidelines. Because long-standing untreated hypogonadism may result in the early onset of osteoporosis, bone density needs to be assessed at baseline and if necessary monitored with DEXA scanning.

Persons with an AIP pathogenic variant and no history of pituitary adenomas. Recommendations follow. Note, however, that long-term experience with asymptomatic AIP heterozygotes is limited; more data are needed to develop appropriate future guidelines.

In a family in which an AIP pathogenic variant has been identified, relatives who have the family-specific AIP pathogenic variant or who have not been tested:

Adults

Baseline. Clinical assessment, pituitary function tests (IGF-1, prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, and fT4), and pituitary MRI

Thereafter

Perform annual clinical assessment and pituitary function tests.

Consider repeating a pituitary MRI every five years if clinical findings and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Consider discontinuing monitoring about age 50 years, after which the likelihood of developing new pituitary adenomas is low.

Children

Yearly beginning at age four years

Measure height and weight with calculation of height velocity. Document pubertal development, Tanner stages

Perform pituitary function tests (as for adults).

Perform baseline pituitary MRI at about age ten years.

Consider repeating the pituitary MRI every five years if clinical and pituitary function tests remain normal.
Appropriate surveillance includes periodic evaluation of complete blood count, thyroid function, glucose tolerance, kidney function (measurement of serum concentration of BUN, creatinine), and liver function (measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT) for evidence of autoimmune disease.
Periodic assessment by the multidisciplinary team with particular attention to the following:

Nutritional status

Neurologic status including evaluation of dosages of antiepileptic drugs and their side effects

Degree of spasticity and related complications, including scoliosis

Periodic sleep studies
Regular evaluation by a rehabilitation specialist may identify potentially helpful interventions.
Whenever hepatic cirrhosis is identified, monitoring for hepatocellular cancer is recommended. Most hepatologists propose twice-yearly screening with abdominal ultrasound examination and serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration [Tavill 2001].
Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects, and doses altered as needed. Because dose adjustment is especially important in growing children, evaluation is appropriate every three to six months during rapid growth phases.

Regular, periodic evaluation of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications is indicated.
Because no uniformly reliable distinguishing characteristics allow prediction of the complications that may develop in an infant or young child with Joubert syndrome, a number of annual evaluations are recommended (see also Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site):

Pediatric and neurologic evaluation and monitoring of growth, sexual maturation, breathing (including apnea symptoms), and motor function

Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation and testing, as appropriate

Ophthalmologic evaluation for visual acuity, tracking ability, and development of retinal dystrophy

Abdominal ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible liver and kidney abnormalities

Liver function tests

Evaluation of renal function: measurement of blood pressure, serum concentrations of BUN and creatinine, CBC, and assessment of first-morning void urinalysis
Neurologic follow-up every six to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.
For individuals with JPS who have undergone surgical resection of bowel, endoscopic follow up is required regardless of the surgical procedure because of the high rate of subsequent development of polyps in the rectum and the pouch [Oncel et al 2005].

For individuals with an SMAD4 or BMPR1A pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing, individuals with a clinical diagnosis of JPS, or individuals with a family history of JPS who have not undergone molecular genetic testing or whose molecular genetic test results were uninformative [Howe et al 1998a] (see NCCN guidelines):

Monitor for rectal bleeding and/or anemia, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color. These symptoms may warrant additional screening.

CBC, colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy screening should begin in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier.

If negative, screening should be repeated in three years.

If only one or a few polyps are identified, the polyps should be removed. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

If many polyps are identified, removal of most of the colon or stomach may be necessary. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant, predictive molecular genetic testing may be appropriate before age 15 years because surveillance for potential complications of HHT begins in early childhood [Gallione et al 2004]. Until the frequency and spectrum of HHT complications in JPS/HHT syndrome are known, it may be appropriate to follow the HHT surveillance guidelines for individuals with JPS/HHT syndrome or a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant.

Precautionary screening for individuals at risk for JPS who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant was previously recommended [Howe et al 1998a]; however, this screening is unnecessary if molecular genetic testing was performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory. Family members who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be screened for colon cancer as recommended for the normal U.S. population.

For surveillance recommendations for individuals with HHT, see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
The following are recommended for individuals with KS:

Frequent monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference (at each well-child visit and, at a minimum, yearly)

Evaluation of developmental milestones at each well child visit; referral for formal developmental evaluation if delays are identified

Following prepubertal girls expectantly for possible premature thelarche, so that the healthcare provider can reassure parents if this finding becomes apparent

Annual monitoring of vision

Annual hearing evaluation

Expectant monitoring for otitis media in children. An ear examination is indicated at all well-child visits; prompt evaluation for all children with symptoms suggestive of otitis media.

Regular follow up by an immunologist for those with abnormal immunologic studies or those who have recurrent infections
The following should be assessed annually:

Developmental progress

Ophthalmologic conditions such as amblyopia (which develops in a majority of patients with SBBYSS)

Thyroid function

Cardiac function if malformations are present

Renal function if hydronephrosis or multiple renal cysts are present

Contractures and/or scoliosis
Table 5. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Growth

Evaluation of nutritional status & growth

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess for evidence of decreased lacrimation & increased risk for corneal dryness

At least annually

ENT/Mouth

Evaluation of feeding difficulties

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Respiratory

Sleep study (if history of sleep disturbance)

Pulmonary evaluation every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Musculoskeletal

Evaluate for scoliosis

At least annually

Endocrine

Monitor serum glucose levels to monitor for hypoglycemia secondary to poor feeding & increased risk for hyperinsulinemia

Every 6 months until age 2 years

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome
BFNE. EEG at onset, age three, 12, and 24 months is recommended. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

BFIE. EEG at onset, 12, 24, and 36 months is recommended. The EEG at 36 months should be normal.
Appropriate measures include:

Strength testing (annually)

Pulmonary function tests (annually in advanced cases)
Screen for premalignant keratoses and early squamous cell carcinomas starting in adolescence and repeat annually.
Cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities should be monitored as needed.
Children of both sexes with findings suggestive of IGD (e.g., microphallus, anosmia) should be monitored at regular intervals from age 11 years onwards with the following:

Assessment of sexual maturation by Tanner staging (Table 1)

Measurement of serum concentrations of LH, FSH, and total testosterone (T) in males and estradiol (E2) in females

Bone age determinations

In individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of IGD, serum sex steroid levels (to guide optimal hormone replacement) and bone mineral density should be monitored at regular intervals.
The following should be assessed at least annually:

Growth

Developmental progress

Vision, hearing

Contractures and/or scoliosis
Surveillance includes the following:

ECG and echocardiogram every six to 12 months to monitor cardiac conduction and contractility

Yearly audiometry and endocrinologic evaluation
Evaluation by a child neurologist at regular intervals is appropriate.
Clinical and psychosocial evaluation should be performed at three- to six-month intervals throughout the teen years.
No standard guidelines for the surveillance of individuals with LAL deficiency have been developed. The following screening practices can be considered to monitor for the most common symptoms associated with CESD.

Children

Special attention should be paid to growth and nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or failure to thrive could indicate malabsorption.

Consider monitoring fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes every six months.

Adults with CESD should be evaluated every six to 12 months depending on disease severity.

Special attention should be paid to nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or weight loss could indicate malabsorption.

Monitor routinely fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes.

Individuals with severe liver disease should be evaluated for esophageal varices by upper endoscopy every three years.

Individuals with hepatosplenomegaly should be monitored and treated for thrombocytopenia to prevent bleeding complications.

Both children and adults. Obtain serial liver and spleen imaging to monitor for hepatosplenic volume and to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma which has arisen in the setting of advanced cirrhosis [Riva et al 2008]. Consensus on optimal screening protocols has not been published.
LBSL is very slowly progressive in most cases. Annual clinical evaluations suffice. In case of rapid worsening more frequent evaluations are appropriate. Follow-up MRI can be performed once every few years. Only in severe, early-onset cases are more frequent evaluations necessary.
Affected individuals should be periodically seen for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and when residual vision is present, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma, or cataract.

Rarely, vision appears to improve beyond expectations; in such cases, a repeat ERG is indicated.
Consider periodic evaluation by a clinical geneticist to discuss manifestations associated with disorders of the Ras/MAPK pathway that may eventually be associated with Legius syndrome

Routine screening for developmental delays and behavioral and learning problems is appropriate.

Although vascular abnormalities have been reported in a few individuals with Legius syndrome, hypertension has not been reported. However, given the prevalence of vascular abnormalities and hypertension in NF1, it would seem appropriate to have regular blood pressure monitoring at each physician visit.
Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new manifestations. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, audiologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.
The following are appropriate:

Annual ophthalmologic examination for those with residual vision given the predisposition to glaucoma and high hyperopia from foreshortening of the globe

Monitoring of renal function (BUN, creatinine, and urine analysis) in those with known renal/ureteral anomalies

Developmental assessments performed with each well-child visit as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics. More frequent and specialized assessments are tailored to each child if development is not on track.

Lifelong case management to help affected individuals gain access to social services and assistive devices for the blind
If anomalies are found in any system, periodic follow up should be planned and lifelong monitoring may be necessary, especially of cardiovascular abnormalities.

For hearing loss, twice-yearly examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment and repeat audiometry to confirm the stability of the hearing loss is recommended.

Surveillance for intellectual and developmental disabilities as per routine pediatric care is of particular importance due to the higher prevalence of these issues in individuals with NSML.

Surveillance for growth delay as per routine pediatric care is important due to the higher prevalence of poor linear growth in affected children.
Standard surveillance includes the following:

Routine measurement of weight and height to assess growth and nutritional status

Physical examination and/or serial x-rays of the hips and spine to monitor for orthopedic complications

Routine history re signs and symptoms of seizures

Certain disorders require specialized surveillance, for example monitoring for the development of hydrocephalus in Alexander disease.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Monitoring of respiratory function

Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those LGMD types known to have cardiac involvement
The following are appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, such as foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures

Referral for pulmonary evaluation (eventually including pulmonary function tests) when there are complaints of excessive daytime somnolence, non-restorative sleep, early morning headache [Narayanaswami et al 2014]. Measurement of forced vital capacity should be made in sitting and supine position.

Examination of cardiac function in the advanced stage of disease (although it is not frequently compromised) [Dirik et al 2001, Okere et al 2013].
Ongoing surveillance of asymptomatic individuals harboring LHON-causing mtDNA variants is not necessary; however, they should be advised to seek immediate medical attention should they experience any visual disturbance.

The frequency of follow-up for affected individuals varies depending on the individual’s personal circumstances and the availability of healthcare locally.
Regular physical examination for evidence of infection and control of skin involvement is appropriate; frequency depends on the severity. In adults, regular surveillance for skin cancer is appropriate (cases with atypical melanocytic nevi, malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinoma have been reported) [Fernandes et al 2010, Natsuga et al 2011].
Clinicians and families need to be aware that currently no monitoring regimens have been definitively proven as beneficial for children or adults with germline TP53 pathogenic variants. Nonetheless, this is an important area of ongoing investigation.

The following is recommended:

Children and adults should undergo comprehensive annual physical examination including careful skin and neurologic examinations. Clinicians should be aware of the high risks for rare, early-onset cancers and also for second malignancies in cancer survivors [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should pay close attention to any lingering symptoms and illnesses, particularly headaches, bone pain, or abdominal discomfort. When present, the individual should see a physician promptly for evaluation [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

Women should undergo breast cancer monitoring, with annual breast MRI and twice-yearly clinical breast examination beginning at age 20-25 years. The use of mammograms has been controversial because of radiation exposure and limited sensitivity. When included, annual mammograms should alternate with breast MRI, with one modality every six months [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

The following is suggested:

Adults should consider routine screening for colorectal cancer with colonoscopy every two to three years beginning no later than age 25 years [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should consider organ-targeted surveillance based on the pattern of cancer observed in their family [NCCN 2012].

In adults with LFS, a pilot trial of screening [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scans detected tumors in three of 15 individuals. However, significant concerns were raised regarding the potential adverse consequences of the radiation exposure associated with PET/CT scans [Masciari et al 2008]. For this reason, attention has shifted to the utilization of whole-body MRI for adults with TP53 pathogenic variants.

Several groups have begun to utilize an intensive screening strategy including rapid whole-body MRI, brain MRI, abdominal ultrasound examination, and biochemical markers of adrenal cortical function. Preliminary data suggest that such a surveillance protocol may improve survival of individuals with LFS through presymptomatic detection of tumors [Villani et al 2011]. However, further prospective studies are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of this protocol in adults and children with LFS.

Individuals with LFS have been surveyed regarding their attitudes toward cancer surveillance, given its lack of known clinical benefit. Most individuals believed in the value of surveillance to detect tumors at an early stage and also reported psychological benefits (specifically, a sense of control and security) associated with participation in a regular surveillance program [Lammens et al 2010b].
The following are appropriate:

Routine follow up of children to monitor general health as well as psychomotor, emotional, and cognitive development

Monitoring of the airway and vocal cords by an otolaryngologist
No surveillance guidelines for LMS have been published.

Ongoing monitoring by the appropriate subspecialists for neurologic, developmental, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, genitourinary, and/or gastrointestinal issues is indicated.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Monitor plasma uric acid concentration and urinary excretion of oxypurines.

Review medical history for signs or symptoms of silent or active renal stones.

Monitor affected individuals for early signs of self-injury.
All individuals with LDS require echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta. The frequency of MRA or CTA evaluations should be tailored to clinical findings.

Individuals with cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.
Eye evaluations should be done at regular intervals, depending on the type and severity of abnormality. No formal guidelines exist. Because approximately 50% of males either present with glaucoma or develop glaucoma in time, regardless of cataract surgery, intraocular pressure should be monitored at least every six months life-long. Presence of clinical findings suggestive of increased intraocular pressure (e.g., excessive tearing, eye rubbing, change in the clarity/transparency of the cornea) warrant prompt evaluation.

Kidney function should be assessed at least yearly with measurement of serum concentrations of electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, intact parathyroid hormone, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.

If the patient has Fanconi syndrome requiring therapy with supplemental bicarbonate or citrate, serum concentrations of phosphate or calcitriol should be measured every three to six months or more often after dose changes.

BUN and serum creatinine are appropriate screening tests to detect the onset of chronic renal failure and to monitor its progression.

Urinalysis and random urine protein, calcium, and creatinine are useful to follow proteinuria and hypercalciuria.

If the patient has renal Fanconi syndrome and bone disease, radiographs of the long bones and growth plates should be obtained at regular intervals as needed, but no more than every six months.

Growth should be monitored regularly with height/length and weight plotted on growth charts for age. Height/length and weight should be measured more frequently in infants (every 2-3 months) than in older children and adolescents who are still growing (every 3-6 months). If patients are treated with growth hormone, growth assessment every three months is indicated.

Developmental progress should be assessed and the educational plan updated twice yearly for the first three years and annually after that. Any regression in abilities should be investigated with high-resolution imaging studies of the central nervous system.

Scoliosis and joint problems should be monitored as part of a routine annual physical examination.

Dental examinations should be performed twice a year by a pediatric dentist experienced in treating children with developmental delay.
Individuals with LPI should be referred for follow-up to physicians with expertise in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism. The age of the patient and the severity of the clinical features determine the frequency of clinical visits and monitoring.

Monitoring should include the following:

Plasma concentrations of amino acids to identify deficiencies of essential amino acids induced by the protein-restricted diet (similar to that used in urea cycle disorders)

Attention to early signs of hyperammonemia including lethargy, nausea, vomiting, and poor feeding in young children, and headache and mood changes in older children

Fasting and postprandial blood ammonia concentrations

Urinary orotic acid excretion

Evaluation of renal function

Attention to early clinical signs of lung involvement

Serum concentrations of LDH and ferritin

The development of a multiorgan pathology in LPI requires careful surveillance of several complications including lung and renal diseases and osteoporosis. No specific guidelines have been proposed. Therefore, a tailored approach is necessary for the follow-up of a specific complication.
Plasma triglyceride levels need to be followed over time to evaluate the affected individual’s success in following the very low-fat dietary recommendations. When the triglyceride level is above 1000 mg/dL, a fasting sample is not required for this evaluation. Other components of the lipid profile do not need to be routinely measured.

Affected individuals who develop abdominal pain need to contact their physician.
Annual neurologic examination should assess gait, tremor, rigidity, cognition, and mood.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of pulmonary function and oxygenation, at least yearly, or more frequently if indicated clinically

Repeat imaging of:

Gastrointestinal tract

Urinary tract

Cardiovascular system
The growth of a child with SHOX deficiency should be monitored every six months.
Click here (pdf) for an overview of the common medical and surgical management recommendations for children with craniofacial microsomia (Adapted from Birgfeld & Heike [2012], published with permission from Semin Plast Surg).
The following are appropriate:

Routine CBC to determine if red blood cell transfusion is necessary

Regular pediatric care
Individuals with Biallelic Germline 

In the US-based National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines [NCCN 2012]:

Pan colonoscopy should be performed every one to two years beginning at age 25-30 years. Following surgery, endoscopy of any remaining colon or rectum should be performed every one to two years.

Upper endoscopy and side viewing duodenoscopy should be performed every three to five years beginning at age 30-35 years.

At this time there is no consensus regarding screening intervals for thyroid abnormalities [LaGuardia et al 2011].

Regarding extraintestinal malignancies, to date no specific surveillance beyond existing protocols that are offered to the general population in most Western countries is recommended.

In Europe:

Recommended ages at which screening should begin differ based on the consensus meeting in Mallorca [Vasen et al 2008] (full text; registration or institutional access required):

Pan colonoscopy beginning at age 18-20 years

Upper endoscopy with side viewing duodenoscopy beginning at age 25-30 years

Recommended intervals between screenings depend on disease severity [Spigelman et al 1989]

Individuals Heterozygous for a Germline 

NCCN guidelines do not propose specific screening recommendations for individuals heterozygous for a germline MUTYH pathogenic variant.

Available data suggest that heterozygous relatives of individuals with MAP have a two- or at most threefold increase in their risk for colorectal cancer at an age similar to that in the general population (see Clinical Description, MUTYH heterozygotes). Thus, they are expected to benefit from population screening measures or could be offered average moderate-risk colorectal screening based on their family history [Jones et al 2009].
Eye. An annual ophthalmologic examination should include a specific assessment for glaucoma and cataracts.

Skeletal. Individuals with severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.

Cardiovascular. Echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta is indicated:

Yearly examinations when the aortic dimension is relatively small and the rate of aortic dilation is relatively slow

More frequent examinations when the aortic root diameter exceeds approximately 4.5 centimeters in adults, the rate of aortic dilation exceeds approximately 0.5 cm per year, and significant aortic regurgitation is present

More frequent evaluations by a cardiologist are indicated with severe or progressive valve or ventricular dysfunction or with documented or suspected arrhythmia.

All individuals with Marfan syndrome should begin intermittent surveillance of the entire aorta with CT or MRA scans in young adulthood. Such imaging should be performed at least annually in anyone with a history of aortic root replacement or dissection.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and behavioral evaluations to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems;

Periodic reevaluations by a clinical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information regarding MBD5 haploinsufficiency.
A metabolic specialist should be consulted immediately during intercurrent illness, especially when it involves fever and/or poor calorie in-/uptake.

During the first months of life, monthly visits should be considered to ensure that families understand and are comfortable with treatment while the infant is otherwise well. A dietician should be involved to ensure proper nutrition in terms of quality and quantity.

The frequency of routine follow-up visits is individualized based on comfort level of the patients, families, and health care providers.
Fibrous Dysplasia

Individuals with craniofacial FD should have yearly vision and hearing evaluations, and periodic computed tomography of the skull.

Individuals with spine FD should be monitored closely for progressive scoliosis.

Radiographs should be performed periodically to evaluate new or worsening symptoms and to provide additional information about FD anatomy and bone quality.

Phosphorus levels should be checked periodically to monitor for the development of FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia.

25-hydroxyvitamin D levels should be checked periodically as part of routine bone health surveillance.

Endocrinopathies

Precocious puberty. All children should be monitored for growth acceleration and other clinical signs of precocious puberty.

Thyroid

Thyroid function tests should be monitored routinely in all children younger than age five years. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Individuals with abnormalities on ultrasound examination but normal thyroid function tests should continue to have laboratory testing periodically throughout childhood, as the development of frank hyperthyroidism may occur later. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Patients who retain abnormal thyroid tissue following thyroid surgery should be monitored with regular physical examination and periodic thyroid ultrasound examination because of the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth.

Testicular lesions likely have low potential for malignant transformation [Boyce et al 2012]; however, it is prudent to monitor all males with regular physical examinations and testicular ultrasound examinations. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys.

Growth hormone excess. See Growth Hormone Excess Evaluation:

All children should be monitored for growth acceleration.

Patients treated medically with octreotide should be monitored for gallbladder disease, and with those treated with pegvisomant should be monitored for hepatotoxicity.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Serum phosphorus levels should be monitored routinely in all patients.

Hypercortisolism

Routine biochemical surveillance is not indicated; however, all infants should be monitored for clinical signs of hypercortisolism.

Patients with a history of Cushing syndrome that has spontaneously resolved should be monitored for late-appearing adrenal insufficiency.

Other

GI. See Gastrointestinal Management (pdf).
Annually, starting at the time of diagnosis and continuing until chronic kidney disease (CKD) Stage 3:

Hemoglobin concentration

Serum concentrations of uric acid and creatinine

Blood pressure

After CKD Stage 3, follow up as determined by the treating nephrologist is appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Measurement of serum creatinine concentration at least annually in affected individuals, and more frequently in those with severe disease

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration at least annually
Early recognition and treatment of cardiac problems and seizures is important, as these potential complications may be severe and appear to cause premature death [Danek et al 2001a].

If no pathologic findings are identified at initial evaluation, cardiac examinations (Holter ECG and echocardiography) should be repeated every two to three years.

In the case of suspected epilepsy, EEG should be performed. If AED treatment is indicated, medication-specific laboratory parameters and serum concentrations should be followed.

One individual with MLS developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis; thus, serum CK concentrations should be carefully monitored, in particular if excessive movement disorders are present or if neuroleptic medications are being used [Jung & Brandner 2002].
Standards of care have been reviewed recently [Wang et al 2010] (full text).

Early-onset LAMA2 MD

At least biannual evaluations during the first five years by a nutritionist and gastroenterologist to monitor weight gain and to identify early recurrent aspiration

At least annual follow up with a pulmonologist to assess respiratory function. After age four to six years: annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of forced vital capacity (FVC).

Annual measurement of FVC to allow trending of FVC

Annual evaluation of strength and joint range of motion by a physical therapist

At least annual evaluation of the spine by an orthopedist. Note: (1) More frequent evaluations are warranted during periods of rapid growth, loss of function, and/or progression of deformities. (2) Annual lateral spinal x-rays (in addition to the standard anterior-posterior x-rays) can be used to evaluate the anterior posterior intra-thoracic cavity diameter; however, if respiratory function declines rapidly without known cause or without prior spinal surgery, a CT may be needed.

Cardiac monitoring:

In the absence of symptoms, evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram at age five years, ten years, and then every two years

In patients with severe respiratory insufficiency on mechanical ventilation, annual echocardiography (required)

In patients reporting palpitations, increased fatigue, or loss of consciousness without a clear neurologic origin, cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor and echocardiogram (recommended)

Pre-surgical cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor, echocardiogram, and a dopamine test of cardiac function

Note: The brain MRI findings seen in both complete and partial laminin α2 deficiency do not need to be followed with serial scans over time [Geranmayeh et al 2010].

Late-onset LAMA2 MD

Respiratory. Monitor for respiratory insufficiency with serial pulmonary function tests.

Orthopedic. Monitor with frequent spinal examinations to detect scoliosis and assess bone health.

Neurologic. Monitor to detect and treat seizures.
Close assessment/monitoring of neurocognitive development and developmental milestones are recommended during childhood for all children who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion, with referral to early intervention programs if required.

Medical surveillance for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental assessments

Monitoring of specific identified medical issues
Periodic:

Developmental evaluations because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and other behavioral features

Monitoring of cardiac, renal, urologic, and/or dental abnormalities, as needed

Reevaluation by a medical geneticist who can apprise the family of new recommendations for monitoring for medical or mental health concerns.
Renal structure/function

Renal ultrasound examination to monitor for kidney cysts 12 months after establishing the diagnosis, then every two to three years in childhood/adolescence and every three to five years in adulthood. If an abnormality is detected, more frequent ultrasound examinations may be warranted.

Periodic monitoring of renal function; serum concentration of magnesium, potassium, uric acid; and possibly urine magnesium and creatinine, preferably under the guidance of a nephrologist. Annual or more frequent monitoring may be advised for patients who have laboratory findings suggesting renal impairment, are taking potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), or have structural renal abnormalities [Verbitsky et al 2015]

MODY5

HgbA1C annually

Patients and families should be educated on how to monitor for the clinical signs and symptoms of diabetes mellitus (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss [sometimes with polyphagia], fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and blurred vision) in order to promote early diagnosis and treatment.

Note: Endocrinology consultations as indicated depending on an individual’s clinical manifestations

Psychomotor development. Routine monitoring through early childhood. A full neuropsychological evaluation is indicated for children who experience difficulty with school.

Other. Audiologic and ophthalmological evaluations on a regular basis
The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care

Specialized neurologic care for individuals with epilepsy

Ophthalmologic examinations at routine intervals due to increased risk for hypermetropia and strabismus

Monitoring for spine deformities

Monitoring as needed of cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental and learning assessments

Monitoring of any specific medical issues that are identified
Continued assessment of:

Feeding and nutrition

Developmental milestones

Cognitive development

Possible psychiatric manifestations
The following recommended surveillance is the same as that for Gorlin syndrome (see Gorlin Syndrome).

Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computer tomography (CT) should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.

While there are currently no published guidelines regarding monitoring for intraabdominal embryonal tumors in individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion, 12% of the published cases have been diagnosed with Wilms tumor. Thus regular abdominal ultrasound for Wilms tumor, similar to surveillance for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, is recommended for individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion until disproven otherwise.
Follow-up evaluations should be performed every three to four months to ensure effective seizure control and monitor for changes in clinical findings.
The following should be monitored from early childhood:

Developmental progress

Neurologic features, with special attention to the onset of spasticity

Onset and frequency of seizures and response to antiepileptic medications

Number and type of infections

Autistic-like features

Gastrointestinal symptoms
Surveillance includes neurologic and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings.
Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Annual ophthalmologic, cardiologic (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.
Routine surveillance using biochemical testing and imaging is recommended for asymptomatic individuals with an MEN1 pathogenic variant and others at risk for MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (i.e., those known to have MEN1 syndrome and those with an affected parent who have not undergone molecular genetic testing); surveillance should begin in early childhood and continue for life. Early detection and treatment of the potentially malignant neuroendocrine tumors should reduce the morbidity and mortality of MEN1 syndrome. Such screening can detect the onset of the disease about ten years before symptoms develop, thereby providing an opportunity for earlier treatment [Bassett et al 1998].

MEN1 Minimal Surveillance Program 

For individuals known to have MEN1 syndrome or a family-specific pathogenic variant in MEN1 2, 3

Biochemical investigations

Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin, IGF-1, fasting glucose and insulin from age five years 2

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration, chromogranin–A, pancreatic polypeptide, glucagon, vasocative intestinal peptide for other pancreatic NET from age eight years 2

Fasting serum gastrin concentration from age 20 years 2

To be considered: fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH

Imaging

Every three to five years beginning at the specified age; the interval depending on whether there is biochemical evidence of a neoplasia and/or signs and symptoms of an MEN1-related tumor 2:

Head MRI from age five years 2

Abdominal CT or MRI from age 20 years 2

To be considered: yearly chest CT, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) octreotide scan

Notes:

1. Brandi et al [2001], Thakker et al [2012]

2. According to the International Guidelines for Diagnosis and Therapy of MEN Type 1 and Type 2 [Brandi et al 2001], and Clinical Practice Guidelines for MEN Type 1 [Thakker et al 2012]

3. Can be modified according to clinical suspicion and/or findings in an individual

For individuals at 50% risk of having MEN1 syndrome in whom genetic status is unknown

Biochemical investigations. Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin from age five years

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration from age ten years

Fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH from age ten years

Fasting serum gastrin concentration if individual has symptoms of ZES (reflux or diarrhea) from age 20 years
MTC. Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with MTC who have undergone total thyroidectomy and neck nodal dissections have recurrent disease [Cohen & Moley 2003]. Furthermore, thyroid glands removed from individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who had normal plasma calcitonin concentrations have been found to contain MTC [Skinner et al 1996]. Therefore, continued monitoring for residual or recurrent MTC is indicated after thyroidectomy, even if thyroidectomy is performed prior to biochemical evidence of disease.

The screening protocol for MTC after prophylactic thyroidectomy is an annual measurement of serum calcitonin [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. More frequent follow up is recommended for those with residual disease.

Hypoparathyroidism. All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy and autotransplantation of the parathyroids need monitoring for possible hypoparathyroidism.

Pheochromocytoma. For individuals whose initial screening results are negative for pheochromocytoma, annual biochemical screening is recommended, followed by MRI and/or CT if the biochemical results are abnormal [Pacak et al 2005, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Other screening studies, such as scintigraphy or positron emission tomography, may be warranted in some individuals.

MEN 2A. Annual biochemical screening beginning at age eight years has been recommended for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634 and at age 20 years for a pathogenic variant in all other codons [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Screening as for MEN 2A is indicated, as not all families classified as FMTC are MTC-only [Moers et al 1996].

MEN 2B. Annual screening should begin at age eight years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia. Annual biochemical screening is recommended for affected individuals who have not had parathyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation.

MEN 2A. Screening should start at age eight years for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634, and by age 20 years for individuals with other RET pathogenic variants [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Periodic screening should begin at age 20 years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

MEN 2B. Screening is unnecessary as individuals with MEN 2B do not have an increased risk of hyperparathyroidism.
For infants being treated with copper histidine or copper chloride, monitor serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels to avoid supranormal levels.
Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals (e.g. every 6-12 months initially) to monitor progression of disease and the appearance of new symptoms.

Annual neurologic, ophthalmologic, cardiology (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.

If normal for three years, less frequent evaluations can be considered.
Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in the disorder (typically a pediatrician). Clinical follow up should include measurement of growth parameters as well as specific enquiry into symptoms of seizures and obstructive sleep apnea.
The following are appropriate:

Physical examination to monitor disease progression yearly or less often depending on rate of progression

Electrocardiogram and/or echocardiogram yearly for early detection of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function tests for individuals with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea.
Ophthalmologic, neurologic, and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings are appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular follow up with a child neurologist for seizure management

Regular follow up with a complex care/palliative care team or experienced pediatrician to monitor for complications associated with severe neurologic impairment (e.g., aspiration, constipation, contractures, pressure sores)

Periodic reevaluation with a clinical geneticist to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of head circumference and stature using standard growth charts

Neurologic follow-up from birth to adulthood to detect behavioral difficulties, hyperactivity, attention disorder, and motor problems (spasticity), and to monitor for evidence of seizures which can be late onset

Periodic neuropsychologic evaluation in order to adapt interventions and schooling to the level of the individual's cognitive abilities
Monitoring and follow up with ophthalmologist, dermatologist, pediatric neurologist, or other professionals as needed is appropriate.

For those with cardiomyopathy, complete and periodic cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of heart failure is needed.
Routine follow up in a clinic specializing in the care of lymphedema is appropriate.
The following surveillance is appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function

Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those subtypes with known occurrence of cardiac involvement
The following are appropriate:

In individuals with renal abnormalities, monitoring of blood pressure and renal function.

In individuals with interim history of severe constipation, rectal biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung disease

Continuing surveillance for manifestations that would establish the diagnosis of BBS including the following:

Serial growth measurements to track height and weight until at least age five years to document obesity that can occur with BBS

Developmental assessments until at least age five years to detect developmental disabilities that can occur with BBS

Regular ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram (ERG) (if appropriate) after age five years to evaluate for visual signs and symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa [A Verloes, personal communication]

As diabetes mellitus is a rare complication of BBS, measurement of fasting blood glucose as appropriate

Investigations for rarer complications of BBS, including hearing assessment, dental assessment, electroencephalogram, and thyroid function tests as appropriate

Consideration of later complications of surgery for HMC, including recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis and infection of the vaginal tract [Lueth & Wood 2014]. Surveillance as appropriate for each individual is recommended.
Infants and toddlers with ML II and their families benefit from outpatient follow-up visits approximately every three months. Subsequently throughout early childhood, two outpatient visits per year may be adequate until cardiac and respiratory monitoring need to be more frequent.
Young children with ML III alpha/beta and their families benefit from outpatient clinic visits about twice a year.

From age six years similar follow-up visits are recommended on a yearly basis unless bone pain and deteriorating ambulation become major handicaps and/or cardiac and respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention.
Young children with ML III gamma and their families usually benefit from out-patient clinic visits once a year, unless cardiac and/or respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention. Orthopedic assessment should be done at least once a year, with more frequent follow-up visits if any deterioration is observed. Annual ophthalmologic assessment should address possible ophthalmologic changes. If necessary, an ERG should be considered to better evaluate for retinal impairment.

During yearly visits, attention should be paid to pain relief, daily functional abilities, and psychological interventions.

Although cardiac manifestations are usually asymptomatic, monitoring for progressive valvular insufficiency using echocardiography should occur at least once a year.

Surveillance for metabolic bone disease includes DEXA scan in five-year intervals.
Annual follow up with a generalist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

A program of periodic MRI monitoring developed by the neurologist and primary care physician:

Wang et al [2011] propose guidelines for confirmatory testing and subsequent clinical management of presymptomatic individuals suspected to have MLD and other lysosomal storage diseases (click here for full text).

Eichler et al [2009] propose a scoring system for brain MR images in individuals with MLD.

Dali et al [2010] report that N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brains of patients with MLD as assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) correlate with motor and cognitive function. This finding could be used to monitor disease progression and the effects of treatments.

Not all persons with MLD show white matter lesions as the initial MRI finding. Cranial nerve enhancement by MRI in a child age 25 months with apparent MLD and without intraparenchymal white matter involvement was seen by Singh et al [2009]. Likewise, Morana et al [2009] report that cranial nerve and cauda equina nerve root enhancement by MRI may precede typical white matter abnormalities and could facilitate earlier diagnosis. Haberlandt et al [2009] present three individuals with peripheral neuropathy in whom initial MRI showed no white matter changes, but who later developed MLD.

Monitoring of changes in locomotion, communication, and behavior which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (e.g., introduction of walking aids and/or a wheelchair). A classification system for gross motor function for children with MLD has been developed and tested by Kehrer et al [2011b]; it can be used to monitor the course of the disease and should prove extremely useful in evaluating therapeutic trials.

Monitoring for onset of seizures and/or contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Monitoring for behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions or actions, problems in following directions, memory loss, and/or incontinence, which indicate a need for increasing physical restriction and curtailing of independence

Monitoring for difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration of gastrostomy

Special attention following general anesthesia or an infection with a high fever as these may trigger exacerbation of disease progression
During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated as frequently as every week. No guidelines regarding the recommended type or frequency of laboratory testing have been published.

The following should be monitored on a regular six-month to one-year basis or more frequently if the patient is unstable and requires frequent changes in management:

Plasma amino acids

Plasma and urine MMA levels

Serum acylcarnitines and free and total carnitine levels

Chemistry: Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin (T/U), triglycerides, and cholesterol

Liver, kidney, and bone health

Bone marrow indices

Monitoring of kidney function periodically with creatinine, cystatin-C, and, if available, studies of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (e.g., iohexol plasma decay), in addition to imaging of the kidneys, will allow for early referral to nephrology and appropriate timing of renal transplantation when needed [van't Hoff et al 1999, Kruszka et al 2013]. Combined equations based on creatinine and cystatin-C are expected to reflect more accurately the kidney function in this patient population [Schwartz et al 2009].

Regular ophthalmology and audiology evaluations to screen for optic nerve thinning/pallor and hearing loss [Authors, unpublished observations] are recommended.
Monitoring for potential complications that can influence the prognosis of MmD includes the following:

Frequent and regular monitoring of the spine particularly during childhood and adolescence when scoliosis can rapidly progress during the adolescent growth spurt

Careful monitoring of respiratory function from an early stage because of the risk for insidious nocturnal hypoxia and sudden respiratory failure. Monitoring of respiratory function should include the following:

Close attention to nocturnal hypoventilation symptoms including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance

Lung function tests (FEV1 and FVC)

Sleep studies

Assessment of the need for intermittent or permanent ventilation. Nocturnal ventilation, when indicated, may significantly improve the prognosis.

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk of cardiac impairment secondary to respiratory involvement

Growth should be assessed regularly.

Regular neuromuscular evaluation to assess disease progress is indicated.
Breath test to screen for bacterial overgrowth is recommended.

Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.
The following are appropriate:

Annual assessment of joints by a rheumatologist or orthopedic surgeon

Follow up of congenital heart defects as per the treating cardiologist
If transplant therapy is not pursued due to lack of donor availability or family preference, annual monitoring of bone marrow karyotype and FISH for chromosome 7, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels should be coordinated by specialists in oncology and bone marrow transplantation. The goal is to identify bone marrow abnormalities (cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia) prior to the development of AML or MDS by annual monitoring of cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels.
After establishing the diagnosis (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) and instituting the indicated therapies (see Treatment of Manifestations), annual review is recommended.

Additional recommendations include:

Spinal review for evidence of scoliosis and/or kyphoscoliosis, especially during the years of rapid growth in adolescence;

Repeat electrocardiogram and echocardiogram if symptoms of cardiac insufficiency occur;

Respiratory function and assessment if symptoms suggest either sleep apnea or sleep-related respiratory insufficiency.
Periodic funduscopic assessment is appropriate [McAvoy et al 2004].
Given the limited number of individuals reported with MPPH syndrome, no formal surveillance guidelines exist; however, recommended surveillance includes the following:

Follow-up with a pediatric neurologist, at least every six months until age six years, and annually thereafter.

Brain MRI to detect hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia; provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Long-term neurologic follow up is recommended for management of epilepsy.

Routine follow up with a developmental pediatrician is appropriate, given the high risk for developmental delays and/or intellectual disability.
The recommended minimal schedule of assessments is highlighted in Muenzer et al 2009].

Persons with MPS I, regardless of disease severity and mode of treatment, should be actively followed at a center that is experienced with the care of individuals with MPS disease.

Aggressive orthopedic management for all patients regardless of treatment choices and disease severity; yearly or more frequent assessment by an experienced orthopedic surgeon is recommended.

Routine median nerve conduction velocity testing because of the high incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome [Van Heest et al 1998]

Annual ophthalmologic assessment with assessment of corneal status and retinal function

Cardiac assessment including annual echocardiogram

Annual assessment by an audiologist as well as by an otolaryngologist to determine the degree and cause of hearing impairment

Early and continuous monitoring of head growth by measuring occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) in infants and children

Cranial ultrasound examination and other brain imaging studies are recommended if a rapid increase in OFC occurs.

MRI can show ventriculomegaly, but imaging studies often cannot reliably distinguish between brain atrophy and brain compression.

Lumbar puncture with measurement of opening pressure of CSF is a preferred method for assessing the degree of pressure elevation [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Annual assessment for evidence of spinal cord compression by neurologic examination with consideration of spinal MRI studies when indicated

Developmental assessment in all patients; consideration of psycho-educational assessment of children with attenuated disease prior to primary school entry
Individuals on ERT

The following should be assessed before and after initiation of ERT to determine treatment efficacy:

Physical and neurologic evaluation at least every six months

Annual assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance (see All Individuals)

Annual pulmonary function tests, including maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) and forced vital capacity (FVC)

Note: (1) Changes in urine keratan sulfate (KS) levels do not correlate with efficacy of treatment; therefore, the benefit of following urine KS (or urine GAG) levels during elosulfase alfa treatment is limited. (2) The benefit of monitoring anti-elosulfase alfa antibodies is unknown.

All Individuals

Assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance

Every 6-12 months: track growth, pubertal stage, and progress; optimize ambulation

Pain severity assessment every six months; age-appropriate quality of life questionnaires every year

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, or as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk (T25FW) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Respiratory rate, pulse oximeter, and heart rate should be measured before and after the annual testing.

Musculoskeletal.

White et al [2014] recommended the following guidelines for monitoring musculoskeletal involvement in those with MPS IVA (full text):

Upper and lower extremities. Evaluate severity and progression of upper and lower extremity involvement at least annually.

Evaluation of range of motion, grip and pinch strength, and functional assessments (e.g., functional dexterity test) of the upper extremities

Assessment of lower extremity alignment, including standing AP radiographs (as clinically indicated) and AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis to assess hip dysplasia/subluxation until skeletal maturity or when clinically indicated

Spine. Neurologic examination every six months to assess for spinal cord compression [Solanki et al 2013]:

For children who are reliable historians, at each clinic visit obtain a history of exercise tolerance and symptoms of myelopathy (e.g., extremity weakness; clumsiness; unsteady, changing gait; bowel or bladder dysfunction or lower back/leg pain).

In those with multisegmental myelopathy, SSEPs and MEPs (if available) may provide detailed information.

Perform plain radiography of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion-extension) every six months.

Perform plain radiography of the spine (AP and lateral views for the thoracolumbar spine) every one to three years.

Perform MRI whole spine (neutral position)* annually and flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine every one to three years.* Neutral, flexion, and extension lateral radiographs of the cervical spine should be obtained prior to cervical MRI to assess for atlanto-occipital instability.

Cardiac. Evaluate heart rate annually; perform electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015].

Respiratory

For obstructive sleep apnea, yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Annual in home screening sleep studies (which monitor oxygen saturation). Polysomnography every three years.

To assess pulmonary function, annual MVV and FVC until children stop growing, then every two to three years. The benefit of noninvasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Length/height and weight should be measured at every visit.

Eye

Monitor for vision and ocular abnormalities at every visit; refer to an ophthalmologist as needed.

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy, perform retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013].

Dental. Evaluate every six to 12 months.

Hearing. Perform yearly audiogram.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Hepatic ultrasound examination to screen for liver masses that might suggest HCC

Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) concentration

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Urinalysis and urine amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Ophthalmologic examination
The following are appropriate:

Regular follow-up with a child or adult neurologist and physiatrist and/or physical therapist

If the diagnosis is made prior to the development of cataracts, ophthalmologic examination beginning in infancy and at regular intervals
The authors recommend that infants with MSUD be evaluated by a pediatrician and metabolic specialist once monthly and have a full amino acid profile measured (either from plasma or filter paper) at least once a week. At the authors’ center, strict adherence to these guidelines by 15 Mennonite infants managed between 2005 and 2008 was associated with a 64% reduction in the overall hospitalization rate to 0.14 admissions per patient per year [Strauss et al 2010].

Children, adolescents, and adults also need to be followed closely and should ideally have amino levels monitored once per week. This is usually not practical without a “send-in” filter paper method.

The Denver Developmental Screening Test II or a comparable tool is useful for monitoring development of infants and young children with MSUD.

School-age children, adolescents, and adults should have neurocognitive testing if indicated by school performance or behavioral problems [Shellmer et al 2011, Muelly et al 2013]. Referral to a psychiatrist is appropriate for individuals who show signs of ADHD, anxiety, or depression.
The following assessments are indicated:

Annual audiometric assessment to evaluate stability or progression of hearing loss

Annual examination by a physician to assess for related clinical findings (e.g., palmoplantar keratosis)
Patients are typically followed most closely by a neurologist for medication management and for interval assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing. This is often done every three to six months, but may be annual for patients who are more stable.

Patients receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism) are monitored for adverse neuropsychiatric effects; conversely, patients receiving typical or atypical dopamine antagonist agents (for psychiatric features) are monitored for the development or worsening of parkinsonism.

Annual ophthalmologic examination is recommended.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual pulmonary assessment, including pulmonary function testing if able to be performed;

Polysomnography every one to three years unless symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing are present on history;

Spinal examination for signs of scoliosis, particularly in late childhood and adolescence;

Annual ophthalmologic exams for ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and myopia;

Assessment for dental malocclusion, with referral for orthodontia if indicated.

Currently, the risk for non-neurologic events including bleeding diatheses and gastrointestinal complications is uncertain. Furthermore, the benefit of screening tests for such abnormalities has yet to be determined or systematically studied. Potential screening tests include the following:

Annual blood counts [Herman et al 1999]

Annual liver function test and abdominal ultrasound to address the potential risk of peliosis hepatis [Herman et al 1999]
The following are appropriate:

Regular developmental assessments of affected children

Periodic repeat audiograms

Periodic assessment for strabismus

As part of protocol-driven care and management: annual multidisciplinary reviews and periodic review by a social work team. Protocol-driven approaches to surveillance currently in use include those of Flapper et al [2009] and de Jong et al [2010].
Surveillance includes the following:

Annual eye examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors

Monitoring for the development of otitis media (OM); for those individuals with chronic OM, referral to an otolaryngologist

Regular developmental assessments to plan and refine educational interventions

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations
The following evaluations should be considered at the suggested maximum intervals:

Every six months. blood count in individuals with bleeding episodes to identify anemia; more frequent counts are appropriate in cases of recurrent profuse bleeding.

Every year

Urinalysis (including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on spot urine sample)

Measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

For individuals with an established renal defect, referral to a nephrologist

Every three years

Audiometric evaluation. Once hearing loss is identified, the frequency of follow-up evaluations is determined by the treating hearing specialists.

Ophthalmologic evaluation. Once cataract is identified, the frequency of evaluations is determined by the treating ophthalmologist.

Measurement of serum AST, ALT and GGT

In individuals with alterations of liver enzymes, alternative causes of liver damage should be investigated.

If alternative causes are excluded, the frequency of the liver enzyme measurements depends on the severity of the alteration.
Cardiovascular

After normal baseline evaluations of upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements, two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler, and cardiology evaluation

In asymptomatic individuals with a normal echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiogram every 1-3 years. Note that pericardial effusion and restrictive cardiomyopathy may occur at any age and may be clinically asymptomatic [Starr et al 2015, Garavelli et al 2016, Lin et al 2016].

In individuals with abnormal findings at the time of initial diagnosis, more extensive imaging may be indicated given the progressive nature of the disorder (e.g., MRI to evaluate for pericardial thickening or effusion).

Respiratory

Consider oxygen saturation in children, with monitoring as needed for symptoms suggestive of restrictive/obstructive pulmonary disease and annual pulmonary function studies in children older than age six years if able to cooperate with test maneuvers.

Evaluation for upper airway stenosis (e.g., laryngotracheal stenosis) should be considered based on symptoms.

Other

Annual ophthalmologic and audiology evaluations

Monitoring of physical skill development and joint mobility
Gagnon et al [2010] provide guidelines for surveillance.

The following are appropriate:

Annual ECG to detect asymptomatic cardiac conduction defects. Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring of individuals with DM1 who do not have cardiac symptoms [Sá et al 2007, Sovari et al 2007, Cudia et al 2009]. Tissue Doppler monitoring has also been proposed [Parisi et al 2007, Wahbi et al 2012].

Annual measurement of fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin concentration, with treatment for diabetes mellitus if indicated [Matsumura et al 2009]

Ophthalmologic examination every two years to evaluate for cataract formation

Attention to nutritional status including mastication and trouble eating [Motlagh et al 2005, Engvall et al 2009, Umemoto et al 2009]

Polysomnographic follow-up of sleep complaints [Kumar et al 2007]
Annual ECG and echocardiogram or possible cardiac MRI is indicated to detect asymptomatic and progressive cardiac conduction defects and cardiomyopathy.

Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring even in the absence of cardiac symptoms.

Fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin level should be measured annually.

Males should be tested for hypogonadism if they become increasingly fatigued or have reduced sexual energy, and should be tested every few years even without symptoms to see if they would benefit from replacement therapy.
Annual measurement of the following is appropriate:

Measurement of blood pressure

Urinalysis

Urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should be referred to a nephrologist.

Screening for glaucoma from the time that a child is compliant with the examination

Dental examination is indicated at least every six months.

DEXA scanning frequency in adults is based on clinical symptoms, abnormalities detected on previous evaluations, and standard practice in peri- and post-menopausal females and older males.
Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.
The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Assessment of ambulation and speech abilities
Surveillance includes the following:

At least yearly evaluation by a neurologist to assess for and/or manage seizures

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities
Routine medical management of children and young adults with complex neurodisability will be relevant to all those affected by NCL. This may include clinical surveillance for the following:

Swallowing difficulties and recurrent aspiration

X-ray surveillance of hip joints and spine

Screening ECG for those individuals with CLN3 disease who are older than age 16 years
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth and development in infants and children

Periodic measurement of serum sodium concentration to identify unrecognized hyperosmolality and early dehydration

Note: Urine output and urine specific gravity are useless as indicators of hydration status.

Annual renal ultrasound evaluation to monitor for hydronephrosis and megacystis [Shalev et al 2004]
The following are appropriate:

Regular formal assessment of respiratory function, including monitoring of sleep studies when significant respiratory impairment is identified

Routine assessment for scoliosis and joint contractures

Routine assessment of physical function and the need for mechanical assistance, such as a wheelchair
Evaluations are recommended at least annually. More frequent monitoring is recommended for individuals with advanced-stage CKD, individuals at higher risk of disease progression, or when assessment will affect therapeutic decision making [KDIGO 2013].

Monitoring of blood pressure, growth parameters, and development

Renal function including serum creatinine concentration and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or BUN, electrolytes, CBC, CKD metabolic bone disease including serum calcium, phosphate, PTH and alkaline phosphatase activity

Liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin and prothrombin time

Urinalysis to monitor proteinuria

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate progression of renal disease and possible liver, bile duct, spleen or pancreas anomalies

Routine evaluations for extrarenal manifestations of syndromic NPH that can appear with time, especially ophthalmologic examination for visual acuity, visual field examination, and evidence of retinal dystrophy
Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013].

The following are recommended:

Annual physical examination by a physician who is familiar with the individual and with the disease

Annual ophthalmologic examination in early childhood, less frequent examination in older children and adults

Regular developmental assessment by screening questionnaire (in childhood)

Regular blood pressure monitoring

Other studies (e.g., MRI) only as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms

Monitoring of those who have abnormalities of the central nervous system, skeletal system, or cardiovascular system by an appropriate specialist
For at-risk individuals (1) in whom the known pathogenic variant in the family has been identified or (2) whose genetic status cannot be clarified by molecular genetic testing:

MRI is usually begun between ages ten and 12 years but can be delayed in families in which the onset is known to be later [Evans et al 2005a]. MRI should be continued on an annual basis until at least the fourth decade of life. It is not clear if earlier surveillance (i.e., cranial MRI before age 10 years) is beneficial, and it is not known at what age monitoring can be safely stopped. Although some individuals with NF2 do not have symptoms until they are in their fifties, it is likely that "silent" tumors would be detected on an MRI performed at a younger age.

Hearing evaluation, including BAER testing, may be useful in detecting changes in auditory nerve function before changes can be visualized by MRI.

Routine complete eye examinations should be part of the care of all individuals with NF2.
Affected individuals

Periodic follow-up to monitor developmental progress, physical growth (including weight, length/height, and head circumference) and frequency of infections; monitoring for weight loss, which may signal the presence of a malignancy

Lifelong monitoring of immune biomarkers to include the parameters listed in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Careful follow up by oncologist: in individuals with NBS who are immunodeficient symptoms of lymphoid malignancies can be misleading.

Monitoring for pubertal progression in both females and males and for premature ovarian insufficiency in females [Chrzanowska et al 2010b]

Breast self-examination and ultrasonographic evaluation recommended in affected females

Carriers (heterozygotes)

Parents. As obligate carriers, parents should be monitored for malignancy, in particular breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men. No consensus tumor screening protocols for carriers have been published.

At-risk sibs. Evidence of cancer risk in young carriers is insufficient to warrant screening in childhood.
Developmental assessment should be performed throughout the first years of life.

Neurologic assessments in the first year can identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and early development of chorea in more mildly affected patients.

Severely affected individuals should be monitored for scoliosis.
The following are appropriate:

For individuals with no neurologic manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual neurologic evaluation

For individuals with no pulmonary manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for pulmonary dysfunction (pulmonary function tests) and pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest

For individuals with no manifestations of thyroid disease or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for thyroid dysfunction (serum concentration of thyroid stimulating hormone) and for thyroid cancer (physical examination that includes thyroid palpation)
If anomalies are found in any system (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis), periodic follow up should be planned and life-long monitoring may be necessary; for example, periodic eye examination if a refraction error or strabismus is found, urinalysis if there are structural abnormalities of the collecting system. Despite the apparent increased incidence of hematologic and solid tumor malignancies, no surveillance strategies have been evaluated or recommended.
The following are recommended:

Routine follow up with an ophthalmologist in all individuals with an NDP-related retinopathy, even when vision is severely reduced

Given that most individuals with the NDP-related spectrum of retinopathies are blind, routine monitoring of hearing so that hearing loss can be detected early and managed appropriately

Observation for clinical evidence of venous stasis or ulcer disease
Individuals with NPD-A should receive routine care from a pediatrician and a neurologist including evaluation of the following:

Nutrition status

Occupational and physical therapy needs

Individuals with NPD-B should be evaluated at least yearly for the following:

History (at least every 6-12 months): growth and weight gain in children; fatigue; any change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities; bleeding, shortness of breath; abdominal pain; headaches; extremity pain

Physical examination including assessment of neurologic function

Blood tests including liver enzymes, platelet count, and fasting lipid profile

Pulmonary function testing and chest radiograph

Skeletal assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)

Nutrition assessment
General pediatric evaluations, with special attention to pulmonary function, swallowing, bowel habit, and mood (for occult depression) at six-month intervals are appropriate for most juvenile and adult affected individuals. Sleep disturbances are common in NPC; the affected individual or caregiver should be questioned regarding sleep hygiene as a part of regular evaluation.

Annual psychometric testing may be helpful in arranging appropriate school or work placement.

Teenagers and adults with motor or sensory impairments who are driving should be monitored at six- to 12-month intervals to ensure that they do not present a risk to themselves or others.
CHILD syndrome

Regular surveillance for cutaneous manifestations as new lesions may occur in puberty or early adulthood

Orthopedic surveillance for musculoskeletal deformities such as scoliosis and joint contractures

Neurologic, cardiologic, or renal surveillance depending on clinical involvement

CK syndrome

Neurologic surveillance of seizures for readjustment of medications if necessary

Orthopedic surveillance for scoliosis/kyphosis
The following are appropriate:

During the first few years of life, annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error and strabismus

In adults, dermatologic surveillance of unusual skin thickening, hyperkeratosis, and erosive lesions that may be harbingers of skin cancer
The following are appropriate:

Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment and accurate correction of refractive errors, and related strabismus or face turn

Annual to biennial search for evidence of sun-related skin damage and pre-cancerous or cancerous lesions, especially in areas of high intensity or prolonged sunlight exposure
Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment for accurate correction of refractive error are appropriate.

There is no definitive guideline supported by scientific evidence as to how often an individual should be evaluated by a dermatologist, though an evaluation of the skin for cancer screening every six months is recommended.
Surveillance includes the following:

Annual audiology evaluation and assessment of speech development and frequency of ear infections in children if cleft lip and/or cleft palate is present

Annual blood pressure examination and serum creatinine concentration to monitor renal function in individuals age ten years or older

Annual ultrasound examination for renal, hepatic, pancreatic, and ovarian cystic disease in individuals age ten years and older
The following are appropriate:

Dental examinations twice a year for those with DI or at risk for DI

Hearing evaluation at three- to five-year intervals perhaps beginning as early as age five years until hearing loss is identified, then as indicated based on the nature and degree of hearing loss and associated interventions
For all individuals with CCHS, the following evaluations are recommended:

At least yearly (every 6 months until age 3 years) comprehensive, multiple-day in-hospital physiologic evaluation (see Table 4)

Yearly echocardiogram to identify right ventricular hypertrophy and/or cor pulmonale

Yearly hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte counts to identify polycythemia

Table 4 summarizes the recommended clinical evaluations for affected individuals with CCHS based on the PHOX2B variant present.

Table 4. 

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

PHOX2B Variant

Annual In-Hospital Comprehensive Testing 1

Annual Neurocognitive Assessment

Annual 72-hr Holter and ECG

Hirschsprung Disease Assessment

Tumors of Neural Crest Origin Assessment

PARM genotype:20/24, 20/25

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/26, 20/27

X

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/2820/33

X

X

X

X

X 2

NPARM

X

X

X

X

X 3

Deletion/ duplication 4

X

X

X

X

X 2

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

1. 

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

2. 

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

3. 

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

4. 

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual ophthalmologic examination, including measurement of visual acuity and visual fields and optical coherence tomography (OCT);

Annual hearing evaluation.
Clinical evaluation for development of orthopedic manifestations (e.g., hand contractures in FMD, scoliosis in FMD and MNS) is appropriate. Head size and shape should be monitored as part of the surveillance for evolving craniosynostosis.

Monitoring of hearing loss should be ongoing, as the sensorineural component can be progressive.
Regular follow-up depending on the type of malformations present:

Craniofacial team follow-up for those with cleft lip/palate, including regular monitoring of hearing

Urology follow-up for those with significant hypospadias and/or renal defects

Cardiac follow-up for those with cardiac defects

Gastroenterology, pulmonary, and/or surgical follow-up for those with LTE defects

Gastroenterology and/or surgical follow-up for those with anal defects
The frequency of follow-up neurologic evaluations depends on the degree of ptosis, dysphagia, and muscle weakness.

Perform routine ophthalmologic evaluation o determine if ptosis interferes with driving or is associated with neck pain, and or if the eyelids cover more than 50% of the pupil, findings that might lead to consideration of surgical intervention.

Perform routine reevaluation for functional signs of dysphagia using videoscopy and fiberoscopy.
The following are appropriate:

At the start of therapy, measure plasma ammonia concentration at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months, as possible.

At the start of therapy, perform plasma amino acid (PAA) analysis at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months.

Perform liver function tests depending on symptoms every three to six months or more often if they have been previously elevated.

Perform neuropsychological testing at the time that significant developmental milestones are expected to be achieved (e.g., at 6-9 months, 18 months, 3 years)
Bleeding disorder. Regular follow up with a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is recommended. Such teams are often identified through the federal hemophilia treatment center network in the US.

For menstruating females:

Regular monitoring: hemoglobin and/or hematocrit and iron studies including ferritin for possible iron deficiency and/or anemia

Assessment of the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions such as antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppressive agents (oral contraceptives)

Cardiac fibrosis. Because of clinical experience (albeit limited to date) with cardiac fibrosis in persons with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Flevaris et al 2017; Author, personal observation], screening echocardiogram can be considered beginning at age 15 years. In those with no cardiac findings, follow-up screening in two years is indicated; and in those with cardiac findings, follow up yearly or more frequently if indicated by a cardiologist [Ghosh et al 2010; Ghosh et al 2013; Author, personal observation].
Surveillance for pancreatic cancer in high-risk groups with pancreatitis has been considered (see Definitions, Chronic pancreatitis for discussion of pancreatic cancer risk). However, because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Ulrich 2001, Brand et al 2007], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.
No disease-specific guidelines have been developed. The following ongoing evaluations are recommended in all individuals in whom pathogenic variants have been confirmed.

Follow up by a nephrologist to monitor renal function and blood pressure

Follow up by an ophthalmologist to monitor vision. Any change in vision could indicate a retinal detachment and should be treated as a medical emergency.

Audiometric evaluation with periodic follow up
Individuals known to have a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations of a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome but known to have a SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD,

SDHAF2, or MAX pathogenic variant, and relatives at risk based on family history who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team with expertise in treatment of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes.

Screening should begin at age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family. Benn et al [2006] estimated that if lifelong screening were to begin at age ten years, disease would be detected in all persons with SDHD pathogenic variants and 96% of persons with SDHB pathogenic variants.

Although no clear consensus has been developed regarding when, how, and how often biochemical studies and imaging should be done in at-risk individuals, it is reasonable to consider lifelong annual biochemical and clinical surveillance. The findings of these evaluations should guide imaging studies [Mannelli 2006, Pacak et al 2007, Lenders et al 2014]. Monitoring includes the following:

Twenty-four hour urinary excretion of fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines, and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines to detect metastatic disease, tumor recurrence, or the development of additional tumors

Follow-up imaging by MRI, CT, 123I-MIBG, or FDG-PET if the fractionated metanephrine and/or catecholamine levels become elevated, or if the original tumor had minimal or no catecholamine/fractionated metanephrine excess. In some individuals the image modality that was most effective in identifying the original tumor may prove to be equally effective in surveillance. Given the concern for cumulative radiation exposure in individuals who harbor germline pathogenic variants in genes associated with PGL/PCC, MRI may be the preferable imaging modality, with CT and nuclear imaging modalities reserved to further characterize tumors that are detected.

In persons with SDHD and SDHC pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the skull base and neck to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) body MRI or CT and 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may occur beyond the neck and skull base

In persons with SDHB pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the abdomen, thorax, and pelvis to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may not be detected with MRI or CT

In individuals (especially children, adolescents, or young adults) who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia, consideration of evaluation for GISTs [Pasini et al 2008]

Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with an SDHB pathogenic variant
Hearing should be evaluated annually.

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation is indicated. (Although electroretinogram is useful in the diagnosis of a retinal dystrophy, it is not useful in follow up; visual field testing is much more helpful.)

Coagulation factors and other synthetic liver functions should be monitored. Persons with overt hepatic dysfunction require more routine monitoring.

The use of routine neuroimaging is uncertain. Individuals with peroxisomal disorders may develop a progressive leukodystrophy. No effective therapy exists, but identification of white matter changes may explain changes in cognitive and/or motor ability.
In patients with PCH2 monitoring of respiratory function may be necessary to detect sleep apnea.
In general, individuals with PC have no known associated systemic diseases or predispositions that require routine surveillance.
Follow up by a pulmonologist to monitor lung function and pathogens in sputum cultures as well as to assess pulmonary disease extent/progression is indicated.

For young children with chronic otitis media, routine hearing evaluation is essential, and should be continued until the teenage years, by which time hearing is usually normal [Majithia et al 2005]. Typically, the ear disease improves in later childhood and hearing screening is not necessary.
Monitor lactate levels regularly.
Affected individuals should be followed for the development of clinical signs of a sensory neuropathy, including regular assessments of joint-position sense, ankle jerks, gait, and station [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011].

Regular assessments of intellectual function should be offered.
Surveillance includes:

Semiannual or annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual or annual examination by an endocrinologist familiar with PDS

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months if hearing loss is progressive

Since goiter is more common than hypothyroidism, volumetric baseline measurement of the thyroid, obtained by ultrasonography with periodic (every 2-3 years) reassessment [Choi et al 2011b]
During induction of puberty, clinical assessment of pubertal staging and adjustment of estrogen dose takes place every three months.

For adults on maintenance estrogen replacement therapy, assessment of withdrawal bleed pattern and overall well-being should be undertaken on an annual basis and assessment of bone density approximately every five years.

Routine audiologic assessment is appropriate in individuals who have hearing impairment or are at risk for Perrault syndrome, as hearing loss is often progressive in nature. Audiologic surveillance is not required in individuals with profound hearing loss.
Routine evaluation of weight and calorie intake, respiratory function (particularly at night or during sleep), motor function, and mood/personality changes is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Assessment by a pediatric ophthalmologist every three months or as indicated to monitor for glaucoma and amblyopia

Regular developmental assessments
The frequency of follow-up evaluations for persons with FPF depends largely on

the patient's individual diagnosis and status. Surveillance would follow the

guidelines for IPF [Raghu et

al 2011] or the specific type of IIP. Those who are stable may be

evaluated every three to six months, while others may need more frequent follow

up.

Pulmonary function studies including the following to serially monitor

disease course [Raghu

et al 2011]:

Forced vital capacity (FVC)

Diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)

The six-minute walk test (6-MWT) distance and oxyhemoglobin

saturation change at baseline

Monitoring for progression of disease by HRCT of the chest

Oxygen saturation by resting pulse oximetry

Serologic monitoring for connective tissue disease (CTD) in patients

suspected of an underlying possibility for CTD-related ILD

Monitoring for any side effects known from pharmacologic treatments

Symptom control
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of occasionally increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement.

Regular life-long follow up with investigation of any suspicious clinical events such as thromboembolic complications and symptoms that could be related to hyperviscosity

Regular life-long follow up to record manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)
Periodic monitoring for fat-soluble vitamin deficiency is recommended.

Hearing screening is recommended at five-year intervals in individuals with no symptomatic evidence of hearing deficits.

Monitoring for hepatobiliary malignancy has not been shown to be necessary in ATP8B1 deficiency.
According to the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium (OxalEurope) [Cochat et al 2012] individuals with:

Preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2) likely require only the following to evaluate/ensure treatment efficacy:

Regular renal ultrasound examinations and fundoscopic eye examinations to identify the extent of any oxalate deposition

Ongoing urinalysis (spot and 24-hour collections)

GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 should have the above evaluations as well as regular (not defined) measurements of plasma oxalate.

GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or a rapid deterioration in function should have the above evaluations as well as the following testing (performed prior to initiation of dialysis if possible, and repeated as needed):

Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required

Thyroid function testing

Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block

Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera for evaluation of calcification in such organs

Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate

History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition

Further testing and surveillance of other organ involvement can be inferred from the list in Table 4 – noting that at GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 the ongoing deposition of tissue oxalate (oxalosis) will, of course, predispose all patients to multi-organ involvement, and this will worsen/accelerate as the patient enters ESRD/ initiates dialysis.

Note: Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.
Frequency of testing depends on the center; however, as a guide, the following are recommended:

Quarterly. Assessment of renal function, blood pressure, and hematocrit

Six monthly to annually. Renal imaging (ultrasound or CT examination) to assess renal stone burden*

Annually. Examination for involvement of the skin, bone, eye, or thyroid*

For pregnant women with PH2, close monitoring by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis during pregnancy or after delivery

*Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.
Attention to ongoing care, including adherence to high fluid intake and medication schedule, is essential to good outcomes.

For patients who are stable and doing well* the following are recommended annually:

Clinical assessment of stone-related symptoms including pain, frequency of passage of stones or gravel in the urine, and urinary tract infection

Assessment of kidney function (serum creatinine and eGFR) and electrolytes

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, particularly in those with any impairment of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

24 hour urine oxalate and supersaturation study. During follow up, changes in the urine supersaturation can be used to monitor the effectiveness of therapy by confirming that the crystallization potential has decreased.

Renal ultrasound examination or other imaging to monitor for stone formation

*Very young patients, those with complex stone problems, and those with reduced kidney function need closer management with more frequent assessments.
Appropriate surveillance includes routine electrolyte and blood pressure measurements, monitored in the same manner as for any person treated with a thiazide diuretic.
During childhood:

Annual medical evaluations to assess growth and monitor for signs of precocious puberty

Annual screening for developmental delay or learning disorders
The most serious consequences of PHTS relate to the increased risk of cancers including breast, thyroid, endometrial, and to a lesser extent, renal. In this regard, the most important aspect of management of any individual with a PTEN pathogenic variant is increased cancer surveillance to detect any tumors at the earliest, most treatable stages. Current suggested screening by age follows:

Cowden Syndrome

Pediatric (age <18 years)

Yearly thyroid ultrasound examination** (on identification of a PTEN pathogenic variant)

Yearly skin check with physical examination

Adult

Yearly thyroid ultrasound** and dermatologic evaluation

Women beginning at age 30 years:

Monthly breast self-examination**

Yearly breast screening (at minimum mammogram); MRI may also be incorporated.**

Yearly transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial biopsy**

For men and women:

Colonoscopy beginning at age 35 years**; frequency dependent on degree of polyposis identified

Biennial renal imaging (CT or MRI preferred) beginning at age 40 years**

** For those with a family history of a particular cancer type at an early age screening may be initiated five to ten years prior to the youngest diagnosis in the family. For example, in a woman whose mother developed breast cancer at age 30 years breast surveillance may begin at age 25-30 years.

Note: Although the NCCN Guidelines removed endometrial surveillance after 2007 (without expert PHTS input), it is prudent to ensure the minimal surveillance for endometrial cancer as detailed if family history is positive for endometrial cancer.

Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome

Screening recommendations have not been established for BRRS. Given recent molecular epidemiologic studies, however, individuals with BRRS and a germline PTEN pathogenic variant should undergo the same surveillance as individuals with CS.

Individuals with BRRS should also be monitored for complications related to gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis, which can be more severe than in CS.

Proteus Syndrome/Proteus-Like Syndrome

Although the observation of germline PTEN pathogenic variants in a minority of individuals who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome is relatively new, clinicians should consider instituting the CS surveillance recommendations for individuals with these disorders who have germline PTEN pathogenic variants.
MCAP syndrome. Provisional surveillance guidelines include regular follow up, no less than every six months until age six years, and at least yearly thereafter. At each visit, the following are recommended with appropriate testing for any positive finding:

A medical history with attention to:

Childhood cancer

Breathing or sleep problems

Seizures or other undefined spells, headaches, or new or worsening neurologic symptoms

A detailed neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI. Based on limited retrospective data available, the risk for hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, or both with low brain stem or high spinal cord compression, appears to be highest in the first two years. Brain MRI is provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Renal ultrasound. Until additional data are available, screening for Wilms tumor following guidelines developed for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be considered (i.e., renal ultrasound examination every 3 months until age 8 years).

CLOVES syndrome

Given the associated morbidities including severe scoliosis, infiltrative lipomatous overgrowth, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems, central phlebectasias and thromboembolism, individuals with CLOVES syndrome require surveillance tailored to their specific needs with particular attention to surgical care [Sapp et al 2007, Alomari 2011, Alomari et al 2011].

Commonly occurring postoperative complications of surgical excision of the truncal lipomatous mass include recurrence, hypervascularity, and infiltrative growth. Therefore, diligent surgical care and monitoring are recommended.

Fibroadipose hyperplasia. Data regarding the natural history of fibroadipose hyperplasia are limited. However, given the extensive degree of somatic overgrowth in most individuals, the same surveillance guidelines for CLOVES are tentatively recommended for individuals with FH [Lindhurst et al 2012].
Neurologic follow up every three to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Ongoing developmental assessments to tailor educational services to an individual’s strengths

Regular follow up with an ophthalmologist to monitor for high myopia and strabismus

Periodic reevaluation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with PTHS
The surveillance program for the multiple organs at risk for cancer is outlined in Table 4. Note: The effect of such surveillance on morbidity and mortality has not been evaluated in controlled trials.

From birth, an annual history and physical examination with attention to testicular examination and routine blood work is recommended. A boy age 13 years with PJS was recently described as developing an unusually early presentation of small-bowel adenocarcinoma, thus supporting screening in childhood as illustrated in Table 4 [Wangler et al 2013].

Table 4. 

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Site

Procedure

Age at Initial Screening (yrs)

Interval

Stomach

Upper endoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Small intestine

Capsule endoscopy or MRE 2

8, 18 3

3 years

Large intestine

Colonoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Breast

Breast self-examination

18

Monthly

Clinical breast exam

6 months

Breast MRI or digital mammography 4, 5, 6

25

1 year

Ovary, cervix, uterus

Transvaginal ultrasound & serum CA 125;pelvic exam w/pap smear 6

18-20

1 year

Pancreas

MRI-MRCP or endoscopic ultrasound

30

1-2 years

Testes

Testicular exam; ultrasound if symptomatic or abnormality on exam

Birth to teenage years

1 year

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

1. 

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

2. 

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

3. 

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

4. 

Digital mammography if MRI not available

5. 

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

6. 

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

Digital mammography if MRI not available

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.
As the disease progresses, episodes of extreme distress may last for days or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain. These may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, mouth lacerations, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a nonambulatory individual with marked stress on long bones from dystonia places individuals with PKAN at especially high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.

The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Oral assessment for consequences of trauma

Assessment of ambulation, environmental adaptations, speech abilities, and communication needs to help affected individuals to maintain independence

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments to assure adequate nutrition
Early detection of hypertension. Children with a family history of ADPKD should have their blood pressure (BP) monitored by a practitioner with experience in measurement of BP in children [Chapman et al 2015]. Screening from age five years onward, with an interval of three years in cases in which no hypertension is found, seems prudent. The diagnosis of hypertension is made when systolic or diastolic BP is ≥95th percentile for age, height, and sex, in accordance with prevailing pediatric guidelines

Renal cell carcinoma. There is currently insufficient evidence for recommending screening in asymptomatic individuals with ADPKD.

Intracranial aneurysms. Widespread screening is usually not recommended since most intracranial aneurysms found by screening asymptomatic individuals are small, have a low risk of rupture, and require no treatment [Gibbs et al 2004, Irazabal et al 2011, Chapman et al 2015], although dissenting opinions have been published [Rozenfeld et al 2014].

Indications for screening in affected individuals with a good life expectancy include a family history of intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage, previous rupture of an aneurysm, preparation for elective surgery with potential hemodynamic instability, high-risk occupations such as airplane pilots, and significant anxiety on the part of the individual despite adequate risk information.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice for presymptomatic screening because it is noninvasive and does not require intravenous contrast material. Because only one of 76 individuals with an initial negative study had a new intracranial aneurysm after a mean follow-up of 9.8 years, rescreening after an interval of ten years has been suggested as a reasonable approach [Schrier et al 2004].

Aortic dissection. Until more information becomes available, it is reasonable to screen first-degree adult relatives of individuals with thoracic aortic dissection using either echocardiography or MRI. If aortic root dilatation is found, yearly follow-up and strict blood pressure control with beta blockers should be recommended.

Cardiac valvular abnormalities. Screening echocardiography is not recommended unless a murmur is detected or there are other cardiovascular signs or symptoms [Chapman et al 2015].

Colon diverticulosis. Routine screening for diverticulosis is not recommended, but physicians should be aware of a possible increased occurrence of diverticulosis or diverticulitis in individuals with ADPKD who have reached ESRD [Chapman et al 2015].
The following should be monitored regularly, depending on disease course and complications:

Blood pressure monitored at periodic physician's visits as well as home blood pressure monitoring if indicated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Renal function in those with chronic kidney disease Stage III or less; close monitoring for the complications of CKD should be undertaken by the treating nephrologist according to standard practices outlined in the KDOQI Guidelines.

Electrolyte balance, monitored by obtaining serum concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride. Mineral balance, monitored by assessing calcium and phosphorous. If the calcium level is low, magnesium concentration should be evaluated [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Hydration status

Nutritional status, with growth plotted on standard growth charts and nutrition consultation as indicated

Hepatoportal duct involvement, by physical examination and complete blood counts, in addition to serum albumin levels, PT/PTT, and 25-OH vitamin D, vitamin E levels, and fat-soluble vitamin levels

If hepatomegaly is present and/or splenomegaly develops, additional monitoring including periodic ultrasonography or MRI. With hepatosplenomegaly, referral to a pediatric hepatologist is suggested for evaluation and periodic monitoring by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect esophageal varices [Telega et al 2013].

Consideration of MR cholangiography, a more sensitive measurement for biliary ectasia, at baseline and then as indicated [Shneider & Magid 2005, Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016]

Agents to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

For affected individuals with hypertension, sympathomimetic agents

In general, unless the clinical situation warrants their use, known nephrotoxic agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and aminoglycosides

Potentially hepatotoxic agents (e.g., acetaminophen doses >30 mg/kg/day, herbal supplements, and alcohol) should be minimized.

Work in cell and animal models suggests that caffeine, theophylline-like agents, and calcium channel blockers may exacerbate renal cyst formation and growth. However, this has not been rigorously studied in individuals with ARPKD or ADPKD.
Individuals with PKD can be monitored every one to two years, particularly with respect to medication needs and doses.
Plasma Phe and Tyr concentrations in individuals with classic PKU must be monitored regularly [National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel 2001] (see Treatment of Manifestations).

In infants, frequent in-clinic visits are recommended until Phe levels are stabilized, followed by weekly blood level monitoring of Phe and tyrosine levels until age one with closer monitoring during periods of rapid growth or diet transitions. In addition, plasma amino acid levels should be regularly monitored to foster optimal growth during the first year of life.

Between ages one and 12 years, biweekly to monthly sampling may be adequate.

In adolescents and adults who are stable and well controlled, blood level monitoring can be monthly.

Nutritional assessment should include growth evaluation and assessment of micronutrient intake and needs.

Some clinics perform monitoring of plasma amino acids, transthyretin, complete blood count, ferritin, and 25-OH vitamin D every six months in infants and annually thereafter even if growth is appropriate and analysis of the diet shows adequate intake.

If there is evidence for suboptimal dietary intake or over-reliance on nutritionally incomplete medical foods, evaluation of plasma amino acids (full panel), transthyretin, albumin, complete blood count, ferritin, 25-OH vitamin D, electrolytes, renal function, liver function, albumin, vitamin B12, red blood cell essential fatty acids, trace minerals (zinc, copper, selenium), vitamin A, and folic acid should be considered [Singh et al 2014, Vockley et al 2014].

Assessment of developmental milestones and overall developmental progress should take place at every visit.

Screening for mental illness should be considered at every visit and performed at regular intervals by primary care providers.
The interval of surveillance for bone lesions and neurologic and psychiatric manifestations must be determined individually.
Semiannual to annual neurologic and physical medicine evaluation is indicated to monitor developmental progress during childhood and to monitor and treat spasticity and orthopedic complications as needed.
No long-term sequelae are associated with PNKD. Monitoring medication requirements and dosage is appropriate.
Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist, ophthalmologist and, if necessary, endocrinologist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies.
No general surveillance guidelines have been developed to date; monitoring should be individualized.
From the time of diagnosis, annual monitoring for deficiencies of TSH, GH, LH, and FSH is indicated.

Surveillance of skin for premalignant lesions may be necessary depending on latitude and history of sun exposure. Malignant skin lesions have not specifically been reported to be associated with POMC deficiency, though a theoretic risk is assumed to exist.
It is advisable to follow porphyrin levels annually and resume phlebotomies (see Treatment of Manifestations) if porphyrin levels begin to rise in the presence of cutaneous signs. Note: Increase in urinary total porphyrins may also be caused by an increase in coproporphyrin (which is of no relevance with regard to the PCT); thus, when levels are only moderately increased, urinary porphyrin fractionation should be performed.

Because of reports of an association between diabetes mellitus and PCT [Muñoz-Santos et al 2011], annual screening with a fasting glucose level is recommended, particularly in those with hypertension (BP >135/80 mm Hg).

Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) surveillance relies on a combination of serum AFP determinations and hepatic ultrasonography. No guidelines as to the frequency of these tests are currently available due to the rarity of PCT and even rarer occurrence of HCC. Surveillance is usually performed annually; however, in those with advanced chronic hepatitis C and/or alcoholic cirrhosis, hepatologists generally agree that surveillance for HCC should be at least every six months.
Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop especially after age 50 years in patients with acute porphyrias and persistent elevations in porphobilinogen or porphyrins; liver imaging at six-month intervals beginning at age 50 years may detect early lesions [Andant et al 2000, Schneider-Yin et al 2010].
Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS

System

Evaluation

Frequency

Comments

Growth

Monitoring for growth deceleration, short stature, failure to thrive

At every visit

For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluationFor short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation.

Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation

Yearly

ENT / Mouth

Audiology evaluation

Newborn hearing screen, then as indicated for speech delay

Dental evaluation

Every 6 months starting in early childhood

Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram w/attention to aortic root dimension & ECG

Every 3 yrs, if initial evaluations were normal; otherwise, as directed by cardiologist

Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for development of scoliosis

Clinical examination at every visit

Scoliosis survey if scoliosis is clinically suspected; referral to orthopedist if indicated

Psychiatric

Behavioral assessment

Screen for behavior problems at every visit; consultation w/psychiatrist and/or psychologist if behavioral atypia present

Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), depending on age, for those with suspected autism

Miscellaneous / Other

Developmental monitoring by a developmental specialist

Annually, or at frequency directed by developmental specialist

A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities.A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS

For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluation

For short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation.

A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities.

A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.
No guidelines regarding initial screening evaluations or surveillance of persons with a germline DICER1 pathogenic variant have been established. Based on data from the International PPB Registry (IPPBR) which includes more than 500 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic DICER1-related disorders, the authors recommend (1) annual physical examination and targeted review of systems, and (2) imaging study type and frequency based on tumor type, patient age, and suspicious clinical findings.

PPB. Baseline chest CT to evaluate for lung cysts or tumors in a patient of any age

Note: The most critical age group for chest CT is children under age three years, the peak risk age for solid PPB. The negative predictive value of a normal chest CT for development of PPB is not known.

CN

Baseline kidney CT or ultrasound examination in a patient diagnosed with PPB

In a patient of any age, especially those younger than age four years, annual abdominal examination and monitoring for abdominal pain, swelling, or hematuriaNote: The negative predictive value of a normal kidney CT or ultrasound examination for development of CN is not known.

Thyroid gland neoplasia

Thyroid physical examination in a patient of any age

If thyroid gland asymmetry and/or a nodule are detected, perform thyroid ultrasound examination to confirm as well as to determine if surveillance or fine needle aspiration biopsy is warranted.

If no nodules are detected, continue annual physical examination and consider repeat thyroid US every three to five years.

Thyroid ultrasound examination if the patient has previously received chemotherapy or as a baseline if chemotherapy is anticipated

Thyroid function testing as indicated based on clinical signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism

Ovarian stromal tumors

Examination of all females of any age for signs and symptoms of precocious puberty or virilization, and masses in the abdomen or pelvis. If any are detected, perform appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluations.

Imaging: abdominal-pelvic US examination, MRI, or CT

Laboratory testing: serum markers AFP, beta-HCG, LDH, inhibin A and B, estradiol, testosterone, CA125, and serum electrolytes including calciumNote: There is no current recommendation for laboratory screening in the absence of a mass or clinical findings of sex hormone excess.

For women and the parents of young girls with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant: education regarding the possible presenting signs and symptoms of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (abdominal distension, precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and signs of virilization [hirsutism, voice changes, acne])

CBME

Evaluation of young children for ciliary body medulloepithelioma including measurement of visual acuity

Visual inspection of the eye and orbit

Botryoid ERMS. In infants, children, and young adults: when signs/symptoms of hematuria or abnormal vaginal bleeding are present, endoscopic evaluation of the bladder or direct visualization of the cervix, respectively

NCMH. In infants, children, adolescents, and adults:

Review of systems including respiratory and feeding difficulties, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, visual disturbances, and otitis media

Nasal endoscopy as warranted by ophthalmologic signs (e.g., ophthalmoplegia, proptosis, ptosis, hypotropia, and enophthalmos) resulting from orbital involvement of the tumor

Pituitary blastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of cortisol excess

Pineoblastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of increased intracranial pressure such as headache, full fontanel, vomiting, and lethargy, or other neurologic defects including upgaze paralysis and nystagmus
See McLaughlin et al [2013] for consensus document, including Reassessing Patients Over Time.

The clinical course of HPAH is highly variable, ranging from rapid progression to long periods of stable clinical status. The appropriate surveillance measures and timing are determined by the relative stability of the patient's clinical condition. Patients who are declining should be in frequent contact with their health care providers so that therapies may be changed or added.
No specific guidelines for surveillance have been published.

Recommendations include the following:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications including bone deformity, secondary joint disease, spinal deformities, and pain

Evaluation by a specialist in skeletal dysplasia or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia clinic every year
Affected individuals are examined at regular intervals for complications related to swallowing difficulties, intercurrent infections, and other disease manifestations.
In the absence of formal surveillance guidelines, the authors recommend:

Annual:

Skin examination for evidence of malignant transformation in persons with chronic recalcitrant skin ulcers

Complete blood count

Liver function tests

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver and spleen size

Follow up as recommended by a pulmonologist and immunologist;

Follow-up assessments of motor and cognitive development as recommended for educational planning.
Growth should be carefully monitored; if growth velocity is low, evaluation for GH deficiency should be undertaken.

In persons with PROP1 pathogenic variants without known ACTH deficiency, cortisol levels should be monitored because ACTH deficiency may develop at a later time.
The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on factors such as age, disease severity, and presence of catabolic stressors; evaluation frequency can range from every three months to annually.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of the following:

Linear growth, weight gain, head circumference, and body mass index

Interval assessment for the need of G-tube

Neurologic evaluation including survey for seizures and movement disorders

Interval ophthalmologic evaluation including dilated eye examination

Audiology evaluation

Evaluation for clinical signs of cardiomyopathy (e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, shortness of breathy, hepatomegaly)

Evaluation of integumentary system (skin, hair, G-tube, and central line insertion sites)

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate

Laboratory evaluation should include the following:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, pre-prandial plasma amino acids (especially, isoleucine, leucine, valine, threonine, and methionine), plasma ammonia concentration, plasma free and total carnitine, and quantitative plasma acylcarnitine profile

Nutritional studies: electrolytes, mineral panel, albumin, prealbumin, hemoglobin, vitamin D, iron studies, essential fatty acids, and trace minerals (selenium and zinc)

Complete blood count and differential to monitor for cytopenias

Renal function tests; serum cystatin C can be more sensitive than plasma creatinine in identifying early evidence of chronic renal failure.

Amylase and lipase as needed to evaluate for pancreatitis

Other evaluations:

Cardiology evaluation, screening for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias by echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitor, annual and as needed

Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess optic nerve and retinal changes, annually and as needed

DEXA scan

Brain MRI, MRS, and EEG as clinically indicated

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy services to determine need
Individualized surveillance plans for the skeletal, pulmonary, soft-tissue, and other manifestations of PS should be developed according to patients’ specific needs.

Because of the predisposition to a range of tumors (most of which are benign) patients should be monitored by their primary care provider with regular evaluations including a directed medical history and examination.
Monthly measurement of 24-hour uric acid excretion in the urine is particularly helpful in the assessment of the response to treatment. Alternatively, a spot urinary urate/creatinine ratio can be informative if accessibility to samples is restricted.

Once a normal serum urate concentration is achieved and maintained, serum urate concentration should be monitored at a minimum annually to assure that the targeted concentration is maintained.

A 24-hour urine should also be monitored at a minimum annually for urate and xanthine concentrations particularly to ensure that urinary xanthine does not exceed solubility (<1 mmol/L); plasma xanthine is cleared efficiently and does not accumulate.

Audiometry should be repeated as deemed appropriate by treating audiologist/otolaryngologist.

Neurologic evaluation should be performed annually or more frequently as recommended by the treating neurologist.

Note: Under usual circumstances, renal functional consequences are avoided if serum urate concentration and urinary excretion of urate are normalized and urinary xanthine does not routinely exceed its solubility (~1 mmol/L).
Long-standing chronic inflammation of the pancreas is associated with an increased risk for pancreatic cancer. Persons with hereditary pancreatitis are at high risk because their onset of chronic pancreatitis is 20-30 years earlier than in sporadic forms of chronic pancreatitis.

Because surveillance for early evidence of colon cancer is effective, it is hypothesized that such surveillance may benefit individuals with hereditary pancreatitis age 40 years and older who have long-standing chronic pancreatitis and a strong family history of pancreatic cancer. Because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Brand et al 2007, Ulrich 2001], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.
Affected individuals should be examined regularly for the following by a medical geneticist and/or orthopedist familiar with the phenotype:

Symptomatic lower limb malalignment

Evidence of kyphoscoliosis

Symptoms related to joint hypermobility

Evidence of degenerative joint disease manifesting as joint pain or by radiographs

Neurologic manifestations, particularly spinal cord compression secondary to odontoid hypoplasia
Individuals receiving long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy. (See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.)
Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Affected System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Cognitive

Monitoring by developmental pediatrics

Long-term

Neurologic

EEG & video EEG monitoring

If seizures are suspected

Eyes

Ophthalmologic & vision evaluations

Routine

Gastrointestinal

Monitoring for dysphagia & constipation

Routine

Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for musculoskeletal complications including hip dysplasia & scoliosis

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Health supervision guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) have been published [McCandless 2011] (full text).

To assure appropriateness of exercise program and diet, including adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake and monitor height, weight, and BMI (weight in kg/height in m2):

Every month in infancy;

Every six months in the first decade of life;

At least annually thereafter.

Cryptorchidism can recur after orchidopexy; therefore, testicular position should be monitored.

Evaluate for the presence of diabetes mellitus by standard methods (e.g., obtaining glycosylated hemoglobin concentration and/or glucose tolerance test) in anyone with significant obesity or rapid significant weight gain.

Test annually for hypothyroidism, including free T4 and TSH levels.

Obtain history of any sleep disturbance; if present, obtain a sleep study.

Monitor for development of scoliosis clinically or, in the presence of obesity, radiographically at least annually.

Perform bone densitometry by DEXA to evaluate for possible osteoporosis every two years in adulthood.

Obtain history for behavioral and psychiatric disturbance at least annually.
The following are appropriate:

Regular examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in retinal disease. Affected individuals benefit from learning to use the Amsler grid to monitor for central visual disturbances.

Regular physical examination with specific attention to the cardiovascular system

Monitoring by the affected individual for black tarry stool

Periodic monitoring of serum lipid concentrations
Patients with RDP need to be monitored for evidence of:

Dysphagia, which (rarely) requires use of a feeding tube

Psychiatric symptoms

Seizures, which are reported in some individuals following acute onset of RDP

Patients with AHC need to be monitored for evidence of seizures which occur over time in a large proportion of affected individuals.

Patients with CAPOS syndrome need to be monitored for evidence of swallow dysfunction in order to reduce the risk of aspiration
The clinician should have a low threshold to repeat imaging studies if clinical signs/symptoms of AVMs/AVFs become evident over time.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic follow up to monitor mental and physical growth and to determine if frequent infections are an issue

Regular follow up for assessment of speech and ear infections/hearing loss if cleft lip and palate are present

Annual screening for developmental delays or learning disorders

Monitoring as per specific ophthalmologic, cardiac, or renal anomalies
Based on a retrospective review of the natural history of 35 individuals with RCDP, White et al [2003] provide health supervision guidelines for primary caretakers of children with RCDP, including the following:

Growth curves that allow weight comparisons to help determine the need for gastrostomy

The ages at which developmental milestones are achieved to provide realistic expectations

Recommendations for medical assessments including seizure control, vision, hearing, orthopedic care, and prevention of respiratory infections and contractures
The following are appropriate:

Measurement of plasma phytanic acid levels every three to six months and more frequently during illnesses or increased stress that may lead to a catabolic state

Annual ophthalmologic examination to identify vision loss resulting from cataracts, which are treatable

Annual cardiac examination to identify cardiomyopathy and concomitant arrhythmias
Further information regarding medical surveillance for those who have had or are at risk of developing Rb is available in the guidelines for retinoblastoma care.

Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Following successful treatment, children require frequent follow-up examination for early detection of newly arising intraocular tumors:

It is recommended that children known to have an RB1 germline pathogenic variant have an eye examination under anesthesia every three to four weeks until age six months, then less frequently until age three years. Clinical examinations with cooperative children are performed every three to six months until age seven years, then annually and eventually biannually for life.

Individuals who have unilateral Rb without an identified heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant are at risk for low-level mosaicism and can develop a tumor in the other eye [Rushlow et al 2009, Temming et al 2013]. This risk is small enough that examination under anesthesia may be replaced with regular clinical examination of the eyes, including clinical ultrasound (a simple, noninvasive procedure).

Individuals with retinomas (premalignant retinal lesions associated with Rb) are followed with retinal examinations and imaging every one to two years, to detect any change early.

Detection of second non-ocular tumors in individuals with retinoblastoma. Because of the high risk for second cancers, including sarcomas, melanoma, and specific other cancers, prompt investigation of any signs or symptoms is indicated. Total body MRI at regular intervals is under investigation to determine when the technology will be specific and sensitive enough for screening for second cancers in persons with a heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant.
Annual evaluation of children under age ten years by a pediatric ophthalmologist or retina specialist is recommended.

Patient education and close follow-up are the only clinical options that may allow for early identification and treatment of vision-threatening complications [Orphanet, accessed 8-21-14].

Older children and adults need less frequent monitoring.
The following are appropriate:

Examination at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, dentition, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills, hand function, and orthopedic and neurologic complications

Periodic ECG to screen for prolonged QTc

Examination at regular intervals for the progression of scoliosis
At three months and six months after initiation of riboflavin supplementation, recommended follow up is:

General examination

Neurologic examination

Discussion of any problems with riboflavin supplementation

Ideally, obtaining a blood sample for riboflavin/FAD/FMN, acylcarnitine analysis (if previous evaluation demonstrated abnormalities) to determine if these levels are normalizing

After one year of riboflavin supplementation, repeat examination/investigations as detailed in Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis except for consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor.
Periodic clinical evaluation to assess for disease progression, treatment response, and therapeutic complications is indicated.

For individuals on calcitriol and phosphate therapy the following are recommended:

Quarterly monitoring of the following: serum concentrations of phosphate, calcium, and creatinine; alkaline phosphatase level; intact parathyroid hormone level; and urinary calcium, phosphate, and creatinine to identify and thus prevent therapeutic complications

Intermittent monitoring of lower-extremity x-rays (teleoroentgenograms) to assess skeletal response to treatment. The frequency has not been well established; although annual imaging can be considered, the decision for imaging should be based on symptoms and physical examination findings.

Renal ultrasound examination to assess for nephrocalcinosis. The frequency has not been well established.

Dental follow up twice a year (as for children and teenagers at high risk for caries)
The following are appropriate:

Head circumference measurements every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter

Developmental assessment every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter, or more frequently as needed if delays identified

Dental evaluation every six months to one year or as recommended by the dental professional on initial assessment

Regular cardiac and renal assessment by respective specialists as needed if abnormalities are identified
The following are appropriate:

Scoliosis surveillance in childhood and through adolescence, until growth is completed

Surveillance of growth in childhood for evidence of growth hormone deficiency
Generally Goldmann visual field perimetry (GVF) or full-field static perimetry [Weleber et al 2015] and a full ophthalmoscopic examination with dilation are performed on an annual basis, with more frequent follow up for active complications such as cystoid macular edema.

Modeling of full-field static perimetry with generation of volumetric indices that reflect both the magnitude and extent of visual field sensitivity are used: for monitoring for rate of progression; as endpoints for clinical trials [Bainbridge et al 2015, Weleber et al 2016]; and to explain to patients the effect of disease progression on visual field [Weleber et al 2015].
No clinical guidelines specific to RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease are available; however, detailed evaluations are outlined in Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research Clinical Guidelines.

The following evaluations should be considered:

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (encephalo-myopathic form with renal tubulopathy)

Regular assessments of neurodevelopment, speech, and language

Regular evaluations by a pediatric neurologist to evaluate for the presence and/or severity of encephalopathy, with consideration of EEG and video EEG monitoring to determine presence of seizures and/or subclinical status epilepticus

Regular evaluation by a pediatric renal specialist, including assessment of renal function (electrolytes in blood and urine and urine analysis)

Routine assessment of nutritional status, growth, and body mass index (BMI)

Regular pulmonary function testing including monitoring of blood gases for early detection of respiratory compromise

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome and mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain, and BMI, including regular review with speech and language therapist with consideration of gastrostomy as needed for nutritional support

Imaging and diagnostic procedures including EEG, ECG, and brain MRI as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

RRM2B-related multiple mtDNA deletions with external ophthalmoplegia

Care will be directed by clinical findings. The following general evaluations are recommended:

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain and BMI, biannually

Imaging and diagnostic procedures to include EEG, ECG, and MRI brain- as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

ECG advised biannually (KSS phenotype)
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth with special attention to growth velocity

In infancy and in older children with diaphoresis or poor appetite, monitoring of blood glucose concentration for hypoglycemia

At each well-child visit in early childhood, examination and measurement of limb-length discrepancy

Close monitoring of speech and language development
Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual follow-up evaluation for ophthalmologic abnormalities

Yearly audiologic screens; more frequent evaluation if a history of multiple episodes of otitis media exists

Monitoring as per routine for cardiac or renal anomalies

Regular dental and orthodontic follow up
The following are appropriate:

Annual evaluation by a physician familiar with RTS

Monitoring of growth

For individuals without cataracts, yearly eye examinations for screening purposes

Prompt skeletal radiographic examination when clinical suspicion of osteosarcoma is present (including bone pain, swelling, or an enlarging lesion on a limb) due to the high risk for this potentially lethal malignancy, particularly for those individuals with pathogenic deleterious variants in RECQL4

Frequent monitoring for any evidence of malignancy in affected family members of individuals with RTS and osteosarcoma (because of reports of more than one sib with RTS also developing osteosarcoma)

Close monitoring of the skin for lesions with unusual color or texture, as individuals with RTS are at increased risk for skin cancers
Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects; doses should be altered as needed. Dose adjustment including efficacy testing is especially important in growing children.

Individuals with an ICD implanted should have regular, periodic evaluations of ICDs for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications.
Monitor as follows:

Every six months: cardiac function (by ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording and echocardiography) starting at age five years.

Yearly: respiratory function, using pulmonary function testing or spirometry.

As needed: orthopedic complications (foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity) by clinical examination and x-rays as needed.
The following are appropriate:

Complete blood count annually. If cytopenias are identified these should be monitored more frequently.

Patient/family education to seek prompt clinical evaluation if any signs or symptoms suggestive of hematopoietic cytopenia develop (e.g., fatigue, pallor, unexpected bleeding, recurrent infections).

Annual evaluation of gait, coordination, and speech.
Small children

Neurologic, audiologic, and ophthalmologic evaluation every six to 12 months

Neurophysiologic studies when clinically indicated

Brain MRI every three to five years

Adolescents and adults

Neurologic examination annually

Audiologic and ophthalmologic examinations every one to two years

EEG and brain MRI at least during status epilepticus
Neurologic evaluation every three to six months is appropriate
Follow-up outpatient clinical evaluation every four to six months is indicated to identify early signs of potential complications and to adjust anticonvulsant treatments.
Annual evaluation by a neurologist is indicated to monitor the ataxia and to identify any new findings that may occur over time.
Annual reevaluation may be helpful for disability assessment and identification of comorbidities.
Evaluation by a neurologist is indicated annually, or more often in the event of an acute exacerbation.
Gait, coordination, and speech should be evaluated annually.
Follow up by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists every two or three years is appropriate.
Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing rapidly, as may happen in the advanced stages [Toyoshima et al 2004].
Affected individuals should be examined at least annually by a physician experienced in movement disorders and ataxia.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic speech assessment if dysphagia becomes a problem

Routine follow up with a neurologist about every two years or as needed
Annual assessment of the cerebellar ataxia using SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia), CCFS (Composite Cerebellar Functional Severity Score), or similar scales should be performe to evaluate stability or progression of the disease.

Monitoring of speech and swallowing difficulties is recommended.
Speech, swallowing, and gait function should be monitored annually or biannually to assess need for assistive devices.
The following routine monitoring is recommended after a diagnosis of SCA36 has been confirmed.

At least annual evaluation by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing

Annual or bi-annual evaluation by an otolaryngologist to detect or monitor hearing loss

Surveillance of speech and ambulation

In presymptomatic individuals who tested positive for the NOP56 expansion, it is appropriate to start surveillance of neurologic status and hearing by age 40-45 years.
Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist, with consultations as needed by physiatrist and physical and/or occupational therapist. Driving ability should be assessed by professionals periodically.
Routine follow up by an ophthalmologist is appropriate to measure visual acuity and visual fields and to help identify appropriate visual aids.
Affected individuals should regularly visit a neurologist familiar with the ataxia syndromes to identify potential complications that develop over time and to manage clinical challenges associated with decreased mobility and exercise or difficulties with speech and swallowing.
Longitudinal follow up of persons with SCAD deficiency may be helpful in order to more clearly define the natural history over the life span, including annual visits to a metabolic clinic to assess growth and development as well as nutritional status (protein and iron stores, concentration of RBC or plasma essential fatty acids, and plasma carnitine concentration).

For individuals with a history of metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and/or other acutely presenting symptoms, the need for closer follow up and surveillance should be determined by the physician.
Routine visits to a neurologist are appropriate.
Evaluate periodically for neurologic, cognitive, and/or behavioral deterioration.

Monitor with EEG and other modalities (e.g., video EEG telemetry or ambulatory EEG) when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Because of the increased risk of SUDEP, some families use oxygen monitoring during sleep.
Because increased intracranial pressure (ICP) can develop even after successful treatment of craniosynostosis, brain imaging or ophthalmologic evaluation for chronic papilledema should be obtained periodically until age 15 years, or at any time symptoms (e.g., headache, reduced school performance) are identified.

Examination for progression of facial asymmetry particularly in individuals with untreated unilateral coronal synostosis should continue until the completion of facial growth (age ~16 years).

Audiologic screening throughout childhood is indicated.

Regular ophthalmologic evaluations (frequency determined on the basis of symptoms) should begin before age two years or earlier if strabismus or severe ptosis is identified.

If cleft palate is present, monitor for ear infections and hearing loss.

Screen for sleep-disordered breathing at all visits.

At least annual assessment of developmental status of preschool-aged children is appropriate. If findings suggest developmental delay, comprehensive developmental assessment and referral to early intervention is indicated.
The following is recommended given the intermittent nature of some features of SDS and the evolution of the phenotype over time [Rothbaum et al 2002, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a]:

Complete blood counts with white blood cell differential and platelet counts at least every three to six months, or more frequently if peripheral blood counts are changing or infections are recurrent and debilitating

Developmental assessment every six months from birth to age six years and growth every six months.

Assessment of nutritional status every six months and measurement of serum concentration of vitamins to evaluate effectiveness of or need for pancreatic enzyme therapy

Repeat bone marrow examinations every one to three years following the baseline examination, and more frequently if changes in bone marrow function or cellularity are observed.

Monitoring for orthopedic complications with x-rays of hips and knees during the most rapid growth stages

Bone densitometry before puberty, during puberty, and thereafter based on individual findings. Results must be interpreted in the context of stature and pubertal status.

Neuropsychological screening in children age 6-8 years, 11-13 years, and 15-17 years

Note: Discussions to update and maintain recommendations are ongoing.
Affected individuals should be followed annually for the development of joint pain and scoliosis.

Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to school age to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.
The following are appropriate:

Clinical follow-up during and after infancy to confirm that CNS disease is not progressive (in contrast to free sialic acid storage disorders) and to document the gradual remission of signs and/or symptoms present in infancy

Follow-up evaluations three to four times in infancy, twice in the second year of life, and once every subsequent year
For males with SGBS1:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia in the newborn period

Physical examination to monitor for scoliosis during period of rapid growth rate; radiographs as needed

If development appears to be normal on initial assessment, routine monitoring of social and intellectual development

Monitoring of renal function if renal anomalies are present

Physical examinations to monitor for tumor risk [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every three months until age four years

Every four months from age four to seven years

Biannually after age seven years

The following screening recommendations require further study to determine benefit. The clinician and family should discuss the methods to be used:

Wilms tumor. Abdominal ultrasound examination every three or four months from birth until at least age seven or eight years, and yearly thereafter [Choyke et al 1999, Lapunzina 2005]. Abdominal ultrasound examination should assess for both Wilms tumor and hepatic tumors.

Note: When associated with an overgrowth syndrome, the risk for Wilms tumor decreases after age eight years [Beckwith 1998].

Gonadoblastoma or hepatocellular carcinoma. Serial measurement of serum alpha fetoprotein and beta human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months between ages four and seven years

Annually after age seven years

Neuroblastoma. Measurements of urinary catecholamine metabolites including vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic acid as well as urinary free fractionated catecholamines with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months from age four to seven years

Annually after age seven years

Annual lifelong chest radiograms have also been suggested [Lapunzina 2005].
All individuals with SGS should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with this condition.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of growth including height, weight, and body mass index

Ongoing eye examinations in individuals with evidence of an anterior chamber anomaly by an individual with expertise in developmental eye disorders or glaucoma

Screening for insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus beginning in mid-childhood

Periodic hearing assessments in childhood
Surveillance should be tailored to an individual's specific phenotype and clinical history; however, most individuals benefit from routine age-dependent screening to allow for early detection and treatment of end-organ damage [NHS 2010, Yawn et al 2014]. The following are general guidelines compiled from several sources. Recently NHLBI has released updated guidelines that readers are encouraged to review. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Comprehensive medical and social evaluation. Affected individuals should be seen routinely for evaluation of risks, review of care plan, education, and assessment of growth and development. Social work assessment with emphasis on support, resources, and the impact of disease on lifestyle should be performed. Routine dental care is recommended.

Mental health and neurocognitive assessment. Periodic mental health screening for signs of depression, anxiety, and isolation should occur. Neurocognitive testing should be performed prior to school entry and repeated periodically to identify learning difficulties that may be related to silent cerebral infarcts as well as other factors.

Annual laboratory assessment should include the following:

CBC with differential and reticulocyte count

Assessment of iron status

Liver function tests (LFTs), BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis (UA)

LDH as a marker of hemolysis

Vitamin D level; may be indicated because of the high prevalence of deficiencies in this population

Baseline values should be given to parents for comparison during times of illness.

Extended red cell phenotyping should be done once to decrease risk of alloimmunization with transfusions.

Assessment of stroke risk. Historically more than 10% of young children with Hb S/S and Hb S/β°-thalassemia (as well as some others) had overt strokes. Yearly screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) starting at age two years followed by initiation of chronic therapy for those with high-velocity blood flow has drastically decreased stroke incidence in SCD [Fullerton et al 2004]. Individuals with an abnormally high arterial blood flow velocity have a high rate of stroke, which can be prevented by chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. Children with normal velocities require yearly reevaluation as a proportion of them convert to higher-risk velocities over time [Adams et al 2004]. Initial studies suggest that this approach is decreasing the incidence of overt stroke in individuals with SCD, but additional measure may be of benefit as well [Fullerton et al 2004, Jordan et al 2012, Webb & Kwiatkowski 2013].

End-organ evaluation. While there is a clear consensus for use of screening TCD starting at age two years through at least age 16 years, there is variability in recommendations for additional screening. The NHLBI [Yawn et al 2014] suggests screening for a proliferative retinopathy by an ophthalmologist starting age ten years, and additional screening based on clinical history that may include:

Chest x-ray examination

ECG

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to determine the tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet with consideration of right heart catheterization depending on symptoms

Six-minute walk test

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study (to assess nighttime hypoxemia)

Iron overload by MRI
It is debated whether monitoring for possible iron overload is warranted in older individuals through routine screening of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), and serum ferritin concentration; iron overload is theoretically possible but has not been reported.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of the hips

Annual monitoring of renal, immune, and hematologic status
Routine monitoring of:

Height and weight using age and gender appropriate growth charts;

Swallowing and diet to assure adequate nutrition;

Ambulation and speech;

Whole-blood manganese levels and brain MRI to assess treatment response and disease progression.
The following are appropriate:

Evaluation every six to 12 months for early evidence of hip dislocation and/or spinal deformity

Regular swallowing assessment to evaluate risk for aspiration

Regular assessment by a dietitian/nutritionist to ensure adequate caloric intake
Routine health supervision by a physician familiar with SLOS, its complications, and its treatment includes the following:

History, physical examination, and monitoring of growth parameters, with the frequency to be determined by the severity of the child's condition

Age-appropriate developmental assessment at least twice a year until age three years and annually thereafter

Nutritional assessment at least every three to four months until age two years and twice yearly thereafter

Monitoring of cholesterol, serum concentration of 7-DHC, and serum amino transferases (ALT and AST) every three to four months in the first few years of life and twice yearly thereafter
The guidelines described below closely follow those presented in the consensus statement for standard care in spinal muscular atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Individuals with XL-SMA should be followed regularly by a physician familiar with this condition (e.g., a clinical geneticist). Other subspecialists involved in ongoing care include the neurologist, pulmonologist, orthopedist, physical and occupational therapists, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist as needed.

Affected children should be followed at least monthly until the severity and disease course are more clearly delineated. Affected children frequently die in infancy or early childhood; their clinical status should be followed closely to optimize management, and so that the family has a good understanding of the progression and can make informed decisions.

The following are indicated on a routine basis:

Neurologic evaluations to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management

Evaluation by a pulmonologist for evidence of progression of restrictive airway disease

Monitoring of caloric intake and weight, linear growth, head circumference, and growth velocity

Monitoring for scoliosis and kyphosis
Individuals with SMA are evaluated at least every six months; weaker children are evaluated more frequently.

At each visit nutritional state, respiratory function, and orthopedic status (spine, hips, and joint range of motion) are assessed.
Recommended annually:

Multidisciplinary team evaluation (including physical, occupational, and speech therapy evaluations and pediatric assessment) to assist in development of an individualized educational program (IEP). Periodic neurodevelopmental assessments and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric consultation can be an important adjunct to the team evaluation.

Thyroid function, including free T4 and TSH

Fasting lipid profile

Routine urinalysis to evaluate for occult urinary tract infections

Monitoring for scoliosis

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Otolaryngologic follow up for assessment and management of otitis media and other sinus abnormalities

Audiologic evaluation to monitor for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss annually or as clinically indicated
Because of the osteoporosis, individuals with SRS are at increased risk for fractures and should be investigated for factures if medically indicated.

While receiving calcium supplementation, patients should be monitored regularly for ectopic calcification with endocrine tests (including calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and hormone levels) and radiographs.
Annually from infancy onwards for the following:

Audiologic assessment

Assessment for increased intracranial pressure and medullary compression

Neurologic and otologic examination for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Dental and orthodontic evaluation of tooth malalignment and malocclusion on an individual basis.
Regular evaluation by a general pediatrician is recommended for younger children, individuals with many medical complications needing coordination of medical specialists, and families requiring more support than average [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007].

The clinician may wish to evaluate older children/teenagers and those individuals without many medical complications less frequently.

The following are appropriate at the clinical evaluation:

Thorough history to identify known clinical sequelae of Sotos syndrome

Cardiac auscultation

Blood pressure measurement

Examination for curvature of the spine

Urine dipstick to assess for quiescent urine infection

Referral to an ophthalmologist if strabismus or other problem with vision is suspected

Referral for audiologic assessment if hearing is a concern or if the child has had many upper respiratory tract infections

Referral to the appropriate clinical specialist if problems are identified

Note: Cancer screening is not recommended. (1) The absolute risk of sacrococcygeal teratoma and neuroblastoma is low (~1%) [Tatton-Brown et al 2005b, Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]. This level of risk does not warrant routine screening, particularly as screening for neuroblastoma has not been shown to decrease mortality and can lead to false positive results [Schilling et al 2002]. (2) Wilms tumor risk is not significantly increased and routine renal ultrasound examination is not indicated [Scott et al 2006].
The following measures are suggested:

Annual hearing test

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference every three to six months during childhood

Neurodevelopmental assessment annually for the first five years of life
Specialized outpatient clinic evaluations are suggested every six months to adjust medication and physical rehabilitation.

Brain MRI can be used to follow the atrophy of the corpus callosum, cerebellum, and brain stem, and to monitor increases in the size and intensity of white matter hyperintensities.

Regular electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP) are recommended to follow the extent of the disease.
Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, muscular atrophy, and deep tendon reflexes by a neurologist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Specialized outpatient evaluations every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation

Cognitive testing

Repeat skeletal survey
There is no consensus regarding the frequency of clinical follow-up visits, but every person with HSP should be reevaluated once or twice a year to identify new complications early and to initiate aggressive therapy as indicated.
Specialized outpatient evaluations are suggested every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation.
Annual neurologic evaluation can help identify potential complications of spasticity that develop over time (e.g., contractures).
The following are appropriate:

Regular neurologic examinations (1-2 per year) to evaluate disease progression and avoid complications of spasticity, including joint contractures

Referral to a urologist for urodynamic testing and follow-up when symptoms appear
Growth, development, respiratory function, and spinal curvature should be monitored.

The parents/care providers of young males need to be alert for the signs of inguinal hernia and its potential complications.
Data are insufficient to determine how frequently CSF levels of dopamine and serotonin metabolites should be evaluated and whether these levels should be used to adjust medication doses. Practices range from at least annual assessment of CNS neurotransmitter metabolites to adjustment of neurotransmitter precursor therapy based solely on clinical manifestations.

Because clinical manifestations are more difficult to assess in children, it would seem prudent to evaluate CSF neurotransmitter metabolites two to four times yearly in children younger than age two years and at least yearly in children younger than age ten years.

Note: Plasma prolactin levels may inversely correlate with CNS dopamine levels but are neither a sensitive nor specific marker [Leuzzi et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2003, Concolino et al 2008].
Regular neurologic and developmental assessments are indicated.
Annual examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is appropriate.

Follow-up audiologic evaluations are appropriate every six months through age five years, and annually thereafter.

While the prevalence of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) among affected individuals is unclear, all individuals with Stickler syndrome should be screened for MVP through routine physical examination. More advanced testing (e.g., echocardiogram) should be reserved for those with suggestive symptoms.
Monitor plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, and the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas [Kidambi & Patel 2008] at least every six to 12 months.

Monitor platelet count for thrombocytopenia, CBC for evidence of hemolytic anemia, and liver enzymes for elevation beginning at the time of diagnosis with the frequency determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.

In those with longstanding untreated sitosterolemia, surveillance for atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease is indicated, with the level of monitoring determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.
There are no published guidelines for surveillance of individuals diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy. The following assessments and investigations can be performed as needed:

Neuropsychological assessment

EEG
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Routine developmental and neurologic assessment

Periodic nutritional and growth assessment

Periodic hearing evaluation

Periodic ophthalmologic examination

Routine physical examination of back and joints for kyphoscoliosis and joint contractures
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the needs of the child:

Developmental and neurologic assessment

Nutritional and growth assessment

Echocardiogram

Liver function tests

Hearing evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination
Yearly evaluation by a neurologist or physiatrist to prescribe walking aids is appropriate.
Routine nutritional assessment is appropriate.

Periodic assessment for gastrointestinal malabsorption may aid in optimizing nutritional status.
Platelet count is indicated whenever evidence of increased bleeding tendency (bruising, petechiae) occurs.
Monitoring of the forced vital capacity and other parameters of ventilation should be performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation.

Routine screening for depression at clinic visits is appropriate.
Neurology evaluation with EEGs are appropriate, depending on seizure frequency and/or progression of clinical manifestations.

Perform yearly audiologic evaluation to assess for possible progression of hearing loss and/or the efficacy of hearing aids.

Yearly dental evaluation is appropriate.

Individuals with epilepsy, irrespective of cause, should have periodic ECGs as interictal and ictal abnormalities may predispose to sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP).
Annual hearing evaluation is indicated.

Renal function should be regularly monitored in all individuals with and without renal anomalies, even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of neurologic status on physical examination

Orthopedic evaluation upon the development of joint contractures or joint hypermobility [Wilcox et al 1998]

Audiology assessment

CT to evaluate for craniocervical constriction in long-term survivors if respiratory insufficiency is potentially the result of compression of the brain stem at the craniocervical junction

EEG for seizure activity
Serial nerve conduction studies can be used to objectively monitor the course of the polyneuropathy.

Serial electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level can be used to monitor the course of cardiomyopathy and conduction block.

Modified body mass index (mBMI) can be used to monitor nutritional status.
Once the serum ferritin concentration is around 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

Although hepatocellular carcinoma has not been reported in individuals with TFR2-associated hereditary hemochromatosis, surveillance for its development should be performed in persons with cirrhosis by monitoring liver ultrasound examinations and serum concentrations of alpha-fetoprotein, as in persons with cirrhosis with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor scoliosis or joint problems

Ongoing developmental assessments
Examination by a movement disorder specialist in pediatric or adult neurology at least several times yearly is recommended.
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of serum glucose concentrations, especially in individuals treated with beta-blockers, which may mask hypoglycemic symptoms

A complete cardiac evaluation based on the status of the individual patient
Although no clinical guidelines are available, treating physicians should consider the following:

Beginning in infancy: periodic neurodevelopmental assessment and speech/language evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist

Soon after diagnosis is established:

Routine assessments of nutritional status, weight gain, and growth parameters

Routine pulmonary function tests, including assessment of blood gases, to monitor for respiratory insufficiency (alveolar hypoventilation and chronic hypercapnia)
For TRPS I and TRPS II

Monitor linear growth in childhood

Routine developmental assessments in childhood

For TRPS II only. X-ray evaluation of osteochondromas when symptomatic and at the end of puberty (when normal growth of osteochondromas has ceased) to provide a baseline for comparison with any future enlargement
The following are appropriate:

Regular dietary evaluation in infancy to ensure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring of developmental progress and educational needs

Behavioral assessment for attention, aggression, and/or social communication difficulties

Monitoring for spine deformities beginning in early childhood

Regular evaluation of teeth; frequency determined by a dentist based on dental condition
The following are recommended at least yearly to monitor the efficacy of the oral thiamine therapy as well as disease progression:

Hematologic tests (CBC, reticulocyte count)

Hearing test

Assessment for glucose intolerance (fasting serum glucose concentration, OGTT, urinalysis)

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cardiac evaluation

Neurologic evaluation
The following are appropriate:

Routine evaluations of swallowing and feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration, and nutrition to prevent malnutrition

At least yearly:

Medical evaluation including physical examination to assess weight and medications

Evaluations by specialists in occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, and rehabilitation medicine

Evaluation by orthopedists to assess for scoliosis and joint dislocation

Annual neurologic evaluation to assess symptoms and any emerging complications
The following routine monitoring is recommended for individuals with TSC (adapted from Krueger et al [2013a], Table 3):

Central nervous system

Obtain MRI of brain every one to three years in asymptomatic (no symptoms referable to the central nervous system) individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to monitor for new occurrence of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). Those with asymptomatic SEGA in childhood should continue to be imaged periodically as adults to ensure that there is no growth.

In affected individuals with large or growing SEGA causing ventricular enlargement who are still asymptomatic, brain MRI scans should be performed more frequently and these individuals and their families should be educated regarding the potential for new symptoms.

Perform screening for TAND features at least annually. Perform comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key developmental points: infancy (0-3 years), preschool (3-6 years), pre-middle school (6-9 years), adolescence (12-16 years), early adulthood (18-25 years), and as needed thereafter.

Obtain routine EEG in individuals with known or suspected seizure activity. The frequency of routine EEG should be determined by clinical need.

Renal

Obtain MRI of the abdomen to assess for progression of angiomyolipomas and renal cystic disease every one to three years throughout the lifetime of the affected individual.

Assess renal function (including determination of GFR) and blood pressure at least annually.

Cardiac. In asymptomatic infants and children with documented cardiac rhabdomyomas, obtain an echocardiogram every one to three years until regression of the cardiac rhabdomyomas is documented. More frequent or advanced diagnostic assessment may be required for symptomatic individuals.

Pulmonary

Perform clinical screening (targeted history) for LAM symptoms, including exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath, at each clinic visit for women older than age 18 years or those who report respiratory symptoms. Counseling regarding smoking risk and estrogen use should be reviewed at each clinic visit for individuals at risk for LAM.

Obtain a high-resolution computed tomography (HCRT) of the lungs every five to ten years in asymptomatic individuals at risk for LAM who have no evidence of lung cysts on baseline HRCT. Individuals with lung cysts detected on HRCT should have annual pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function test and 6-min walk) and HRCT reduced to every two to three years.

Skin. Perform detailed clinical dermatologic inspection/exam annually.

Dental. Perform detailed clinical dental inspection/exam at minimum every six months and panoramic radiographs by age seven years, if not performed previously.

Ophthalmologic. Perform annual ophthalmologic evaluation in affected individuals with previously identified ophthalmologic lesions or vision symptoms at the baseline evaluation.
Frequent evaluation of the following parameters is typical in the management of individuals with tyrosinemia type I (Table 3) [CR Scott, personal recommendations].

Table 3. 

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

Evaluation

Initiation of Therapy (Baseline)

First 6 Months:

After 6 Months of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

After 2 Years of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

As Clinically Indicated

Monthly

Every 3 months

Tyrosinemia type I markers

Plasma concentration of methionine, phenylalanine, tyrosine

X

x

X

X

or X

Blood / urine succinylacetone

X

X(urine)

X

or X

Blood nitisinone concentration

X

X

X

or X

CBC

Hemoglobin, hematocrit, WBC, platelet count

X

X

X

X

or X

Liver evaluation

Serum AFP concentration

X

X

X

X

X

PT/PTT

X

X(until normal)

Bilirubin

X

ALT/AST/GGT

X

X(until normal)

X

Alkaline phosphatase

X

X(until normal)

X

X

CT or MRI 1

X

Renal studies

BUN / creatinine

X

Urine: PO4, Ca, Prot/Cr ratio

X

Skeletal evaluation

X-ray of wrist (for rickets)

X

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

1. 

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

For monitoring children diagnosed based on clinical presention, see Table 4 (pdf).

For alternative management recommendations, see de Laet et al [2013].
Disease progression and the need for rehabilitation and orthotic treatment should be evaluated by neurologic examination every one to four years.
Annual evaluation with the following specialists is appropriate:

Pediatrician for growth assessment

Neurologist to identify and manage seizures

Orthopedist for evaluation of contractures and back examination for scoliosis

Ophthalmologist for ocular manifestations and corrective therapy if needed
Monitor for evidence of urinary tract features including vesicoureteric reflux (VUR) and hydroureteronephrosis. Renal function should be monitored at intervals determined by urinary tract features at presentation and their subsequent progression.
Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.
Routine auditory evaluation is recommended in order to detect changes that may require modifications to hearing aids.

Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended in order to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.
Individuals with known VHL syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations but identified as having a VHL pathogenic variant, and first-degree relatives who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team familiar with the spectrum of VHL syndrome.

Annual evaluation starting at age one year for neurologic symptoms, vision problems or hearing disturbance

Annual examination starting at age one year for signs of nystagmus, strabismus, or white pupils

Annual blood pressure monitoring starting at age one year

Monitoring for complications is as follows:

CNS lesions. MRI of the brain and total spine every two years starting at age 16 years. Attention should be given to the inner ear/petrous temporal bone (for ELST) and the posterior fossa.

Visceral lesions. Annual abdominal ultrasound; MRI scan of the abdomen (kidney, pancreas and adrenal glands) every two years starting at age 16 years

Retinal angiomas. Annual ophthalmology evaluation with indirect ophthalmoscope starting at age one year

Pheochromocytoma. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines starting at age five years

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). The best way to detect ELST is unknown.

ELST presents as a mass on the posterior wall of the petrous part of the temporal bone and can be missed on standard MRI. MRI with contrast and high signal intensity with T1 (to detect hydrops), using thin slices of the internal auditory canal is recommended in symptomatic individuals. Butman et al [2013] found that FLAIR MRI is useful to find ELST-associated hydrops.

Butman et al [2013] described three pathophysiologic ways in which ELST can cause symptoms: optic capsule invasion, hemorrhage, and endolymphatic hydrops. Symptoms can be caused by all three mechanisms and hemorrhage or hydrops can be present even without any lesion being visible on MRI (<3 mm).

Audiology assessment every two to three years (annually if hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo is present) starting at age five years. Audiology can be used to detect (early) hearing loss. Binderup et al [2013b] described a male patient with demonstrable hearing loss by audiometric data whose ELST was only detectable with MRI more than one year later, after the patient already suffered from complete right-sided hearing loss. Results from a large study on audiometric data in individuals with VHL are pending.

While current medical surveillance guidelines do not address structured psychological support for individuals with VHL, their partners, and their family members, research suggests a distinct need for psychosocial support [Lammens et al 2010, Lammens et al 2011b].

Note: The surveillance guidelines established for VHL are not evidence based and rely on experiential reporting, largely from North America. Guidelines may vary somewhat depending on the local standard of care.

In the United States, the VHL Alliance has worked extensively with healthcare professionals to assemble guidelines which are generally accepted throughout the world [VHL Handbook]. Other guidelines originate from Denmark and the Netherlands. For example, Dutch guidelines recommend screening for ELST only on indication. In addition, examination by a primary care physician and assessment of metanephrine levels start at age ten years, while ophthalmologic examination begins at age five years.

Two recent studies evaluated tumor progression. In one study, new tumor development was compared to age and genotype [Binderup et al 2013b]. According to their results, surveillance for retinal angiomas is essential during teenage years and central nervous system hemangioblastomas is mainly important in adults. In the other study, the optimal lesion-specific age to start surveillance and the optimal screening interval per organ system was analyzed [Kruizinga et al 2013]. The optimal time to start metanephrine measurements is age five years; retinal screening in patients with VHL can start at age 12 years. For central nervous system hemangioblastomas and visceral lesions, starting age was in line with current surveillance guidelines. Furthermore, to attain a 5% detection rate, surveillance intervals for retinal tumors can be twice as long, and for the adrenal gland, four times as long.

Improved surveillance guidelines have increased the life expectancy of individuals with VHL by more than 16 years since 1990 [Wilding et al 2012]. Two studies evaluated the implementation of national surveillance guidelines in Denmark and the Netherlands. One study showed that more than 90% of the 84 affected individuals included reported that they were familiar with their national VHL surveillance guidelines. However, daily practice showed that 64% of those individuals had received information that was only partially consistent with the Dutch guidelines [Lammens et al 2011a]. In a Danish study, compliance and frequency of follow up was surprisingly low with regard to the national VHL guidelines for individuals with VHL and subjects at risk [Bertelsen & Kosteljanetz 2011]. These studies collectively suggest that correct implementation of surveillance guidelines through a doctor- and patient-oriented information campaign could have an immediate positive impact for individuals with VHL.
Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.
Because VMCM lesions can increase in size over time and become painful or symptomatic, affected individuals should be reevaluated yearly or whenever symptoms arise.
The following are appropriate:

Regular surveillance of hepatic function, platelet count, and hemoglobin level in children with VODI as hepatic failure and portal hypertension may occur

Surveillance of serum and urine electrolytes as the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) may occur

Measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations prior to IVIG infusions

Broncho-alveolar lavage to diagnose Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral cultures or lung function studies as needed

Cerebrospinal imaging to diagnose leukodystrophy when clinically indicated
Individuals with milder forms of VWD can benefit from being followed by treatment centers with experience in the management of bleeding disorders.

Individuals with type 3 VWD should be followed in experienced centers and should have periodic evaluations by a physiotherapist to monitor joint mobility.
For VPS35-PD (as well as in Parkinson disease in general), follow-up clinical neurologic evaluations are recommended every three to 12 months (depending on the clinical scenario and the needs of the individual) to assess tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, gait, cognition, and neuropsychiatric symptoms as well as treatment effectiveness.
The following surveillance guidelines are adapted from the American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies. Click here for full text.

Neonatal period and infancy

Weekly assessment of nutritional intake and weight gain during the first month of life

Otolaryngologic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development

Dental evaluation

Consultation with other specialists as applicable

Longitudinal evaluation and treatment

Audiologic evaluation as soon as possible in a neonate and again at the time of an infant’s first visit to a cleft clinic. The timing and frequency of follow-up evaluations should be based on the individual’s history of ear disease or hearing loss. Evaluations should be carried out routinely through adolescence.

Dental evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within six months of the first tooth erupting, no later than age 12 months. Routine dental evaluation should continue throughout life.

Otolaryngologic evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within the first six months of life. These evaluations should continue throughout adolescence.

Speech-language pathology evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic to provide parents with information about speech and language development. By age six months, infants should be seen for assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development. During the first two years of life, children should be evaluated at least twice, and then at least annually until age six years. After age six years, evaluations should be at least annually until after adenoid involution, and then at least every two years until dental and skeletal maturity.

Consultation with other specialists as applicable
Annual ophthalmologic examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is indicated.
Regular follow-up is indicated to monitor blood counts, adequacy of the IVIgG replacement therapy, and other potential complications.
Regular review by a pediatrician is recommended for young children with EZH2-related Weaver syndrome to monitor developmental progress, camptodactyly (for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia.

If scoliosis is present, monitor as per the orthopedic recommendations.

The clinician may wish to review less frequently older children/teenagers who do not have medical complications.

Current data suggest that there may be a slightly increased relative risk for the development of neuroblastoma in individuals with heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variants. Although the numbers are too small to quantify the absolute tumor risk, it appears to be low. In addition, given that neuroblastoma surveillance has been inconsistent with no data to support the modality of surveillance, screening interval or duration, the current recommendations include clinical vigilance and thorough investigation of any symptoms that may be tumor related.
Periodic ophthalmic examinations for early detection and removal of an ectopic lens can help decrease the possibility of pupillary block and glaucoma.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus at least annually

Annual lipid profile

At least annual physical examination for malignancies common in Werner syndrome and other skin manifestations

Annual ophthalmologic examination for cataracts

Attention to symptoms of angina, or peripheral or cerebrovascular disease
Wolfram syndrome. Regular evaluations including the following to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Diabetes mellitus: tests of glucose tolerance

Optic atrophy: ophthalmologic examination

Sensorineural hearing loss: audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing

Neurologic deficits: neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities: assessment for signs including depression, suicidal behavior, and changes in personal appearance and social behavior

Urologic abnormalities: urodynamic examination and assessment of ability to empty the bladder. Regular urine cultures when bladder dysfunction or other renal tract abnormality is present.

Diabetes insipidus: assessment of concentrating ability of the urine

Growth delay: monitoring of linear growth in children using standard growth charts

Hypogonadism

Puberty: monitoring for signs of onset of puberty

Once diabetes mellitus is present, regular follow-up for complications that can occur with time, including evaluations for:

Diabetic retinopathy

Microalbuminuria

Because women with WFS may develop diabetes insipidus during pregnancy [Rugolo et al 2002], monitoring for diabetes insipidus during pregnancy is warranted.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Regular audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing is appropriate.
Systematic follow up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Ferrarini et al 2003, Battaglia et al 2008, Battaglia 2010].

Complete blood count annually to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Annual renal function testing, including serum BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C; urinalysis; and creatinine clearance test

Consideration of routine liver ultrasonography to evaluate for liver adenomas
Table 3. 

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Interval / Age

Test/Measurement

In infants – toddlers

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 yearsThyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Annual / all ages 1

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismusHearing evaluationMonitoring of blood pressure in both armsMeasurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysisCardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Every 2 years

Serum concentration of calciumThyroid function and TSH level

Every 10 years

Renal and bladder ultrasound

In adults

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenosesEvaluation for cataracts

1. 

Except as noted

2. 

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 years

Thyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Medical evaluation

Vision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing evaluation

Monitoring of blood pressure in both arms

Measurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysis

Cardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Serum concentration of calcium

Thyroid function and TSH level

Renal and bladder ultrasound

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2

Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenoses

Evaluation for cataracts

Except as noted

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.
According to current guidelines (AASLD [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines [European Association for Study of Liver 2012]), routine monitoring should include the following examinations:

At least twice annually: serum copper and ceruloplasmin, liver biochemistries, international normalized ratio, complete blood count, urinalysis, and physical examination including neurologic assessment

Note: Patients receiving chelation therapy require a complete blood count and urinalysis regularly, no matter how long they have been on treatment

At least once annually: 24-hour urinary excretion of copper

Note: Measurements are recommended more frequently if there are questions on compliance or if dosage of medications is adjusted.
The hearing loss in WS1 is typically non-progressive. Hence, repeat audiogram would usually not be necessary.
Monitor for endocrine abnormalities:

Hypogonadism at age 12-14 years

Diabetes mellitus in the teens and later

Hypothyroidism in the teens and later

Neurologic manifestations should be monitored by experts in rehabilitative medicine, speech, and swallowing.

Dystonia may require monitoring by a neurologist.

Monitor hearing annually.
Adrenal function should be reevaluated periodically in males with X-ALD whose initial evaluation revealed normal adrenal cortical function [Dubey et al 2005].

Males with X-ALD should undergo brain MRI every six months through childhood and then yearly to monitor for the development of cerebral disease [Peters et al 2004] because MRI abnormalities occur well in advance of clinical disease [Loes et al 2003] and the evidence clearly shows that HSCT has the best outcome when performed on an asymptomatic individual [Shapiro et al 2000, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2007].
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Regular follow-up of ophthalmologic abnormalities

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor kyphoscoliosis or joint problems and assess linear growth and any leg length discrepancy

Ongoing developmental assessments

Ongoing follow-up with dermatologist

Routine monitoring of any existing cardiac and/or renal abnormalities

Regular hearing evaluations
The first dental visit should occur by age one year to monitor tooth and maxillary/mandibular development and for anticipatory guidance for parents. The developing dentition should be evaluated every six to 12 months to monitor existing treatments and to provide continued interventions as needed.
No formal surveillance guidelines exist; the following are general considerations:

Blood should be monitored by EBV-PCR for evidence of EBV infection if symptoms of infection or HLH develop.

Blood counts, hepatic profiles, coagulation studies, and inflammatory markers (ferritin, soluble IL2R) should be monitored as needed based on clinical status for early evidence of HLH.

IgG levels should also be monitored as needed based on clinical phenotype.
Children younger than age 16 years with ocular albinism should have an annual ophthalmologic examination (including assessment of refractive error and the need for filter glasses) and psychosocial and educational support.

In adults, ophthalmologic examinations should be undertaken when needed, typically every two to three years.
Because of the associated increased incidence of aortic or carotid dissection in PVNH, affected individuals should be screened by echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. There is insufficient data at present to provide definitive guidelines. However, given that such complications have occurred in early adulthood, it is reasonable to perform evaluation initially in late adolescence, with follow up as needed. Cardiology evaluation of those who have connective tissue findings and classic PVNH would be prudent.
After successful bone marrow transplantation, routine evaluation of affected boys every six to 12 months is appropriate to monitor donor cell engraftment, growth, immune and lung function, and gastrointestinal and dermatologic issues.
Presymptomatic males known to have the pathogenic variant may need yearly clinical evaluations after age 30 years to identify the onset of symptoms in order to institute appropriate therapy as early as possible.

Once an individual is symptomatic, biannual follow-ups are recommended in order to adjust medications to assure best management of dystonia and/or parkinsonism.

Periodic swallowing evaluation, especially in those with subjective dysphagia, is appropriate.
Regular follow up, especially during childhood, is necessary to evaluate for development of vision, refractive errors, strabismus, and/or ambylopia.
At least once a year:

A complete blood count with differential, chemistries, and quantitative serum immunoglobulins to monitor gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Chest x-rays or CTs and sinus films

Note: Chronic lung disease can develop in the absence of an acute pulmonary infection [Quartier et al 1999].

If the patient is stable, the serum IgG does not need to be evaluated with every infusion of gammaglobulin.
Monitor and treat pulmonary complications:

Annual pulmonary function tests for those older than age seven years

Follow-up of pulmonary infiltrates with a high-resolution chest CT scan, as they may represent lymphoid aggregates

Bronchoscopic evaluations as indicated

Perform annual endoscopic evaluation.

At routine visits, monitor for the following:

Chronic neutropenia

Chronic diarrhea and resulting malnutrition. If present, screen for ova and parasites.

Liver disease with biochemical liver function tests, especially in individuals with documented history of cryptosporidiosis

Lymphomas and GI cancers by history of new symptoms that could be suggestive of malignancy

Autoimmune disorders with history, physical examination, and CBC

Neurologic complications with neurologic examinations and brain MRI, as indicated
Growth should be followed regularly in infancy and childhood and plotted on age-appropriate growth charts. (Syndrome-specific growth charts are not available.)

Developmental progress should be monitored throughout infancy and childhood.
See Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. A physician should examine the skin of an affected individual at frequent intervals (every ~3-12 months, depending on the severity of skin disease).

Affected individuals or their parents should be educated to look for abnormal pigmented lesions or the appearance of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. Individuals should be examined frequently by a family member who has been instructed in recognition of cutaneous neoplasms.

Eyes should be examined regularly for signs of UV exposure and damage.

Neurologic. Routine neurologic examination is indicated because of progressive neurologic abnormalities that are present in a minority of individuals with XP and may not be detected in young children.

Hearing. Periodic audiograms. Serial audiograms at regular intervals may also be useful for assessing the presence or absence of progressive neurologic degeneration, especially in those with a history of acute burning on minimal sun exposure [Totonchy et al 2013].
The following routine monitoring is recommended:

Assessment of developmental progress and cognitive abilities

Screening for behavioral and psychiatric problems

Audiology evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation
Monitoring during testosterone replacement therapy should include the following:

Evaluation of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size.

Measurement of serum testosterone concentration at three-month intervals (prior to the next injection) to evaluate nadir testosterone concentrations. Concentrations lower than 200 ng/dL or higher than 500 ng/dL may require adjustment of total dose or frequency.

In adults, digital rectal examination and measurement of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) prior to treatment and three, six, and 12 months after initiation of therapy to evaluate for the presence of an overt prostate cancer, which would be a contraindication to the treatment. Such testing should then be performed annually.

For individuals on testosterone replacement therapy, evaluation of hematocrit at three, six, and 12 months, then annually because of risk of increased hematocrit with subsequent risk of hypoxia and sleep apnea

Lipid profile and liver function tests, as testosterone may alter lipid profile and liver function

Bone mineral determination by bone densitometry (DEXA) once a year, if osteopenia has been diagnosed

Ongoing psychosocial support
Following a successful HSCT, the following should be routinely monitored:

Growth

Psychomotor development

Complete blood counts

Liver and renal function

Immune status

Donor and recipient chimerism

Development of post-transplant complications, particularly chronic graft-versus-host disease, decreased bone density, pulmonary and cardiac function, and gonadal function

Individuals with milder findings or those who have not undergone HSCT also need to be monitored for worsening of immune function with periodic assessment of clinical status and functional lymphocyte responsiveness.
Suggested serial monitoring to evaluate severity and rate of disease progression

Medical history (every 6-12 months) including number and type of infections, hearing, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression, change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities, ability to walk distances; diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (every 6-12 months) including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, and orthopedic evaluation. In children, attention to growth (height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts)

Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections

Audiometry. If intellectual disability makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing

Ophthalmologic examination to detect corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus

Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacities

Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of ALT for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Immunologic status, focusing on SLE, is recommended.

Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites

Bone densitometry every two to five years to assess osteopenia

CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema)
HbH disease

Hematologic evaluation every six to 12 months to determine the steady state levels of hemoglobin

In children, assessment of growth and development every six to 12 months

Monitoring of iron load with annual determination of serum ferritin concentration in individuals who have been transfused, in older individuals, and in those given inappropriate iron supplementation. Since serum ferritin may underestimate the degree of iron overload, a periodic quantitative measurement of liver iron concentration is also recommended [Musallam et al 2012].
Individuals with PORD should be seen by a specialist tertiary pediatric endocrine service throughout childhood to closely monitor their development and adjust steroid supplementation.

Because of the presence of developmental delays in many individuals with ABS, periodic formal developmental assessments may be indicated. However, interpretation of these assessments may be complicated by the physical limitations of the disorder. Screening evaluations are likely to underestimate cognitive abilities. Therefore, evaluations should be done in centers with expertise and experience in developmental testing.
The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic follow-up, especially during the early teens when significant scoliosis starts to appear

Monitoring in the late teens for psychiatric manifestations including psychosis and paranoid delusions
Ophthalmologic examination is indicated:

Every six to 12 months in children to monitor changes in refraction and to achieve the best possible corrected visual acuity;

Every two to three years in adults.
Guidelines for surveillance are incorporated into the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical report [Trotter et al 2005].

Growth. Monitor height and weight at each physician contact using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978, Hoover-Fong et al 2007]

Development. Screening of developmental milestones throughout infancy and early childhood should be performed and compared with those specific for achondroplasia [Fowler et al 1997, Ireland et al 2010].

Head growth and risk for hydrocephalus

Complete baseline CT scan (or MRI) of the brain in infancy

Monitoring of head circumference using growth curves standardized for achondroplasia [Horton et al 1978] throughout childhood

Craniocervical junction

Every infant should have a CT scan (or MRI) of the craniocervical junction in infancy, with comparison of foramen magnum size to diagnostic-specific standards [Hecht et al 1989].

Overnight polysomnography should also be completed in infancy and interpreted with consideration of features important in assessing the craniocervical junction [Pauli et al 1995].

Neurologic examination including for signs of cervical myelopathy should be incorporated into each physical examination in infancy and childhood.

Sleep apnea

Inquiry should be made regarding signs and symptoms of sleep apnea.

If worrisome nighttime or daytime features arise, then polysomnography should be completed.

Ears and hearing

In addition to newborn screening, each infant should have tympanometric and behavioral audiometric evaluation by age approximately one year.

Evidence for middle ear problems or hearing loss should be sought throughout childhood.

Kyphosis

The spine of the infant and child should be clinically assessed every six months until age three years.

If severe kyphosis appears to be developing, radiologic assessment is needed (lateral in sitting or standing, depending on age, and lateral cross-table prone or cross-table supine over a bolster).

Legs. Clinical assessment for development of bowing and/or internal tibial torsion should be part of each physical assessment.

Spinal stenosis. Because adults with achondroplasia are at increased risk for spinal stenosis, a clinical history and neurologic examination is warranted every three to five years once the person with achondroplasia reaches adulthood.

Adaptation to difference. Inquiry regarding social adjustment should be part of each primary physician contact.
Marked accumulation of iron in parenchymal tissues including the liver, pancreas, heart, and thyroid can result in diabetes mellitus, cardiac failure, and hypothyroidism.

All affected individuals should have an annual glucose tolerance test starting at age 15 years to evaluate for the onset of diabetes mellitus.

ECG evaluation should be performed early in the course of the disease.

Evaluation of thyroid and liver function and complete blood count are indicated annually starting at the time of diagnosis.
For asymptomatic individuals with a KCNJ2 pathogenic variant, annual screening including a 12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitoring is desirable, followed by referral to a cardiologist if abnormalities are identified.
Surveillance should be individualized using a multidisciplinary approach.

Surveillance should take into account the link between fetal urinary tract dilation and long-term increased risk for impaired renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012].

Long-term dependence on parenteral nutrition requires routine surveillance of liver function.
Annual or more frequent evaluation of lymphocyte counts, serum immunoglobulin levels, and various in vitro tests of cellular and humoral immune function (i.e., as listed above for the evaluation of individuals suspected of having SCID) should be performed following BMT/SCT and during ERT [Gaspar et al 2009].

Individuals on ERT also require periodic monitoring as follows:

Plasma levels of PEG-ADA activity

Erythrocyte dAXP concentration

Development of neutralizing antibodies, particularly if plasma ADA activity or clinical or immunologic status declines unexpectedly

Monitoring for the appearance or recurrence of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Cardiovascular

Echocardiography annually until age three years for signs of pulmonary hypertension

Consideration of abdominal ultrasound examination for signs of portal hypertension in those with failure to thrive, persistent nausea, abdominal swelling, or black stools

Neurologic

Annual pediatric care, including neurologic examination and ongoing assessment of psychomotor development

Ocular

Annual assessment by pediatric ophthalmologist until age three years to identify those with abnormal retinal vascular development
Assessment of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure one to three times per year: adults who are stable may be examined yearly, whereas children require more frequent examinations. Ultrasonography may be necessary to evaluate for retinal detachment if the view of the fundus is limited
There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are reevaluated in neurology clinics and/ or clinical genetics clinics annually (or more frequently if medication trials are undertaken) to document disease progression and determine if other interventions are necessary.
Serial evaluation of EEGs to monitor disease progression is appropriate.
Regular evaluation with a multidisciplinary team is recommended for evaluation and prompt treatment of disease manifestations. In particular:

Dental findings over time may warrant use of dental prosthetics.

Periodic hearing evaluations should be performed as conductive hearing loss is common.
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring for signs of diabetes insipidus in the neonatal period

Assessment for glaucoma at least for the first few years of life

Monitoring of the spine for the development of scoliosis

Monitoring for signs of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and hypothyroidism
If puberty has not started by age 14 years, serum concentrations of LH and FSH (basal concentration and GnRH-stimulated concentration), testosterone, and inhibin B are monitored to evaluate for the possibility of HH.

Some children and parents prefer the induction of puberty at the same time as the affected boy’s peer-group; this should not be delayed unnecessarily.

If puberty does start spontaneously it is likely to arrest; thus, careful monitoring of testosterone levels is needed.

Psychological counseling should be available for families and young people if needed to discuss the issues related to hormone replacement therapy and future fertility.
The following are appropriate:

Routine dermatologic evaluation to monitor for vascular and other malignancies

Monitoring for and treatment of gastrointestinal complications at regular physician visits

Regular monitoring of the spine to assess the degree of scoliosis
In view of the high risk for HCC in individuals with AIP in Sweden, annual hepatic imaging is offered after age 50 years. It has been shown to improve survival [Innala & Andersson 2011]. A few other countries have also initiated screening. It is not yet clear whether similar testing should be offered more widely, since the risk appears to be low in some countries [Deybach & Puy 2011, Stewart 2012]. Note: Serum α-fetoprotein measurement is not helpful.
Growth should be monitored using standard growth charts so that nutritional intake can be adjusted to need.

Regular monitoring by cardiology, gastroenterology, and a nutritionist is appropriate.

At this time, the efficacy of presymptomatic screening for vascular anomalies in individuals with ALGS has not been formally evaluated. The possibility of a vascular accident should be considered in any symptomatic individual and MRI, magnetic resonance angiography, and/or angiography to identify aneurysms, dissections, or bleeds should be pursued aggressively as warranted.
Depending on age, affected individuals should be examined at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, orthopedic and neurologic status, gastrointestinal function, strength and mobility, communication skills, and psychological complications.
Asymptomatic children at risk. Large-scale, population-based studies in Japan, Europe, Canada, and the US that screened healthy infants with urinary catecholamines to identify neuroblastomas found no improvement in survival in children diagnosed before symptoms occurred [Schilling et al 2002, Woods et al 2002].

Because no data are available as yet on the effect of screening in families with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant and because tumor surveillance at the population level does not improve neuroblastoma outcome, there is currently no consensus on the proper frequency or type of tumor surveillance for individuals with a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant. In the absence of published guidelines, the noninvasive measures of physical examination, abdominal ultrasound examination, and measurement of urine catecholamine metabolite levels have been performed on the following schedule; less frequent intervals may also be appropriate.

Every 1-2 months in infants age ≤12 months

Every 3-4 months in children age ≤10 years

After successful treatment of a neuroblastic tumor, screening for neuroblastic tumors should continue since children with ALK-related neuroblastic tumor susceptibility are at risk of developing multiple primary tumors. Although no consensus exists, some recommend screening until age six years [Bourdeaut et al 2012].
Cardiac. Surveillance for cardiac complications every one to two years is advisable after age 40 years and should include:

Echocardiography to detect aortic dilation and aortic or mitral valve calcification and stenosis;

Surveillance CT scans (according to the recommendation of a cardiologist) in affected individuals with coronary artery calcification.

Urology. Urologic complications become more prevalent after age 40 years:

Routine surveillance is not recommended, but awareness of this potential complication is advised.

Ochronotic prostate stones appear on radiography; kidney stones can be identified by ultrasonography and helical abdominal CT.
Individuals with POLG-related disorders require frequent examination and interval evaluation by a team comprising the following:

Primary care provider

Neurologist

Clinical geneticist

Hepatologist or gastroenterologist

Physiatrist

Psychiatrist

Ophthalmologist

Pulmonologist

Laboratory tests. No standard of care guidelines are available to suggest the frequency for which the following tests should be obtained. Testing should be guided by clinical features and the proposed schedule should be modified if the clinical course is stable. For those with the most severe phenotypes, the following could be considered:

Every three months. CBC; electrolytes, liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT); CK, liver function tests including: preprandial serum glucose concentration; serum concentration of ammonia, albumin, bilirubin (free and conjugated), and cholesterol; and prothrombin time or INR as a measure of coagulation factors

Annually. Urine analysis; serum concentration of lactic acid

Biannually. Plasma amino acids; urine organic acids; plasma concentration of free and total carnitine (unless treated with levocarnitine, in which case measure annually)

Imaging and diagnostic procedures

Liver ultrasound examination annually

EEG and video EEG monitoring (e.g., for suspicion of subclinical status epilepticus; presence of epilepsia partialis continua; need to determine if events are seizures or non-epileptic movements)

Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked responses as clinically indicated

Barium swallow study as clinically indicated

Polysomnogram with CPAP titration as part of an evaluation of subacute mental status changes or every two to three years
Patients with severe AATD should undergo pulmonary function tests (including spirometry with bronchodilators and diffusing capacity measurements) every six to 12 months [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

All individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype (including those who did not manifest liver disease in childhood) should undergo periodic evaluation of liver function [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003].

While current guidelines from the American Thoracic Society recommend regular follow up of liver function tests in adults with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003], those tests may not reliably detect liver disease in these individuals [Clark et al 2012]. For instance, various liver function tests were not significantly different in persons with AATD with or without liver disease, and the sensitivity of the alanine transaminase (ALT) for alpha-1 antitrypsin-associated liver disease was only 12% [Clark et al 2012]

A combination of liver function tests, platelet count, and liver ultrasound examination may be an effective screening method to detect the presence of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis [Dawwas et al 2013].

All patients with established liver disease should have periodic (i.e., every 6-12 months) ultrasound examination of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and HCC [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003, Nelson et al 2012].
Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment and health surveillance of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013].

Individuals with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy should be followed by a nephrologist in addition to a primary care physician. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels), and blood pressure should be monitored.

Although most females with XLAS exhibit only asymptomatic microhematuria, recent data indicate a significant risk for progression to ESRD [Jais et al 2003]. For this reason, all women with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome need to be monitored regularly for the development of proteinuria and hypertension.

Children with Alport syndrome should have audiologic evaluation every one to two years beginning at age six to seven years (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview).

Periodic cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation for males with XLAS is appropriate.

Transplant recipients should be monitored for development of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis.
Clinical assessment, imaging, and laboratory studies outlined in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis can be used in surveillance for manifestations of lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity.

Specialized imaging studies such as combined PET and CT scanning in combination with clinical and laboratory surveillance may be helpful in detection of malignant transformation, keeping in mind that PET/CT scanning is often abnormal in ALPS, such that distinguishing between “typical” ALPS findings and a new malignancy (lymphoma) can be difficult [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. Because of this, careful consideration of imaging modalities that expose the patient to radiation is warranted.
Clinical, neurologic, and neuropsychological follow up is necessary.
Specialized multidisciplinary ALS clinic evaluations are suggested every three months.

Neurologic examination to establish the extent of weakness, atrophy, gait instability, involvement of fine motor and gross motor function and swallowing with attention to choking or coughing episodes and insensible aspiration manifesting as pneumonia

Pulmonary function tests

Nutritional status

PT/OT evaluation

Speech evaluation
Rod-cone dystrophy. Annual ophthalmologic follow-up is indicated as long as the affected individual has vision.

Obesity. Weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded annually and plotted on growth curves.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry should be performed yearly.

Cardiomyopathy

A detailed cardiac history and examination including echocardiography annually even in the absence of symptoms related to left ventricular dysfunction (signs of cardiac failure, such as sweating, fatigue, lethargy, asthma, decreased physical activity)

ECGs in parallel with echocardiography and 24-hour ECG monitoring if indicated

In individuals who have had infantile cardiomyopathy, annual monitoring by a pediatric cardiologist, even if the individual has recovered from cardiomyopathy and is asymptomatic

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes

Annual measurement of plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from early infancy

Measurement of fasting plasma glucose concentration every two to three months

If fasting blood glucose is greater than 7 mmol/L, or postprandial blood glucose is greater than 11 mmol/L, measurement of HbA1c concentration and serum glucose concentration regularly (every 6 months, although glucose estimations may be performed more frequently as determined by the 'diabetic control' of the affected individual)

Hyperlipidemia. Annual total lipid profile determination is appropriate unless hyperlipidemia is present, in which case more frequent monitoring may be indicated. When the affected individual is ill and/or dehydrated, pancreatitis precipitated by hyperlipidemia can be life threatening.

Renal disease

Urinalysis and measurement of plasma concentrations of electrolytes, uric acid, BUN, and creatinine twice yearly

Renal and bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal

Hepatic disease

Annual measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration

Ultrasonography to evaluate for possible steatosis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and portal hypertension

Pulmonary disease. Pulmonary function tests should be performed yearly to evaluate general lung function, even if symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis are not yet present.

Hypothyroidism. Patients should be monitored annually for thyroid abnormalities.
Monthly surveillance to identify and manage secondary complications is indicated.
Lifelong clinical follow up should include the following:

Neurologic

Monitoring of antiepileptic drug treatment (drug levels and clinical assessment of biological effects);

Periodic assessment of hearing by audiograms and BAEPs and of the peripheral nerves by NCV and needle EMG.

Renal function monitoring by measurement of: blood pressure; body weight; serum concentrations of creatinine, albumin, and cholesterol; 24-hour urinary protein; and creatinine clearance

Agents/Circumstances to avoid

Diphenylhydantoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and possibly lamotrigine increase myoclonus and should be avoided in any individual with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME), including AMRF.

Evaluation of relatives at risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Some antiepileptic drugs can lead to an increased risk of malformations, growth retardation, or neurodevelopmental disabilities in exposed fetuses. However, when pregnant women experience prolonged seizures during pregnancy, the risk of adverse fetal outcomes is increased. Therefore, it is recommended that women with a known seizure disorder continue to take antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy. Standard measures for prevention of fetopathy should be followed. These include:

Possible changes of medication prior to pregnancy;

Spacing of the antiepileptic drugs into four doses a day or taking extended release medications, so that the drug levels do not have significant peaks or troughs;

Monitoring the dosages and drug levels of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and after the delivery.

In addition, folic acid should be prescribed at 1 mg/day for all women of childbearing age and increased to 5 mg/day when planning a pregnancy (ideally 3 months prior to conception) and during the pregnancy, in order to prevent possible neural tube defects and other congenital malformations that can be associated with fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs.
Appropriate measures include the following:

Monitoring of postnatal development of genitalia that were ambiguous at birth for changes that could lead to reconsideration of the assigned sex

For individuals assigned a male sex, evaluation during puberty for signs of gynecomastia

In adults, monitoring of bone mineral density through DEXA (dual-emission x-ray absorptiometry) scanning [Oakes et al 2008]
The following are appropriate:

Annual clinical examination for scoliosis

For older children, evaluation for the development of obesity associated with excessive appetite and decreased physical activity
Amblyopia and refractive error. Children younger than age eight years should be monitored every four to six months for refractive errors and detection and treatment of incipient or actual amblyopia (strabismic, refractive, or sensory). Glasses and other visual aids should be provided to be able to best access educational materials.

Detection of later-onset eye pathology. Individuals with aniridia should have an annual ophthalmology review to detect problems such as corneal changes and cataracts.

Glaucoma. Individuals with aniridia should undergo annual glaucoma screening throughout life including:

Measurement of intraocular pressure;

Optic disc examination;

Visual field assessment, when possible.

Note: Assessment of the optic disc and visual field may be difficult in the presence of media opacities and nystagmus.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Individuals with aniridia with a history of multiple ocular procedures (penetrating keratoplasty, IOLs, and drainage tube insertion) should be monitored for aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005].

Wilms tumor. Children with aniridia and a WT1 deletion require renal ultrasound examinations every three months and follow-up by a pediatric oncologist until they reach age eight years. See Wilms Tumor Overview. (Those without deletion of the WT1 locus are at very low risk for Wilms tumor and do not require such screening [Grønskov et al 2001, Muto et al 2002].)

Renal function. Because of the increased risk for renal impairment in WAGR syndrome, it has been suggested that renal function be evaluated every few years across the lifetime in those with WAGR syndrome, especially those with bilateral Wilms tumor [Breslow et al 2005].

Hearing. Children with WAGR syndrome and isolated aniridia may have abnormal hearing despite a normal audiogram; thus, detailed audiologic evaluation is recommended [Bamiou et al 2007].
For persons with muscle weakness, evaluate muscle strength and functional status every six to 12 months.

For asymptomatic persons, evaluate less frequently.
Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.
Routine visits to the attending neurologist are indicated.
Periodic assessment of the following:

Bladder function

Gait

Sensation in the distal lower extremities

Cognition (e.g., executive function)
There are no formal guidelines regarding surveillance. The authors suggest obtaining the following:

Lipoprotein profile one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). If abnormal, follow at regular intervals for treatment of hyperlipidemia.

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time) one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients regarding the signs of liver dysfunction.

Platelet count one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients to notify their provider immediately in the event of bleeding or petechial rash.
No surveillance guidelines have been developed. However, all individuals with APRT deficiency should see their physician every six to 12 months to:

Monitor kidney function;

Assess the urinary excretion of DHA crystals (disappearance of the crystals is considered an adequate treatment response);

Facilitate medication compliance.

Periodic renal ultrasound examinations may be considered to evaluate for new kidney stones.
Patients are seen at regular intervals determined by their age and degree of metabolic stability.

Infants should be seen monthly or more frequently, with monitoring of plasma concentration of ammonia and amino acids, growth, and neurologic function. If treatment fails to arrest the neurologic deterioration or if spasticity is symptomatic, appropriate orthopedic and physical therapy interventions are indicated.
Regular monitoring of the concentration of plasma amino acids to identify deficiency of essential amino acids as well as impending hyperammonemia is indicated. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical scenario, but need to be more frequent in neonates and in those with frequent metabolic decompensations. The authors prefer to evaluate neonates every one to two weeks, infants between age two months and one year every one to three months, and children older than age two years every three to four months.

Early signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes in older individuals include mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, ankle clonus, and elevated plasma concentrations of glutamine, alanine, and glycine. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration in such individuals.

Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic dietician and clinical biochemical geneticist is preferred when possible.

Annual measurement of blood pressure using the appropriate-sized cuff and plotting the centile values for age and stature is indicated.

Periodic evaluation of liver function tests may be necessary; the appropriate frequency is unknown.

Periodic evaluation of serum electrolytes is appropriate; the frequency unknown.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular follow up with echocardiography, and MRI- angiography or CT scan with 3D reconstructions from head to pelvis starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis, and repeated at regular intervals depending on the initial findings and the disease course. Under stable conditions (in the absence of aneurysms, stenosis, or dilatation of the aortic root), echocardiography could be performed on a yearly basis and MRI angiography or CT scan at least every three years in older children and adults.

Pulmonary hypertension may develop secondary to pulmonary artery stenosis, requiring regular echocardiographic follow-up.

Pulmonary follow up. Increased vigilance for emphysema is appropriate

Routine follow-up for refractive errors and keratoconus, when possible with an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders

Evaluation for orthopedic complications especially during periods of rapid growth (first two years of life and during puberty), e.g., serial radiographs to evaluate for progression of scoliosis

Orthodontic follow-up, especially during eruption of permanent dentition because of the increased risk of dental crowding secondary to palatal abnormalities
Cognitive impairment appears to be non-progressive, but repeat neuropsychologic assessments are recommended to help guide educational support programs.

Although the sensorineural deafness appears to be static (albeit very severe), regular audiologic assessment is recommended so that educational support can be optimized.

Visual impairment appears to be progressive; thus, regular evaluation by an ophthalmologist is recommended.
Screening for degree of cardiac involvement in persons diagnosed with ARVC is essential to ascertain severity and disease progression over time. Screening recommendations:

ECG, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Echocardiogram, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms

Holter monitoring, event monitoring, implantable loop recorder

Exercise stress testing

Cardiac MRI, with frequency depending on symptoms and findings
The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which could contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Parents should be counseled to monitor for – and report to a physician – the early warning signs of malignancy (which can occur at any age) including weight loss, bruising, and localized pain or swelling. Periodic CBCs are warranted.

Immune status needs to be monitored if severe recurrent infections occur or immunomodulatory therapy is in progress.
During vitamin E therapy, the plasma vitamin E concentration should be measured at regular intervals (e.g., every 6 months), especially in children. Ideally the plasma vitamin E concentration should be maintained in the high normal range.

Some protocols call for measuring the total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter of plasma (TRAP). Although α-tocopherol only contributes 5%-10% to TRAP, this parameter appears to be the best surrogate marker for clinical improvement [Schuelke et al 1999]. Discontinuation of vitamin E supplementation, even temporarily, leads to a drop in plasma vitamin E concentration within two to three days and to a prolonged drop in TRAP, even after reinitiating vitamin E supplementation [Kohlschütter et al 1997, Schuelke et al 2000b].
A general timetable for clinical and laboratory evaluation in thalassemia major has been provided by Thalassemia International Federation [Cappellini et al 2014] and is available at the TIF web site.

For individuals with thalassemia major, follow up to monitor the effectiveness of transfusion therapy and chelation therapy and their side effects includes the following:

Monthly physical examination by a physician familiar with the affected individual and the disease

Every three months: assessment of liver function tests (serum concentration of ALT), determination of serum ferritin concentration, and assessment of growth and development (during childhood)

Annual

Ophthalmologic and audiologic examinations

Complete cardiac evaluation, and evaluation of thyroid, endocrine pancreas, parathyroid, adrenal, and pituitary function

Liver ultrasound evaluation and determination of serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration in adults with hepatitis C and iron overload for early detection of hepatocarcinoma

Bone densitometry to assess for osteoporosis in the adult

Regular gallbladder echography for early detection of cholelithiasis [Origa et al 2009], particularly in individuals with the Gilbert syndrome genotype (i.e., presence of the (TA)7/(TA)7 motif in the UGT1Apromoter)
Consensus management recommendations have not been established; however, several groups have proposed variations of the following [Carbone et al 2012, Battaglia 2014, Rai et al 2016]:

Uveal melanoma. Yearly dilated eye examinations and imaging by an ocular oncologist beginning around age 11 years

Malignant mesothelioma. No reliable early disease symptoms or screening modalities

Annual evaluation is recommended for late manifestations of mesothelioma, which can include chest pain, cough, fever, shortness of breath, dysphagia, hoarseness, weight loss, fever, upper body and face edema (chest mesothelioma) and abdominal pain, ascites, nausea, vomiting, and/or constipation (peritoneal mesothelioma). Annual physical examination is recommended to look for signs of pleurisy (pleural inflammation), peritonitis, ascites and/or pleural effusion.

If an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure.

Cutaneous melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and atypical Spitz tumors. Annual full body dermatologic examinations beginning around age 20 years

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Protocol similar to von Hippel Lindau disease with annual abdominal ultrasound examination; consideration of annual urinalysis and abdominal MRI every two years
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Neurodevelopmental follow up by a multidisciplinary team involved in cognitive impairment and appropriate support

Coloboma or microphthalmia: ophthalmologic follow-up (at least yearly) with systematic screening for intraocular hypertension and glaucoma. Although glaucoma has not been reported to date, it is a known complication of colobomatous microphthalmia. Early detection allows specific treatment of intraocular hypertension.

Routine follow up of deafness for any evidence of progression

Cardiac defect: cardiology follow up (adapted to the type of congenital heart disease identified)

Renal tract anomaly: nephrology follow up adapted to the anomaly and the risk of renal insufficiency

Screening for malignancies. The risk of malignancies is not established for BWCFF syndrome; screening for hematologic malignancies must be considered in case of physical deterioration or unexplained chronic fever.
Height and weight should be monitored on a regular basis with consideration of Barth syndrome-specific growth patterns [Roberts et al 2012].

Standardized cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitoring should be considered at least yearly [Spencer et al 2005].

A low threshold for performing an electrophysiologic study to assess for a potentially serious arrhythmia is appropriate, especially in the presence of symptoms such as palpitations and syncope, abnormal arrhythmia screening tests, or a family history of sudden death [Spencer et al 2005].
A multidisciplinary approach is required to effectively manage this pleiotropic condition. Suggested surveillance is summarized here:

Annual ophthalmologic evaluations with annual electroretinogram in those older than age five years

Routine (at least annual) measurement of blood pressure

A baseline renal ultrasound scan and annual renal function tests for all individuals with BBS. If a structural renal malformation is detected, review by a nephrologist and follow-up sonography is indicated.

Monitor BUN and serum concentration of creatinine if a progressive obstructive urinary tract anomaly is detected or if bilateral renal malformations are observed and satisfactory renal growth is not observed on follow-up ultrasonography.

In individuals with renal impairment (elevated serum creatinine) as a result of an underlying structural malformation, six-month to annual monitoring by a nephrologist for complications of chronic kidney disease is indicated.

Annual endocrinology review

Regular testing for diabetes mellitus by measurement of fasting glucose concentration or glucose tolerance testing

Annual thyroid function tests, liver function tests and lipid profile
Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computed tomography (CT) scans should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity. A recent consensus meeting has suggested annual head MRI scans until age eight years in affected children [Bree et al 2011], but this would require general anesthesia for many children and is probably not now justified in PTCH1-related NBCCS with only a 2% risk. However, it may well be justified in infants with SUFU pathogenic variants [Smith et al 2014].

No other tumors occur at a frequency that warrants surveillance above that offered to members of the general population.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.
Bethlem myopathy

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns, perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry)

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly annually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.

Ullrich CMD

Clinical assessment of muscle weakness, scoliosis, joint contractures, and mobility to inform physiotherapeutic advice regarding stretches/splints and mobility aids

Once scoliosis is evident, regular orthopedic follow up

Assessments of respiratory function to detect asymptomatic decline. (Assess clinically by seeking history of clinical symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation such as early-morning nausea and headaches, daytime somnolence; inquire about frequency and severity of chest infections; if any concerns perform spirometry and nocturnal pulse oximetry);

Clinical assessment of nutritional status

Assessments should be repeated regularly, possibly biannually, depending on the clinical status of the individual.
KCNQ2-BFNE. EEG at age three, 12, and 24 months is appropriate. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

KCNQ2-NEE. Video-EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Serial neuropsychological evaluation of neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral problems is advised.

Regular follow up by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to nutritional intake, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills is recommended.
Thorough neurologic and neuropsychiatric assessment is indicated annually.
Evaluation every six months by the treating subspecialists (pediatric neurologist, metabolic genetic specialist, physiotherapist, and psychologists) is appropriate.
For persons with pathogenic RECQL4 variants that correlate with an increased risk for osteosarcoma, attention to clinical findings such as bone pain, limp, and fracture is warranted. Currently no data are available regarding the effectiveness of routine screening such as x-rays, MRI, and bone scan. Furthermore, the risk of added radiation exposure from diagnostic studies and the benefit of "early" detection of osteosarcoma are unknown.

Because lymphoma has been observed in individuals with BGS [Debeljak et al 2009] and its allelic disorders RAPADILINO syndrome (4/14 cases) [Siitonen et al 2009] and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome [Simon et al 2010], it seems reasonable to monitor individuals for lymph node swelling and /or mediastinal enlargement on chest radiographs.
There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the recommendations given are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with known BHDS, individuals known to have a pathogenic variant in FLCN without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone genetic testing should have regular monitoring by physicians familiar with the spectrum of BHDS.

Renal tumor screening

Renal imaging is appropriate for individuals age 18 years or older when the clinical diagnosis of BHDS is established or if a pathogenic variant in FLCN is confirmed. However, earlier testing and surveillance for renal tumors should be personalized based on family history of renal tumor development, when available.

Yearly MRI of the kidneys is the optimal screening modality to assess for kidney lesions.

Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast is an alternative when MRI is not an option. However, the long-term effects of cumulative radiation exposure in individuals with BHDS is unknown and has not been studied.

As a result of the low aggressiveness of kidney tumors and the 3.0-cm rule used by surgeons in treating renal tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005], affected individuals without a family history of kidney tumors who have had two to three consecutive annual MRI examinations without the detection of kidney lesions may be screened every two years until a suspicious lesion is identified.

Note: The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in further characterization of kidney lesions but should not be used as a primary screening modality.

If any suspicious lesion (<1.0 cm in diameter, indeterminate lesion, or complex cysts) is noted on screening examination, annual MRI should be instituted. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast may be used as an alternative in those for whom MRI is not an option.

Renal tumors less than 3.0 cm in diameter are monitor by periodic imaging. When the largest renal tumor reaches 3 cm in maximal diameter evaluation by a urologic surgeon is appropriate with consideration of nephron-sparing surgery [Stamatakis et al 2013].

Rapidly growing lesions and/or symptoms including pain, blood in the urine, or atypical presentations require a more individualized approach. PET-CT scan is an option for evaluation of these lesions.

Melanoma. Because of a concern for a possible increased risk of melanoma in those with BHDS, full body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be considered.
Ophthalmologic examination is recommended every one to two years to monitor disease progression. Examination should include visual field testing particularly as it relates to determination of driving eligibility and eligibility for government programs and/or disability.

Patients should be aware of the possibility of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) and the option of self-monitoring using an Amsler grid under direction of their primary care ophthalmologist.
For all children with biotinidase deficiency:

Yearly ophthalmologic examination and auditory testing for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Regularly scheduled appointments with primary care physicians or as needed

Yearly evaluation by a clinical geneticist or metabolic specialist for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency

Symptomatic children with residual clinical problems should be seen as directed by the appropriate sub-specialists:

Evaluation of urinary organic acids if return of symptoms with biotin therapy (most commonly the result of non-compliance)Note: Measurement of biotin concentrations in blood or urine is not useful except to determine compliance with therapy.
Families benefit from counseling regarding the risk of cancer in persons with BSyn. The wide variety of types and sites of cancer in Bsyn – plus the unusually early onset of solid tumors such as carcinomas and sarcomas – makes surveillance for cancer a life-long undertaking, requiring planning and cooperation among the affected person, the family, and the physician in charge.

In persons younger than age 20 years, leukemia is the main type of cancer. Until evidence becomes available that treatment at the earliest stages of leukemia is more effective than treatment after full-blown symptoms appear, hematologic surveillance other than that used in general pediatrics appears unnecessary, if not contraindicated.

Close contact between individuals age 20 years and older and their physicians is advisable, and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated promptly as potential early indicators of cancer.

Screening for colon cancer, the most common solid tumor in individuals with BSyn (see Table 2), should begin decades earlier than in others, and should be carried out more frequently.

In adults, colon cancer screening may include colonoscopy every one to two years, and stool guaiac testing for blood every three to six months.
Monitor for changes related to the major findings over time.

Monitor older children as they enter adolescence for signs of low self-esteem and other psychologic issues.
Surveillance for otologic and renal anomalies should be offered as described below.

Otologic anomalies. Serial audiometry to survey for progression of hearing loss:

Annual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual examination for hearing impairment and annual audiometry to assess stability of hearing loss (more frequent if fluctuation or progression is described by the affected individual)

Renal anomalies

Regular assessment of renal function to prevent progression to ESRD

Semiannual/annual examination by a nephrologist and/or urologist if indicated, based on level of renal function and type of renal and/or collecting system malformation
Routine follow up by a neurologist for medication management and interval assessment of ambulation, seizure activity, speech, and swallowing. Often done every three to six months, follow up may be annual for those who are more stable.

For those receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism), monitoring for adverse neuropsychiatric effects and disabling motor fluctuations and dyskinesias

Follow-up ophthalmologic examination every one to two years
The frequency of ophthalmic follow-up should be individualized depending on age, procedures performed in the past, and results of visual acuity testing.

Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are advised in females in whom the BPES type is unknown or in whom BPES type I is suspected based on a positive family history or FOXL2 pathogenic variant. Frequency of endocrinologic follow-up to monitor ovarian status is individualized and can involve pelvic ultrasound examination, measurement of serum FSH concentrations, and assessment of menstrual pattern (ages of menarche and onset of oligomenorrhea and secondary amenorrhea).
Women

Monthly breast self-examination

Clinical breast examination every 6-12 months beginning at age 25

Annual breast MRI beginning at age 25, or individualized based on family history if a breast cancer diagnosis before age 30 is present

Annual mammogram beginning at age 30

Annual transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125 concentration beginning at age 35 years (or individualized based on the earliest age of onset in the family) may be considered for those women who have not elected to undergo prophylactic oophorectomy.

Note: Annual pelvic ultrasound and/or CA-125 concentration has not been effective in detecting early-stage ovarian cancer, either in high-risk or average-risk women.

Men

Breast self-examination training and regular monthly breast self-examination beginning at age 35

Annual clinical breast examination beginning at age 35

Annual prostate cancer screening beginning at age 45

Women and men

Screening for melanoma should be individualized based on the family history.

Screening of asymptomatic individuals for pancreatic cancer is not generally recommended, but is possible in research settings.
At-risk individuals with a family history of Brugada syndrome or a known pathogenic variant should undergo ECG monitoring every one to two years beginning at birth [Oe et al 2005]. The presence of type I ECG changes should be further investigated.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic screening for glycosuria as a manifestation of diabetes mellitus

For individuals with diabetes mellitus, follow-up in a diabetes clinic every six months to monitor for possible retinal, peripheral nerve, and renal complications

Yearly cardiac ultrasound and EKG

Yearly or biennial liver ultrasound examination to detect fatty infiltration

Ultrasound surveillance is a noninvasive procedure that can, along with serum lipid concentrations and liver enzymes, provide information on the degree of lipid control and compliance with the fat-restricted diet.
Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in craniofacial disorders. Clinical follow up should include body measurements, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination.
Ophthalmologic examination should be performed annually to monitor the progression of the fundus lesions; in childhood, annual examinations are important in preventing the development of amblyopia. Affected individuals should be advised to see their ophthalmologist in the event of decreased vision or metamorphopsia, which could be signs of CNV.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia, especially in the neonatal period

Screening for embryonal tumors, which has traditionally involved the following(see also Note):

Abdominal ultrasound examination every three months until age eight years [Beckwith 1998, Tan & Amor 2006, Clericuzio & Martin 2009, Zarate et al 2009]

Measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration every two to three months in the first four years of life for early detection of hepatoblastoma [Clericuzio & Martin 2009]. AFP serum concentration may be elevated in children with BWS in the first year of life [Everman et al 2000]. If the AFP is elevated and imaging reveals no suspicious lesion, follow-up measurement of serum AFP concentration plus baseline liver function tests one month later can be used to determine the trend in serum AFP concentrations over time. If the concentration is not decreasing, it is appropriate to undertake an exhaustive search for an underlying tumor [Clericuzio et al 2003]. Note: (1) Some have proposed revising the tumor surveillance guidelines based on the molecular alteration detected. Scott et al [2006] suggested that children with BWS and IC2 alterations did not require Wilms tumor screening. Brioude et al [2013] proposed that children with BWS and loss of methylation at IC2 should have an ultrasound evaluation at the time of clinical diagnosis and only continue with ultrasound surveillance if visceromegaly or ‘severe’ hemihyperplasia are present; otherwise, clinical examination alone was recommended. Mussa et al [2016b] questioned the rationale for ultrasound surveillance and ‘tumor markers’ for individuals with loss of methylation at IC2 but subsequently, in their guidelines from the Italian Scientific Committee on BWS, suggested that in the near future, tumor screening in clinical practice will cease. Based on personal experience, the present authors continue to recommend tumor surveillance for all children with BWS regardless of the molecular etiology. (2) Although periodic chest x-ray and urinary VMA and VHA assays to screen for neuroblastoma have been suggested, they have not been incorporated into most screening protocols because of their low yield.

Annual renal ultrasound examination between age eight years and mid-adolescence to identify those requiring further evaluation for findings such as nephrocalcinosis and medullary sponge kidney disease. Those with positive findings should be referred to a nephrologist for further assessment and follow up. Since the natural history of renal disease in adults has not as yet been evaluated, adult-onset renal disease without early findings remains a possibility. Therefore, consideration should be given to periodic renal evaluation in adulthood.

Consideration of annual or biannual measurement of urinary calcium/creatinine ratio from the time of BWS diagnosis as it may be abnormal in individuals with BWS who have normal findings on ultrasound examination [Goldman et al 2003]

Developmental screening as part of routine childcare
Follow up with a metabolic disease specialist every three to six months for physical and neurologic examinations. Consider neurodevelopmental testing and measurement of: plasma ammonia and amino acids (to check for chronic hyperammonemia and citrulline deficiency as well as general nutritional state); serum lactate and glucose; blood gases; liver parameters; and urine organic acids.
Close surveillance for several days following head trauma or major surgical procedure with anesthesia is indicated because neurologic deterioration (presumably stress related) may follow.
There are no standard international surveillance guidelines for CADASIL. Several countries have developed CADASIL guidelines which can be referred to, such as the medical guideline for CADASIL published (in French) by the French Health Authority (HAS).

Yearly follow up by a neurologist with expertise in CADASIL is recommended from the time of diagnosis.

A consultation with a neuropsychiatrist is recommended when there are symptoms of depression or other psychiatric manifestations.

Consultation of other medical specialists (e.g., rehabilitation physician, physical therapist, and psychologist) is as required.

The interval at which individuals with CADASIL should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the patients and their care givers.
Currently, no standard surveillance protocols exist. However, given that Caffey disease is a collagenopathy, yearly evaluation of stature, joint extensibility, hernias, fracture history, and dental health is recommended.

Although no systematic reviews of bone mineral density in adults with the defining pathogenic variant have been performed, reports of fractures and short stature in adults with other COL1A1 pathogenic variants suggest that assessment of bone mineral density may be prudent in adults with a history of Caffey disease in childhood.
The following evaluations should be performed every three to four months when children are actively growing. Evaluation may be less often thereafter. The frequency of evaluation should vary depending on individual needs [Speiser et al 2010].

Efficacy of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Early-morning serum concentrations of 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone approximately every three months during infancy and every three to six months thereafter. (In some instances, measurement of urinary pregnantriols and 17 ketosteroids in a 24-hour urine sample may help assess hormonal control. However, the process of urine collection makes it less practical than a simple blood draw.)

Linear growth, weight gain, pubertal development, and clinical signs of cortisol and androgen excess

Bone age to assess osseous maturation (at 6- to 12-month intervals)

Efficacy of mineralocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following:

Blood pressure

Early morning plasma renin activity or direct renin assay in a controlled position (usually upright)

Monitoring for testicular abnormalities in males. Periodic imaging of the testes either by ultrasonography or MRI should begin after puberty and be repeated every three to five years.

Monitoring fertility and metabolic risks in adults. In affected adults, periodic measurements and/or monitoring of the following should be performed:

Fecundity and fertility

Weight

Lipid profile

Blood pressure

Bone mineral density

Imaging studies. No routine adrenal imaging or bone mineral density is recommended [Speiser et al 2010].
Most long-term survivors require annual monitoring of growth and spinal curvature by clinical and radiographic measurements.
Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease. Follow up at six-month intervals to evaluate developmental status and evidence of any new problems is suggested.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. Annual routine follow up is indicated.
If cardiac abnormalities are present, follow-up intervals should be determined by the cardiologist according to the specific clinical manifestations. Otherwise, yearly echocardiogram and electrocardiogram are recommended to monitor cardiac size and function, as well as for evidence of pericardial effusion. These studies should be started in infancy, or as soon as the diagnosis is made, and continued throughout life.

Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis should be performed if there is concern based on physical examination. If scoliosis is present, continued monitoring by an orthopedist is recommended.

Consider brain MRI with magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) to evaluate persistent headaches or other neurological symptoms, given the increased risk for cerebral vascular abnormalities.

Affected individuals should be monitored for edema –which often develops in adolescence or early adulthood- by reviewing the medical history regarding swelling of the limbs, and by physical examination.
The interval at which a person with CARASIL are followed depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the affected individual and care givers.
Recommended clinical surveillance for individuals with CNC include the following:

Pre-pubertal pediatric individuals

Echocardiogram (annually; biannually for those with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound for boys; close monitoring of growth rate and pubertal staging (annually)

Post-pubertal pediatric and adult individuals

Echocardiogram (annually or biannually for adolescent individuals with a history of excised myxoma)

Testicular ultrasound (annually)

Thyroid ultrasound (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Transabdominal ultrasound of the ovaries (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed)

Urinary free cortisol levels (annually)

Serum IGF-1 levels (annually)

Further evaluation of affected individuals of all age groups, as needed

For primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, in addition to urinary free cortisol levels:

Diurnal cortisol levels (11:30 pm, 12:00 am and 7:30 am, 8:00 am sampling)

Dexamethasone-stimulation test (modified Liddle’s test, as per Stratakis et al [1999])

Adrenal computed tomography

For gigantism/acromegaly, in addition to serum IGF-1 levels:

Pituitary MRI

Three-hour oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT)

90-minute thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) testing

For psammomatous melanotic schwannoma: MRI (brain, spine, chest, abdomen, retroperitoneum, pelvis)
Annual monitoring of hearing loss is not required in individuals with DIS because hearing loss is non-progressive.
Periodic monitoring of the following is recommended:

Spine: orthopedic consultation and, if needed, x-ray analysis

Respiratory function: spirometry

Cardiac function: 24-hour electrocardiography and echocardiography

Mobility and muscle function: physiatrist and physical therapist consultation

The interval between visits is determined based on the symptoms and signs observed in the individual patient.
The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on age and disease severity.

During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated once or twice a month by a metabolic specialist.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of:

Growth including weight, linear growth, and head circumference;

Nutritional status;

Feeding ability;

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate.

Laboratory evaluation should include:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, plasma MMA concentration, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma tHcy concentration;

Complete blood count (CBC) to monitor for cytopenias;

Nutritional studies, if indicated: electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels (including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D), and trace minerals.

Routine evaluations should include:

Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal and optic nerve changes in patients with cblC and cblG and if visual symptoms are present;

Neurologic evaluations for early signs of psychomotor retardation, behavioral disturbances, seizures, and myelopathy;

Brain MRI and/or EEG as clinically indicated.
Annual evaluations including:

Neurologic examination

Ophthalmologic examination

Audiologic assessment

MRI follow up can be performed once every few years, in the event that the neurologic manifestations change.
The following are appropriate:

Echocardiogram every two years until it is clear that the aorta is not involved

At least annual physical examination for evidence of kyphosis/scoliosis
Children with CCD should be monitored for the following:

Orthopedic complications

Dental abnormalities

Upper-airway obstruction. Because of the craniofacial involvement, signs and symptoms of obstructive upper-airway disease should be elicited. When symptoms are suggestive, a sleep study is indicated and surgical intervention may be required.

Sinus and ear infections

Hearing loss. Regular audiometry in individuals with repeated ear infections allows the identification and early management of hearing loss if it develops.

Osteoporosis. DEXA to measure bone mineral density should be done early in adolescence and every five to ten years thereafter. If there are clinical signs of osteopenia (increased number of fractures), evaluation and treatment should be started earlier.
Annual examinations to monitor for possible ophthalmologic, neurologic, and endocrine complications are warranted.
Brain MRI imaging with GRE or SWI is indicated in individuals experiencing new neurologic symptoms. Interpretation can be difficult because new hemorrhages may be asymptomatic.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of the spine for scoliosis and joints for contractures

Routine assessment of respiratory parameters such as respiratory rate, peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)

Sleep studies especially when patients show signs of nocturnal hypoxia

Regular assessment of motor abilities in order to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and assistive devices for ambulation, such as a wheelchair
Thus far, heart valve dysplasia has not required correction; thus, no firm guidelines for appropriate surveillance have been developed. Echocardiogram is suggested at time of diagnosis and, if normal, should probably be repeated at intervals of five years.
Recommended monitoring for iron overload:

Measurement of hemoglobin, bilirubin, iron, transferrin and serum ferritin concentration every three months starting at age ten years

Annual myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI, if available, starting at age ten years
Annual

Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and referral for speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy

Eye examination

Liver function tests, thyroid panel, protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III

Other

Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis and counseling about the risk of fractures

Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident
Annual

Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and possible need for referral for speech, occupational, and physical therapy

Eye examination

Liver function tests; thyroid panel; serum concentrations of the clotting factors protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III

Other

Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist

Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident
Since both pre- and postnatal advances in treatment have increased survival of high-risk patients, it is important to provide close follow-up and support for potential long-term morbidities. Long-term follow-up for infants with CDH is ideally provided at a specialized center by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a pediatric surgeon, surgical nurse specialist, cardiologist, nutritionist, pulmonologist, and developmental pediatrician. This type of team can recognize, treat, and coordinate care for the many medical complications frequently found in long-term survivors with CDH.
The following are appropriate:

Annual gastrointestinal evaluation including monitoring of growth

Annual evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and to target therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Routine monitoring of existing cardiac or renal anomalies
The following evaluations have been suggested [Magoulas & El-Hattab 2012]:

Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. Perform annually during childhood and less frequently in adulthood. Individuals with cardiomyopathy require management and follow up by specialists in cardiology.

Plasma carnitine concentration. Monitor frequently until levels reach the normal range, thereafter, measure three times a year during infancy and early childhood, twice a year in older children, and annually in adults.

Serum CK concentration and liver transaminases. Consider measuring during acute illnesses.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring growth and development during infancy and childhood starting at the time of diagnosis

Beginning at age one year, examination of teeth with regular follow-up during to detect tooth damage and oligodontia

Periodic monitoring starting at the time of diagnosis for signs of nephronophthisis (renal insufficiency, renal cyst formation), including osmolarity testing in morning urine, urine collection assays to test for polyuria, measurement of blood pressure, determination of serum creatinine and blood urea concentrations to establish renal function, and periodic renal ultrasound examination to establish kidney size and presence of cysts. Periodic measurement of liver enzymes starting at the time of diagnosis.

Annual ophthalmologic examinations starting at age four years. Note: Electroretinography (ERG) and fundoscopy can be performed at an earlier age if it is evident that vision is reduced.

Evaluation for respiratory infection (with x-rays and sputum analysis) when clinical findings suggest pneumonia

In those with structural heart defects, periodic monitoring of cardiac function including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography.
Affected individuals. Surveillance for CEBPA-associated familial AML is similar to that for other forms of AML. There are no generally accepted minimal residual disease (MRD) markers in CEBPA-associated AML or in most other AML subtypes with normal karyotypes.

Individuals are monitored and evaluated in accordance with administered treatment, clinical course, symptoms, and protocol, if enrolled in clinical trials. When complete remission is achieved and intensification therapy is complete, individuals are monitored with:

CBC and platelet counts every one to three months for two years with the frequency decreasing to every three to six months for up to five years;

Bone marrow aspiration when cytopenia and/or an abnormal peripheral blood smear are present.

Note: The use of flow cytometry for MRD monitoring is controversial.

Individuals with a germline CEBPA pathogenic variant who are cured of their initial disease episode may be at risk for new leukemic episodes, often occurring after a prolonged period of remission (>3 years post presentation) [Pabst et al 2009, Tawana et al 2015]. In light of these data, lifelong clinical surveillance is warranted to ensure prompt recognition and appropriate management of disease recurrence. Repeat testing of CEBPA at recurrence is important to help distinguish conventional relapse from new, independent leukemic episodes.

Asymptomatic carriers. Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic CEBPA germline variant may be reviewed with CBC profiling every six to 12 months. Bone marrow examination may be performed if there is an appropriate clinical indication (e.g., abnormalities in CBC). Referral for post-testing genetic counseling should be considered as appropriate.
After initiating corticosteroids, affected individuals should be followed monthly, with efforts to taper the steroids to the lowest tolerated dose. Blood pressure should be monitored at each visit, as hypertension can develop following the initiation of steroid therapy.

When a maintenance steroid dose is achieved, ongoing evaluations should include the following:

Annual:

Complete neurologic examination

CBC

Measurement of blood pressure

Hearing screen

Evaluation of bone mineral densityNote: CED does not appear to cause an increase in spine density; therefore steroid therapy could lead to osteoporosis of the spine [Author, personal observation].

Routine monitoring of linear growth in children due to the possible side effect of delayed or stunted growth

The authors are aware of one affected teenage individual who died of a dilated ascending aorta dissection. Whether this is related to CED is unknown. Because the mechanism of CED involves increased TGFB1 signaling, also found in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, this death is of some concern. The authors are unaware of any other similar cases. Note: No recommendations for routine evaluation of the aorta can be made at this time.
For individuals with celiac disease, abnormal celiac disease serologies should be followed to normalization, which usually occurs within six to 12 months of starting a strict gluten-free diet.

Follow-up biopsy can be considered to confirm healing of intestinal villi. Because some patients on a strict gluten-free diet can heal gradually, this should typically be done at least two years after the initial diagnosis.

For asymptomatic relatives who have the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 celiac disease-susceptibility haplotype on molecular genetic testing and negative antibody results, tTG IgA testing should be performed at three- to five-year intervals to screen for the development of celiac disease-associated antibodies [Hill et al 2005, NIH Consensus Committee 2005, Pietzak 2005].
Monitor the following:

Hematologic indices including iron profile, reticulocyte count, and bilirubin to assess hemolysis every six months

Note: Individuals receiving transfusion therapy need closer monitoring.

Iron profile on a regular basis to assess for iron overload for those who are transfusion dependent

Hepatic function every six to twelve months

Vitamin D 25-OH levels in all patients whether or not they are receiving vitamin D supplements
If anomalies are identified in any organ system, lifelong periodic follow up is warranted. Consensus guidelines for surveillance in CFC syndrome have been established [Pierpont et al 2014].

Gastrointestinal. Monitor for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal reflux, constipation, and generalized dysmotility.

Endocrine. Monitor growth parameters to identify evidence of growth failure that may be associated with growth hormone deficiency. Monitor for signs of precocious puberty.

Cognitive development. Assess periodically to be certain that school programs or other supports are addressing learning needs.

Neurologic. Monitor neurologic signs and symptoms with period neurologic evaluations and MRI if indicated. Chiari malformation and later onset of seizures have been observed.

Audiologic. Annual evaluation of hearing is recommended.

Ophthalmologic. Periodic evaluation by an ophthalmologist to monitor for ocular issues (such as myopia, hyperopia, cataracts) is recommended.

Cardiac. If the initial cardiac evaluation is normal, periodic follow-up evaluations including an echocardiogram and an electrocardiogram are necessary as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and rhythm disturbances may develop later in life.

Dermatologic. As affected individuals age, formation of nevi may be progressive. At present, the natural history of the nevi is unknown. Periodic and routine dermatologic evaluation of nevi may be warranted to monitor for malignant change, although no individuals with CFC syndrome have been reported to have a malignant change.

Musculoskeletal. Periodic evaluation for scoliosis during young childhood is recommended.

Malignancy. No screening protocol exists at present, as it is unclear if individuals with CFC syndrome are at an increased risk for malignancies.
CFEOM is congenital and is believed to be non-progressive.

Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia and complications of corneal exposure [Yazdani & Traboulsi 2004].

Routine ophthalmologic care is indicated, with visits every three to four months during the first years of life, and annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals not at risk for amblyopia.

In individuals with specific TUBB3 variants, surveillance for endocrine abnormalities, facial or vocal cord weakness, and interventions for developmental delays are indicated.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring for scoliosis [North 2004], particularly in childhood and adolescence

Regular pulmonary monitoring including assessment for evidence of decreased nocturnal ventilation, such as morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, and decreased appetite or school performance; sleep studies; and lung function tests, including FEV1 and FVC

After an initial cardiac evaluation, consideration of ongoing cardiac monitoring on a case-by-case basis. Monitoring is advisable in those who have been found to have pathogenic variants in MYH7 and TPM2 and/or baseline cardiac abnormalities. Other subsets of individuals with CFTD may require cardiac monitoring in the future as more data are gathered regarding the incidence of cardiac complications in these people.

Regular assessment of motor abilities to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and physical support, such as walkers or wheelchairs
Regular follow-up visits can aid in early detection and treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic infections and non-infectious complications such as colitis, pulmonary granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis [Roesler et al 2005].

Laboratory examinations include CBC, chemistries, CRP, and ESR.

Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection.

Presence of microcytic anemia and hypoalbuminemia may indicate development of colitis.

Monitor liver chemistries for transaminase and alkaline phosphatase elevation, especially drug-related hepatotoxicity.

Although imaging is also important in detection of infectious and non-infectious manifestations, no specific guidelines address the intervals at which imaging should be used. CT or MRI should be followed closely to monitor progression of disease or until resolution of infections.

Frequent follow-up visits also provide the treating clinician opportunities to encourage compliance with prophylaxis and educate the patient and family about the disease.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of nutritional status and adaptation of diet to assure adequate caloric intake and to prevent aspiration

EEG approximately every third year
Children with Char syndrome need pediatric attention during infancy and childhood.

Although certain medical concerns including hearing loss, visual problems, and developmental delay are relatively rare among affected children, their prevalence is greater than in the general population. Ongoing developmental assessment for affected children by a pediatrician may be beneficial so that early intervention can be provided as needed.
Regular ophthalmologic evaluations are appropriate to follow changes in acuity and risks for retinal detachment and/or cataract. Monitoring nonverbal infants and children who are unable to report subjective loss of vision can permit timely detection of retinal detachment and appropriate surgical repair where necessary.

Frequent retesting of hearing by a pediatric audiologist may be necessary to determine the exact type and extent of hearing loss and to assess the success of hearing habilitation.

Frequent clinical and radiologic dental evaluations should be performed.

Wheeler et al [2000] recommended that LH and FSH be obtained between age two and three months, or by age 13-14 years if puberty has not occurred. If there is reason to suspect hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation test may be helpful.
The following regular evaluations are indicated to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Neurologic deficits. Neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities. Assessment for signs including depression and suicidal ideation

Impaired respiratory function. Monitoring of forced vital capacity (FEV) and other aspects of respiratory function performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation

Sensorineural hearing loss. Audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing
No guidelines for surveillance of classic CHS exist. Current standard of care initiates evaluation for bone marrow transplantation as quickly as feasible after the diagnosis is confirmed.

For atypical or adolescent- or adult-onset CHS, annual screening should include the following:

Abdominal ultrasound examination to monitor for hepatosplenomegaly

CBC to evaluate for cytopenias

Evaluation for signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia

Measurement of serum ferritin concentration

Soluble interleukin-2 receptor measurement

Consideration of bone marrow biopsy and/or lumbar puncture if history or physical examination suggests CNS involvement or other manifestations of the accelerated phase

If clinical status changes, the above tests should be repeated.

For both classic and atypical CHS, annual ophthalmologic examination is appropriate.
Generally, long-term follow up including clinical, radiographic, dental, orthodontic, and ophthalmologic evaluations is indicated [Silva et al 2007].
Skeletal dysplasia

Children with CHH require annual measurement of linear growth and body proportions; comparison with published disease-specific growth curves [Mäkitie et al 1992a] is helpful.

Pubertal development should be monitored during yearly follow-up visits and hypogonadism excluded if puberty is significantly delayed.

Clinical assessment for deformities of the lower extremities and joints is appropriate. Radiographic evaluation and orthopaedic consultation is necessary if symptomatic misalignment, restricted knee or hip mobility, or symptomatic joint laxity is present.

Individuals with AD require annual clinical and radiographic monitoring of the spine.

Anemia

Observe for clinical signs of anemia starting from the time of the initial diagnosis until early adolescence.

Follow RBC, hematocrit, and hemoglobin levels in those in remission after treatment for anemia at least every six months or when clinical signs of anemia reappear.

Note: (1) No data are available on the likely timing of recurrence of anemia after successful treatment; (2) severe anemia in adolescents and adults with CHH can be the presenting symptom of malignancy and may require extensive investigations with bone marrow evaluation and imaging studies.

Immunodeficiency and infection

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to infection in children, ongoing follow up by physicians with experience in this condition is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of infection.

Particularly in the first two years of life, children with normal initial immunologic assessment should be monitored for recurrent infections, especially life-threatening varicella infections [Notarangelo et al 2008, Rider et al 2009].

Laboratory markers for immunodeficiency may fluctuate in children with CHH, thus emphasizing the need for regular yearly follow up [Kainulainen et al 2014].

Bronchiectasis should be suspected especially in subjects with frequent respiratory tract infections and combined immune deficiency; high-resolution computed tomography should be used for diagnosis [Toiviainen-Salo et al 2008].

Malignancy

Although no specific recommendations exist, it is advised that children be checked on a regular basis (once yearly) by their pediatrician or primary healthcare provider for lymphomas and other associated malignancies by careful clinical examination and routine blood tests.

Skin should be inspected for abnormal changes, lymph nodes for enlargement, and abdomen for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or other abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at a regular one- to two-year interval, as well as yearly laboratory tests including blood counts with differential, LDH, and uric acid.

As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to malignancy in adults, ongoing regular follow up beyond adolescence is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of malignancy, as described above. The frequency of follow-up visits need to be determined on an individual basis.
Regular ophthalmologic examination to monitor progression of CHM is recommended as affected individuals need advice regarding their levels of visual function. Goldmann visual field examinations provide practical information for both the clinician and the affected individual.

Spectral domain-OCT (SD-OCT) is useful during therapeutic trials to measure macular thickness and the presence of cystoid macular edema [Genead & Fishman 2011].
Whenever any unusual spells or any developmental regression is noted, a child neurology consultation should be performed, and EEG considered.
Surveillance includes monitoring for evidence of scoliosis and its progression.
To monitor for emergence of the FTTDCD phenotype in persons with citrin deficiency older than age one year, close surveillance of anthropometric indices (e.g., height, weight, and head circumference; serum lipid levels including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and LDL-cholesterol) is appropriate.

It is recommended that the following be measured every several months:

Plasma ammonia concentration (especially in the evening or 2 hours after feeding)

Plasma citrulline concentration

Serum PSTI concentration

Increases in plasma citrulline concentration and serum PSTI suggest onset of CTLN2 [Tsuboi et al 2001, Mutoh et al 2008] and should prompt initiation of treatment.
ARO

The possible manifestations and complications of osteopetrosis require repeat investigations; however, no general recommendations are available for the extent and frequency of investigations. A blood cell count and an ophthalmologic examination should be performed once a year at a minimum in all individuals with ARO.

In individuals who have undergone HSCT, surveillance should be coordinated by the transplantation center; chimerism analysis should be performed repeatedly, as secondary graft failures have been reported. However, such individuals may be free of disease manifestation even in the case of stable mixed chimerism, if a substantial part of blood cells are donor derived (i.e., coexistence of hematopoietic cells of donor and recipient origin).

ADOII. In ADOII, skeletal manifestations do not progress and therefore no special surveillance is necessary.
Neurologic, ophthalmologic, immunologic/hematologic, and orthopedic evaluations are based on individual findings as needed.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic tests of hearing and vision

Annual physical cardiac examination, with echocardiogram by age ten years. Even if normal, the latter should be repeated every five to ten years in light of uncertainty as to the incidence and range in age of onset of cardiomyopathy [Massin et al 1999, Facher et al 2004].

Monitoring of the spine for the development of progressive kyphoscoliosis. There should be a high index of suspicion for narrowing of the spinal canal with attention to change in gait and bowel/bladder habits, expression of pain, and focal neurologic changes such as clonus or abnormal tendon reflexes.

Routine dental evaluation as in the general population but with particular attention to the risk of tooth loss

Note: A table containing suggested guidelines for follow-up of individuals with CLS is provided in Hunter [2010].
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of respiratory function using pulmonary function testing or spirometry with measurements in sitting and supine positions to detect diaphragmatic involvement that increases the risk of nocturnal hypoventilation. When the forced vital capacity in the supine position is less than 60% of normal values, respiratory function should be monitored by pulse oximetry and/or arterial blood gases and, where available, polysomnography.

Clinical examination and x-rays as needed to monitor for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity (scoliosis, thoracic lordosis or kyphosis, lumbar hyperlordosis)

Monitoring of cardiac function every six to 12 months (by echocardiography, ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording) in those individuals with respiratory insufficiency with or without mechanical ventilation and/or CMD subtypes prone to cardiomyopathy (L-CMD, dystroglycanopathies) and cardiac rhythm disturbances (L-CMD)

Monitoring of neurologic function and EEG in those with CMD subtypes associated with seizures or if clinically indicated

Routine complete eye examinations in those with dystroglycanopathies to monitor for changes in vision and/or changes that suggest development of cataracts and/or evidence of retinal detachment

Note: In those with laminin alpha-2 deficiency the white matter changes do not require follow-up brain MRI.
Routine surveillance of muscle strength and respiratory function is recommended. In some patients, especially those with COLQ and DOK7 pathogenic variants, slowly progressive respiratory impairment is seen with increasing age. Symptoms of nighttime hypoventilation should be considered.
Regular evaluations to determine:

Neurologic status and need for treatment (or change in treatment) for musculoskeletal and/or neuropathic pain;

Functional disability and need for change in physical therapy regime and/or augmentative devices for activities of daily living and mobility;

Need for change in diet to control weight;

Need to involve specialists to evaluate and treat potential complications.
Surveillance includes regular evaluation by the multidisciplinary team to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
Gait and condition of feet should be monitored to determine need for bracing, special shoes, or surgery.
Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, and visual acuity is appropriate.
TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders. Annual:

Neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, and sensory loss

Physical therapy examination to monitor feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery

ENT consultation with laryngoscopy

Dynamic breathing chest x-ray

Hearing assessment

TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias

Annual assessment for the development of joint pain and scoliosis

Cervical spinal films to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia before:

A child reaches school age;

Surgical procedures involving general anesthesia
Surveillance includes periodic assessment by a neurologist and/or a neuromuscular disorders specialist to assess progression of weakness in the limbs and determine the need for use of prosthetic and assistive devices.
Monitoring of gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, surgery is appropriate.
Children's feet should be watched at regular intervals to provide for properly fitting shoes and avoid sores and skin breakdown.

It is appropriate to monitor gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery.
Scoliosis needs to be closely followed. Monitoring four times a year is recommended.

Hand function and foot strength should be evaluated by an orthopedist every six months starting from the date of diagnosis.
Appropriate surveillance includes annual evaluation by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.
The following are appropriate:

Annual follow up with a neurologist for overall evaluation of neurologic deficits

Annual follow up with occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) to assess fine motor and gross motor function

Annual follow up with a pulmonologist for evaluation of respiratory function
Regular foot examination for pressure sores or poorly fitting footwear is appropriate.
Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising otologists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, physiatrists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability. While profound hearing loss begins during infancy, optic neuropathy and peripheral neuropathy in CMTX5 vary in age of onset of manifestations and progression. Thus, regular ophthalmologic and neurologic exams are warranted to monitor symptom development and progression.
Yearly reassessment for known potential complications (e.g., hypertension; renal or hepatic dysfunction; declining vision and hearing) is appropriate.
Surveillance includes the following:

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Annual follow up with a gastroenterologist and feeding specialists as needed to monitor feeding and weight gain

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities

Because of the rarity of tumors in CSS, the utility of tumor surveillance has not been determined.
Annual ophthalmologic evaluation should assess visual acuity, refractive error, cataracts in older individuals, and/or retinal dystrophy.

Annual hematologic evaluation should include complete blood count and differential to assess neutropenia. More frequent monitoring may be needed for individuals with lower ANC or more frequent infections.

Growth and weight gain should be monitored.
The interval at which individuals with COL4A1-related disorders should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms.

Annual clinical evaluation is reasonable.

Regular brain imaging can be proposed, especially to evaluate the size of asymptomatic cerebral aneurysms.
While surveillance depends on the specific genetic defect and on the clinical manifestations (see Table 1), it should always include periodic evaluations of the following: neurologic findings, urine analysis (for proteinuria) and renal function, ophthalmologic findings, and hearing.

Note: Because cardiomyopathy to date has been found only in the most severe phenotype (i.e., neonatal onset), cardiac evaluation should be performed at the time of diagnosis, but not periodically unless cardiac involvement has been documented.
Hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Monitoring of blood glucose concentration should follow typical protocols for neonates at risk for hypoglycemia.

Cardiac. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with a cardiovascular abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history. Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we advise providers and families to receive individualized care by a pediatric cardiologist, transitioning to an adult specialist following the “best practices” for the particular defect. General guidelines [Lin et al 2011(see Figure 4)] can be pragmatically dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with close evaluation in the first two years of life depending on the severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations and appropriate risk stratification. It is beyond the scope of this review to delineate the complex decision making involved in treating HCM or atrial tachycardia.

Tumor screening consisting of abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and urine testing for catecholamine metabolites and hematuria was proposed by Gripp et al [2002]. However, a subsequent report [Gripp et al 2004] on elevated catecholamine metabolites in individuals with Costello syndrome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful.

Serial abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma was proposed every three to six months until age eight to ten years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annually beginning at age ten years to screen for bladder cancer [Gripp et al 2002].

Neither of the above screening approaches has yet been shown to be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important factor for early tumor detection continues to be parental and physician awareness of the increased cancer risk.

Bone density. Osteoporosis is common in young adults with Costello syndrome [White et al 2005]. Bone density assessment is recommended as a baseline, with follow up depending on the initial result.
At clinic appointments and during periods of reduced caloric intake and febrile illness that could precipitate metabolic decompensation, individuals with CPT1A deficiency should undergo liver function testing whether they are symptomatic or not. Tests should include liver enzymes, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and functional liver tests (including the blood-clotting tests PT and PTT).
Annual or more frequent monitoring to regulate medication and diet is indicated.
Because progressive thickening of craniofacial bones continues throughout life, regular neurologic evaluation, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination are required for early diagnosis and management of complications of narrowing of the cranial foramina, including the foramen magnum.

The frequency of neurologic evaluations depends on the individual's history of skeletal changes.
Persons with a known risk for significant complications, including hydrocephalus, should be monitored from birth throughout life at intervals and by methods appropriate for the severity of the clinical findings.

Six of 29 persons with the FGFR3 pathogenic variant p.Pro250Arg required reoperation for increased intracranial pressure, emphasizing the need for continued long-term monitoring [Thomas et al 2005].
For patients undergoing treatment:

Determination of cerebral creatine level by in vivo 1H-MRS should be performed:

For individuals with GAMT and AGAT deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels during creatine supplementation therapy;

For individuals with CRTR deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels for the assessment of treatment outcome [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010b, van de Kamp et al 2012].

For GAMT deficiency: growth and nutritional status (plasma GAA levels, amino acids, ammonia, protein, albumin, pre-albumin levels) should be monitored every three to six months.

For CRTR deficiency: plasma GAA levels and plasma amino acids should be monitored every three to six months as high-dose arginine and glycine supplementation can result in increased GAA levels.

Repeat GFR annually for assessment of kidney function while on creatine supplementation therapy to detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy [Barisic et al 2002].

Perform neuropsychological assessment of cognitive functions and speech.
Visual acuity and routine ophthalmologic examination should be performed at least every year in children. Regular surveillance in adults is not necessary unless they have undergone penetrating keratoplasty. Affected individuals should be informed about penetrating keratoplasty and advised to contact their eye doctor in case of reduced visual acuity or increased glare.
Regular (yearly) eye examinations are recommended with refraction at a young age to monitor for the development of myopia.
Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic nutritionist and clinical biochemical geneticist is required. Monitoring should include:

Evaluation of early warning signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes including mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, and ankle clonus;

Plasma ammonia and amino acid analysis to identify hyperammonemia and deficiency of essential amino acids and impending hyperammonemia, respectively. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration [Brusilow & Horwich 2001].

Monitoring should occur frequently in neonates and infants, based on disease severity.

As affected individuals become older (teenage years and adulthood), clinical and biochemical monitoring can be extended to every six months to annually depending on clinical stability.
Clinical and laboratory examinations should be performed in individuals with nephropathic cystinosis according to disease severity and may include renal, endocrine, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and cardiac examinations [Kleta et al 2005]:

Evaluation by a nephrologist every three to six months depending on the severity of renal impairment

Renal function tests, electrolytes, and thyroid function tests at least every three to six months in those who are stable

Serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and intact parathyroid hormone; plain bone radiographs as well as DEXA scans to detect osteopenia and bone fragility predisposing to fractures, starting as soon as diagnosis is made and continued throughout the course of the disease

Ophthalmologic evaluation with fundoscopic examination to screen for increased intracranial pressure every one to two years for those being treated appropriately

Fasting blood glucose concentration throughout the course of the disease and testosterone concentration (in males) every two to three years, starting before puberty

In advanced disease (i.e., poorly treated adults) and in late stages of disease, perform every two to three years:

Chest CT for detection of coronary and other vascular calcification

ECG

Brain CT or MRI for evaluation of cerebral atrophy or calcifications

Evaluation for the presence of progressive muscle weakness and swallowing difficulties using electromyography (EMG), oral sensorimotor examination, and modified barium swallowing studies with videofluoroscopy

Pulmonary function tests

Neurologic and neurocognitive evaluations including visual-motor integration, visual memory, planning, sustained attention, and motor speed beginning at age seven to eight years [Besouw et al 2010a]
Recommended annual surveillance includes the following:

Neurologic and neuropsychologic evaluation

Cholestanol plasma concentration

Brain MRI

Echocardiography

Measurement of total body density (TBD)
Perform annual ophthalmologic examination, including refraction for evidence of myopia (which can be progressive) and fundus examination to inspect Bruch’s membrane.
Regular follow-up visits to the cardiologist every six to twelve months (depending on the severity of clinical manifestations) are required in order to monitor therapy efficacy. These visits should include the following:

Resting ECG

Exercise stress test, performed at the maximal age-predicted heart rate. For individuals on beta-blocker therapy (in whom maximal heart rate cannot be reached), the test should be performed at the highest tolerated workload.

Holter monitoring

Echo and MRI at least every two years

The limit for any allowed physical activity can be defined on the basis of exercise stress test done in the hospital setting; the use of commercially available heart rate monitoring devices for sports participation can be helpful in keeping the heart rate in a safe range during physical activity but should not be considered as an alternative to medical follow-up visits.
For those individuals with congenital neutropenia not undergoing HSCT, surveillance for evidence of malignant transformation to MDS/AML is critical to allow early therapeutic intervention. Observation should include the following:

General evaluations by parents and medical personnel several times a year

Blood counts several times a year

Annual bone marrow cytogenetic studies because of the frequent association of monosomy 7 and malignant transformation

Note: Although sequencing of the receptor for G-CSF (G-CSF-R) from peripheral blood may also provide evidence of evolution to MDS/AML [Ancliff et al 2003a], its clinical utility is not yet clearly established [Freedman & Alter 2002, Cassinat et al 2004, Beekman & Touw 2010].
Renal function should be assessed by BUN and plasma creatinine at a minimum of every two years and more often if a loss of function is evident. Plasma magnesium and potassium should also be assessed.

Individuals on droxidopa should be encouraged to report any adverse events to their physician.

Affected individuals should be queried at least yearly about continued efficacy of droxidopa against orthostatic hypotension and symptoms. Adjustment of dosage may be required.
Cardiac. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for optimal cardiac care in persons with DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] (full text) and consensus guidelines published in 2010 [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) include the following:

DMD

Complete cardiac evaluation at least every two years, beginning at the time of diagnosis or by the age of six until the age of ten years or at the onset of cardiac symptoms if they occur earlier

Note: At minimum, the evaluation should include an electrocardiogram and a noninvasive cardiac imaging study such as echocardiography or cardiac MRI.

At approximately age ten years, or at the onset of cardiac signs and symptoms, annual complete cardiac evaluation

Note: Most individuals with DMD demonstrating cardiac signs and symptoms are relatively late in their course.

If evaluation reveals ventricular dysfunction, the 2010 consensus guidelines recommend initiation of pharmacologic therapy and surveillance at least every six months

BMD. Complete cardiac evaluations beginning at approximately age ten years or at the onset of signs and symptoms. Evaluations should continue at least every two years.

The AAP recommendations for optimal cardiac care of female carriers for DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] include the following:

Education about the risk of developing cardiomyopathy and about the signs and symptoms of heart failure

Complete cardiac evaluation by a cardiac specialist with experience in the treatment of heart failure and/or neuromuscular disorders, with the initial evaluation to take place in late adolescence or early adulthood, or earlier at the appearance of cardiac signs and symptoms

Starting at age 25 to 30 years, screening with a complete cardiac evaluation at least every five years

Treatment of cardiac disease similar to that for boys with DMD or BMD

Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function testing before confinement to a wheelchair (usually age ~9-10 years)

Evaluation by a pediatric pulmonologist twice yearly after ANY of the following [Finder et al 2004]:

Confinement to a wheelchair

Reduction in vital capacity below 80% predicted

Age 12 years

The 2010 consensus guidelines [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) make detailed recommendations regarding pulmonary care, including:

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device;

Manual and mechanically assisted cough techniques;

Indications for nocturnal and then daytime noninvasive ventilation as well as for tracheostomy.

Orthopedic

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures and scoliosis in those with DMD and BMD

Evaluation for surgical interventions as needed
Screening and identification of DCM before the onset of symptoms enables the initiation of medical therapy that may delay disease progression.

Individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant who are found to have any ECG abnormality should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation for disease progression at least annually [Brodt et al 2013]. This should include, minimally, an ECG, 24- or 48-hour rhythm monitoring, and measurement of ventricular function.

Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic LMNA variant should undergo cardiovascular evaluation (medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every one to two years and/or whenever new symptoms arise.
An asymptomatic person with a known pathogenic variant. Cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) should be performed every one to three years.

An asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relative in a kindred with an established diagnosis of FDC in which the family pathogenic variant is unknown. Depending on age, cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) is indicated every three to five years. If an at-risk first-degree relative has evidence of idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy, the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

An asymptomatic first-degree relative of an individual with IDC in whom it is unknown if the IDC is familial should undergo cardiovascular screening (physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every three to five years starting in childhood. If a first-degree at-risk relative shows evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy, a diagnosis of FDC is made and the surveillance recommendations outlined here should extend to that person's first-degree relatives.

For at-risk relatives with abnormal evaluation results that do not meet criteria for DCM but could be consistent with early DCM (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal systolic function, decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle, normal echocardiogram with ECG abnormality) [Burkett & Hershberger 2005, Hershberger et al 2010a, Hershberger & Siegfried 2011], full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease with history of myocardial infarction or history of exposure to cardiotoxic medications) and subsequent yearly screening are indicated.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of seizure activity by regular neurologic examination and EEG

In the event of new neurologic findings or neurologic deterioration, evaluation for seizures

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference as well as assessment of psychomotor development as a part of regular health maintenance evaluations

Monitoring of orthopedic complications including foot deformity and scoliosis
The following are appropriate:

Long-term follow-up to monitor the highly variable rate of progression and degree of involvement of different organ systems

Regular neurologic evaluations to follow the progression of dystonia and consider pharmacologic treatment

Annual developmental and speech/language assessment in childhood, with appropriate adaptation of educational programming

Annual audiologic assessment

Regular assessment for dementia and/or psychiatric manifestations, with initiation of appropriate care or treatment
Sequential audiologic examinations are essential to:

Document the stability or progression of the hearing loss;

Identify and treat superimposed hearing losses, such as middle ear effusion.

In a person with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss caused by pathogenic variants in SLC26A4, the hearing loss can progress and annual audiometric testing may be warranted. Additionally, thyroid function should be followed if the diagnosis is consistent with Pendred syndrome.
Routine developmental surveillance and screening are recommended because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism. See the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines on surveillance and screening to identify patients with developmental disorders in general [Council on Children with Disabilities 2006] and autism in particular [Johnson et al 2007] and recommendations for management of children with ASD [Myers et al 2007] (Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Surveillance should include the following:

Monitoring of height, weight, and BMI

Monitoring for abnormal movements, staring spells, or other events of concern for possible seizures

Monitoring for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, and other symptoms of brain stem or spinal cord dysfunction that could indicate Chiari malformations/cerebellar ectopia, and neurologic consultation and brain MRI if indicated

Clinical screening for scoliosis until the age of skeletal maturity

Annual evaluation and monitoring of hearing in first three years of life

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations and facilitate long-term monitoring for emerging medical or mental health concerns
Systematic follow-up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Battaglia et al 2008].
Jones et al [2011] suggested that individuals with 2q deletions sparing 2q37.1 likely have a less than 5% risk of developing Wilms tumor; therefore, they do not recommend surveillance for the development of Wilms tumor in these individuals. Wilms tumor screening can be considered for individuals with deletions including 2q37.1, although screening intervals are not delineated. Wilms tumor screening protocols in individuals with WAGR syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome include abdominal ultrasounds every three months until mid-childhood [Beckwith 1998]. The practitioner caring for an infant or young child with a 2q37 deletion is encouraged to monitor the literature for updates.

When the 2q37 microdeletion is identified in early childhood, screening for the development of renal cysts at age four years and again at puberty is suggested [Falk & Casas 2007].

The following are also appropriate:

Ongoing routine pediatric care

Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information about the syndrome

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric evaluation to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems
Renal function measured as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) should be monitored at least annually together with the parameters used to stage chronic kidney disease (i.e., blood pressure, hematocrit/hemoglobin, urinary calcium excretion, and serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations).

More frequent visits and monitoring for complications of chronic kidney disease (i.e., hypertension, anemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism) as well as consideration of intensified treatment of cardiovascular risk factors may be indicated if GFR falls below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD Stage 3B).
Serial EEGs are appropriate when seizure frequency increases or when seizures of new symptomatology occur.

Repeat brain MRI with a higher resolution technique is recommended in individuals with treatment-resistant seizures whose first brain MRI was normal.
Yearly evaluations by the multi-disciplinary team mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

ENT and audiology evaluations at least yearly

Regular speech and language evaluation to monitor language development

Regular ophthalmology evaluations to monitor for potential complications from high myopia including cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal detachment

Yearly evaluations by a clinical geneticist familiar with hereditary forms of deafness
Audiograms should be obtained on an annual basis to follow progression of hearing loss.
The following are appropriate:

Semiannual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss
The following are appropriate:

Annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Repeat audiometry to confirm stability of hearing loss
For individuals with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss:

Examine semiannually or annually by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment.

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months to determine whether hearing loss is progressive.
Hearing loss in DFNX1 is prelingual or postlingual and progressive, regular audiologic evaluation is recommended to assess hearing status and progression of hearing loss.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition.

Neonatal multisystem disease:

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Developmental and neurologic assessment

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Isolated hepatic disease

Hepatic function

Nutritional status

Evidence of renal disease (proteinuria and aminoaciduria)

AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma
The following are indicated:

Complete blood counts several times a year

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity periodically and if evidence of another cytopenia or failure of current treatment is noted

Monitoring of blood pressure in individuals who are steroid dependent

Monitoring of growth individuals who are steroid dependent and in those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Evaluation by an endocrinologist; recommended for individuals who are steroid dependent and those at risk for transfusion iron overload

Cancer surveillance includes the following:

In individuals with DBA who are otherwise healthy, every four to six months: an interim history, physical examination, and measurement of blood count

If red blood-cell, white blood-cell, or platelet counts fall rapidly, bone marrow aspirate with biopsy and cytogenetic studies (including karyotype and FISH analysis) to look for acquired abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7, and 8 that are associated with certain cancers [Vlachos et al 2008]
Annual monitoring of spinal curvature to prevent neurologic complications and joint contractures is appropriate.
The recommendations in this section were discussed at the first DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and updated in 2014 at a consensus conference that led to publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015]. Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials.

Bone marrow failure

Consider repeating a complete blood count (CBC) once a year if CBCs are normal. CBCs should be obtained more frequently at the discretion of the treating hematologist.

Consider annual bone marrow aspirate and biopsy that includes morphologic examination and cytogenetic studies.

Individuals on androgen therapy for bone marrow failure

Check liver function tests prior to starting and then every three months.

Perform liver ultrasound examination semiannually for adenomas.

Check cholesterol and triglycerides prior to starting and every six months.

Cancer surveillance. Most solid tumors develop after the first decade (median age of onset: 28 years).

Monthly self-examination for oral, head, and neck cancer

Annual cancer screening by an otolaryngologist

Annual gynecologic examination

Annual skin cancer screening by a dermatologist

Pulmonary fibrosis. Perform annual pulmonary function tests starting either at diagnosis or at an age when the individual is able to appropriately perform the test (typically age ~8 years).

Oral and dental surveillance

Schedule routine screening and dental hygiene visits every six months.

Maintain good oral hygiene.

The individual’s dentist should be made aware of the increased risk of head and neck squamous cell cancers and perform a thorough examination at each visit.

Oral leukoplakia should be monitored carefully and suspicious lesions should be biopsied.
A patient’s primary care physician and biochemical geneticist should follow growth and development regularly. Developmental delays should be identified and treated as early as possible.

Plasma amino acid levels should be regularly followed to guide dietary management by the biochemical geneticist in conjunction with a qualified metabolic nutritionist.

Complications of DLD deficiency including hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, and CNS changes require regular surveillance if present.

Patients receiving dichloroacetate (DCA) need to be monitored for the development of peripheral neuropathy [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].
Lifelong monitoring (≥4x/day) of blood glucose concentrations is indicated to achieve the goals of therapy.

Children with PNDM, particularly those with a pathogenic variant in KCNJ11 or ABCC8, should undergo periodic developmental evaluations.

Yearly screening for chronic complications associated with diabetes mellitus should be started after age ten years and should include the following:

Urinalysis for microalbuminuria

Ophthalmologic examination to screen for retinopathy
Periodic glucose tolerance tests can be used to assess insulin secretion. Most children with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus in remission have no evidence of beta cell dysfunction or insulin resistance in the fasting state. Insulin response to intravenous glucose loading is often normal but suggests future recurrence if abnormal [Shield et al 2004].

Measure growth (height, weight, head circumference) at regular intervals (i.e., at least every six months)

Developmental assessment to identify any special educational needs is appropriate.

Children with HIL need to be monitored for developmental delay and special educational needs.
Sensory impairment. Examine feet on a daily basis to screen for skin injury.

Dementia. Perform annual routine clinical testing for dementia:

Observation of behavior

Use of tools such as the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)

Hearing loss. Perform annual audiogram.
Formal ophthalmic examination should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Frequent and serial monitoring is needed; the schedule should be determined by the findings present. Treatments (e.g., peripheral laser photocoagulation) may minimize the risk of retinal detachment resulting from high myopia.

Hearing evaluations should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Data on the natural history and possible progression of hearing loss are not currently available and thus no timetable for monitoring has been established.

Periodic monitoring of renal function seems prudent, based on the report of Shaheen et al [2010]. However the frequency of DBS-associated renal dysfunction is not currently known.
Examination by a movement disorder specialist at least several times yearly is recommended.
Surveillance is individualized based on disease progression.
In those with cardiac malformations or conduction defects:

ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of a known cardiac malformation, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

In those with renal anomalies:

Renal function should be monitored by routine laboratory parameters for renal function (ie, serum creatinine), even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination. In the first years of life, renal function should be performed every six months or once per year. If renal function remains normal, the screening intervals may be extended.

Renal ultrasound should be repeated if renal position anomalies could cause obstruction. The frequency depends on the clinical situation.

In those affected individuals with thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis, blood counts should be monitored at least yearly. However, data are sparse on the natural history of thrombocytopenia in individuals with SALL4 pathogenic variants and so it is unknown at present if more severe complications may occur.
Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia if it occurs.

Routine ophthalmologic visits every three to six months during the first years of life

Annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals older than age seven to 12 years who have good binocular vision and thus are no longer at risk for amblyopia
Most individuals diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia as infants who are followed by a genetics or metabolic specialist are discharged from follow up after a successful galactose challenge at age one year (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Among children with Duarte variant galactosemia who have been restricted for dietary galactose as infants, if the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is >1.0 mg/dL following a galactose challenge at age one year, galactose restriction may be resumed, and the galactose challenge and measurement of erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level repeated every four to six months until the level can be stabilized at <1.0 mg/dL.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral assessments

Periodic monitoring for evidence of seizures and/or change in seizure type
Regular assessment of psychomotor development is recommended for all children with the 17q12 recurrent duplication. Referral to an early intervention program will likely be of considerable benefit.
Table 2. 

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome 

Interval/Age

Test/Measurement

Infancy

Measurement of head circumference at every visit or at least every 3 monthsHearing evaluation

Annual

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors & strabismusCardiology evaluationEchocardiogram to measure the aortic root & ascending aorta with calculation of Z scores to monitor for progressive aortic dilation. Significant dilation may require more frequent monitoring and/or CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography.Occupational & physical therapy assessment (through age 6 years)Speech & language assessment (through age 6 years; annual assessment beyond age 6 years if moderate or severe speech/language disorder is present)Behavior assessment (attention, anxiety, opposition, aggression)

Every 3 years

Assessment of intellectual abilities & academic achievement

Adolescents/adults

Genetic counseling

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]

Surveillance for Individuals with the 7q11.23 Duplication Syndrome

Based on Mervis et al [2015], Morris et al [2015], and Parrott et al [2015]
Periodic developmental assessment to assure that educational needs are being met is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring and guidance as needed for educational and behavior problems

Regular lifelong dietary evaluation to assure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring for complications of hypertonic musculature such as scoliosis and the development of a stiff gait

Regular lifelong evaluations of the following:

Teeth: frequency determined by a dentist, based on the dental condition

Heart: based on the type of congenital anomaly. If no congenital cardiac anomaly is present, ongoing cardiac surveillance is not needed.

Eyes
Follow up several times a year with a neurologist specializing in movement disorders is recommended (especially if there is progression) to prevent secondary complications, although little information regarding the benefit of this approach is available.

Individuals treated with GPi DBS surgery require regular follow up, more frequent in the first year after surgery, for programming of the stimulation parameters and monitoring of battery life.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.
Perform annual screening for iron deficiency anemia with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screen annually for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration to provide zinc supplementation when necessary for enhanced wound healing.

Periodic echocardiographic screening to evaluate for the development of dilated cardiomyopathy is appropriate.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/ or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.
Because the lifetime risk of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma is greater than 90% in individuals with RDEB, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions may be necessary followed by local excision.

Screening for anemia should be routine with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration in order to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measurement of serum zinc concentration should be routine in order to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening for predisposition to dilated cardiomyopathy secondary to selenium deficiency and carnitine deficiency is possible by measurement of serum concentrations of selenium and carnitine. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy by transthoracic echocardiogram is also useful [Sidwell et al 2000]. No guidelines regarding the age at which such screening should begin have been established.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may pick up early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.
Screening for iron-deficiency anemia should be routine, with complete blood counts and measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary.

Screening for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration should be routine to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing.

Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should be initiated.

Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy can be accomplished with regular echocardiograms [Lara-Corrales et al 2010].

Because of the risk for squamous cell carcinoma, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions followed by local excision may be necessary.
Surveillance for infection and proper wound healing is indicated.
Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon is recommended if the affected individual has chronic pain or limb deformities (genu varum, genu valgum).
Radiographic surveillance by an orthopedist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Annual cardiac assessment consisting of ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography in order to detect asymptomatic cardiac disease. More advanced and invasive cardiac assessment may be required.

Monitoring of respiratory function
If no abnormalities are found on echocardiogram in an adult, a follow-up echocardiogram is not necessary. (Because longitudinal data on progression of aortic dilation are not available, specific recommendations for follow-up in individuals with a normal aortic diameter are not available.)

Yearly echocardiogram is warranted if an abnormality such as aortic dilatation or mitral valve prolapse is present.
DEXA should be repeated approximately every other year if bone loss is confirmed. Otherwise, routine population surveillance of bone density is all that is necessary.

Annual echocardiography is not necessary in those with a normal initial echocardiogram [Atzinger et al 2011]. In children and adolescents with a normal aortic root diameter, it is the author's practice to repeat every two to three years until young adulthood (age ~25 years). If the aortic root diameter is increased or accelerating faster than body surface area, more frequent monitoring is appropriate. In adults with a normal aortic root diameter, no further monitoring is needed.
The use of surveillance of the arterial vasculature assumes that effective interventions will decrease the risk of arterial dissection or rupture and prolong life. At a time when an open surgical approach was the only option, the benefit of surveillance could not be established. As endovascular approaches to management of aneurysms and dissection become more available, intervention is considered earlier and surveillance is seen to have greater benefit. There are, however, no published data that assess the efficacy of screening strategies to identify the regions in the arterial vasculature at highest risk; conversely, there are examples in which regions of concern in the arterial vasculature failed to progress and arterial rupture occurred at other more distant sites. Thus, the benefit of controlled studies cannot be overemphasized.

If undertaken, noninvasive imaging such as ultrasound examination, magnetic resonance angiogram, or computed tomography angiogram with and without venous contrast is preferred to identify aneurysms, dissections, and vascular ruptures [Chu et al 2014]. Because arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter and at sites of high pressure injection, conventional arteriograms are not recommended.

Blood pressure monitoring on a regular basis is recommended to allow for early treatment if hypertension develops, which will presumably reduce vascular stress and injury.
The following are appropriate:

Routine ophthalmologic examination for management of myopia and early detection of glaucoma or retinal detachment

Routine examination for inguinal hernia and surgical referral as necessary

Vigilant observation of blood pressure

Regular follow up by an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis

Echocardiogram at five-year intervals, even if the initial echocardiogram is normal

Females should be made aware of complications associated with pregnancy (see Pregnancy Management).
Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.

Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

System

Evaluation/Action

Frequency

Growth

Assess growth and monitor for failure to thrive

At each visit

Gastrointestinal

Monitor feeding and electrolyte status, particularly in those with severe diarrhea

Neurologic

Monitor for epileptic crisis; modify therapy according to clinical presentation and EEG findings

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiovascular and pulmonary follow up starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis

Annual MRA from head to pelvis
The following are appropriate:

Follow up as needed based on the extent of systemic involvement in the affected individual

Regular assessment of developmental progress to guide therapeutic interventions and educational modalities

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations
Neonates with HS require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus.

Infants with HS require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion

Those dependent on frequent transfusions require at least annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration.

If iron chelation is required secondary to frequent transfusions in children too young to undergo splenectomy, appropriate monitoring for toxicity and effectiveness of chelation treatment is necessary [Musallam et al 2013].

When hemolysis is significant, ultrasound examination to evaluate for cholelithiasis is indicated by age ten to twelve years, and every five to ten years thereafter.
Patients need lifelong clinical follow up and psychosocial support including evaluation of the drug treatment and comprehensive rehabilitation.
Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies including abdominal sonogram are indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.
Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate.

Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies such as an abdominal sonogram is indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected.

Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.
There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are treated in dermatology clinics, neurology clinics, or pain clinics, or by anesthesiologists specializing in the management of chronic pain. It is important to monitor for side effects of treatment.
Regular examinations to address:

Growth and nutritional status, including problems with feeding and risk of aspiration

Respiratory function

Joint contractures and scoliosis

Development or management of epileptic seizures
Monitoring of the size of adult osteochondromas, in particular those involving the pelvis or scapula, may aid in early identification of malignant degeneration, but no cost/benefit analyses are available to support routine surveillance.

Radiography, CT scanning, MRI, positron emission tomography and technicium-99 radionuclide imaging can be used to evaluate centrally located osteochondromas, but it is not known whether the benefits outweigh the risks of irradiation and the potential for false positive results that lead to unnecessary interventions. In addition, optimal screening intervals have not been determined.

A single screening MRI of the spine in children with HMO has been recommended by some [Roach et al 2009] to identify spinal lesions that may cause pressure on the spinal cord. The presence of osteochondromas in the canal would then warrant close clinical follow up; encroaching lesions and those causing symptoms may merit excision.
See 2014 consensus guidelines [Frohnmayer et al 2014] (full text).

Annual evaluation with a multidisciplinary team including an endocrinologist

Regular blood counts, every three to four months while stable and more often as needed

Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy at least annually to evaluate morphology, cellularity (from the biopsy), FISH, and cytogenetics (the latter two for emergence of a malignant clone). Individuals on GCSF need to have a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy every six months, if possible.

In individuals who develop Sweet syndrome (neutrophilic skin infiltration), prompt investigation for hematologic disease progression including bone marrow evaluation

Notes: (1) Progressively changing blood counts without a potential cause (e.g., acute infection or suppression from medication) require immediate evaluation with a complete blood count and bone marrow examination with FISH and cytogenetics. (2) It is important to recognize that rising blood counts can be due to either the development of MDS/AML or, rarely, reversion of a germline mutation in a stem cell, which repopulates the marrow with normal cells (somatic stem cell mosaicism). These individuals may require immediate HSCT (for MDS/AML) or continued close monitoring with complete blood counts at least every one to two months and a bone marrow examination with cytogenetics every six months.

Individuals receiving androgen therapy

Liver function tests every three to six months

Liver ultrasound examination every six to 12 months for androgen-related changes, including tumors

Cancer surveillance

Annual gynecologic assessment for genital lesions beginning at age 13. Thorough vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear can begin when women become sexually active or by age 18 years, whichever is earlier. Suspicious genital tract lesions should be biopsied.

Examination every six months for oral, head, and neck cancers beginning by age nine to ten years. Screening should be performed by a dentist, oral surgeon, or ENT familiar with FA. Nasolaryngoscopy starting at age ten years, or within the first year after HSCT. Individuals with difficulty or pain with swallowing should be evaluated for esophageal cancer.

For individuals with a history of premalignant or malignant lesions: surveillance examinations every two to three months

For individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants in BRCA2: screening for neuroblastomas, brain tumors, and kidney tumors every six months (see also Risk to Family Members – Autosomal Recessive FA)
The following are appropriate:

Annual or more frequent renal function studies

Annual cardiology evaluation

Annual audiology evaluation

Biennial brain MRI/MRA
Individuals on long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation of their clinical course to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected factor V Leiden heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment. Fundus photography may be helpful in characterizing changes in the optic nerve over time.

Assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing

Regular review of communication needs and environmental adaptations
Multiple professional societies have published guidelines based on the available evidence to date as well as expert consensus [Church et al 2003b, Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. The following surveillance recommendations are based on these expert society guidelines.

In individuals known to have FAP

Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy every one to two years, beginning at age ten to 12 years

Colonoscopy, once polyps are detected

Annual colonoscopy thereafter if colectomy is delayed more than a year after polyps emerge. In individuals age ten to 20 years in whom adenomas are smaller than 6.0 mm and without villous component or high grade dysplasia, delay in colectomy may be considered.

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) including complete visualization of the ampulla of Vater (using a duodenoscope if necessary) is recommended, though the age of initiation is variable. The American College of Gastroenterology recommends beginning screening at age 23 to 30 years, whereas the NCCN recommends starting at age 20 to 25 years or prior to colectomy. Surveillance is recommended every six months to four years depending on duodenal adenoma burden. The frequency of EGD depends on the severity of duodenal adenomas; Spigelman staging criteria can help determine the frequency. The Spigelman staging criteria are summarized by Syngal et al [2015] (see Table 9). The NCCN recommends examination of the stomach at time of upper endoscopy (frequency determined by duodenal polyp surveillance). Fundic gland polyps are common in FAP and low-grade dysplasia can be found, but rarely progresses. Specific gastric polyp screening or surgery should be considered in the setting of high-grade dysplasia only. Non-fundic gland polyps should be removed endoscopically.

Annual physical examination including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations and neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm) and palpation of the thyroid starting in the late teenage years

Thyroid cancer. In addition to annual thyroid examination, starting in late teenage years [NCCN 2016], annual thyroid ultrasound may be considered with fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]; however, data supporting this recommendation are limited [NCCN 2016].

Annual abdominal palpation for desmoids. If family history of desmoids, consider MRI or CT scan within one to three years post colectomy and then every five to ten years. Data to support screening and treatment of desmoid tumors are limited.

Small-bowel polyps and cancer. Although the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] does not recommend routine small bowel screening distal to the duodenum, the NCCN recommends considering adding small bowel visualization to CT or MRI for desmoids (if applicable), especially if duodenal polyposis is advanced.

Screening for hepatoblastoma. Efficacy in individuals with FAP is unclear. Screening protocols in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, in which the risk for hepatoblastoma is also increased, often include frequent (every 2-3 months) abdominal ultrasound examinations and measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations, and have resulted in early detection of hepatoblastomas [Tan & Amor 2006]. Screening for hepatoblastoma in FAP using liver palpation, abdominal ultrasound, and measurement of AFP every three to six months during the first five years of life has been suggested [NCCN 2016].

Adrenal tumors. Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

In individuals who have undergone colectomy

If total colectomy with IPAA is performed, routine endoscopic surveillance of the ileal pouch is recommended every two years [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016].

If subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is performed, surveillance of the remaining rectum every six to 12 months, depending on the number of polyps that develop [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. Cancer may still occur in the remaining rectum, but the risk is low with current management [Church et al 2003a].

If total colectomy with end ileostomy is performed, ileoscopy is recommended every two years [NCCN 2016].

In individuals known to have attenuated FAP

Colonoscopy every two to three years, beginning in late teens

Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy with polypectomy every one to two years depending on polyp burden

Colectomy. The absolute and relative indications for colectomy are the same as for FAP (see Surveillance).

Screening and surveillance of the upper gastrointestinal tract as for FAP (see Surveillance)

Annual physical examination, including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations, neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm), and palpation of the thyroid with consideration of follow-up ultrasound examination and fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011].

Due to the lower risk of desmoid tumors and hepatoblastomas in attenuated FAP compared to FAP, screening of these tumors is currently not recommended.

In individuals known to have GAPPS. It is currently unknown if screening for gastric cancer or prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Due to the extent of gastric polyposis, in addition to reports of rapid progression of fundic gland polyposis, gastric cancer surveillance in this condition may have limited effectiveness [Repak et al 2016].
Routine surveillance of the urinary tract for evidence of bladder diverticula and/or vesicoureteral reflux is indicated.
No surveillance guidelines have been published. The following evaluations should be performed on a regular basis, with the treating physician determining the frequency based on initial presentation and severity of the condition.

Table 6. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Eyes

Ophthalmologic evaluation

ENT/Mouth

Hearing evaluation

Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram & electrocardiogram to monitor for development of cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, respectively

Gastrointestinal

Continued assessment of nutrition and growth

Measurement of serum lactate, electrolytes, & liver function tests w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile

Neurologic

Regular neurologic evaluations & developmental assessments

Immunologic

Complete blood count

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome
Surveillance includes:

Monitoring of respiratory function in individuals with advanced FCMD over age ten years. Those who survive beyond age 20 years may require tracheostomy or noninvasive respiratory support.

Monitoring of myocardial involvement by chest x-ray, ECG, and echocardiography in individuals over age ten years.

Observation/evaluation of gastrointestinal function by a qualified specialist, using a video-fluoroscopic swallow assessment, upper gastrointestinal tract image and pH monitor for gastroesophageal reflux

Monitoring for foot deformities and scoliosis
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of growth in children

Periodic evaluation of chronic respiratory disease: spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study. Follow-up frequency depends on findings.

Regular monitoring of blood pressure and optimal management of blood pressure lability to help prevent some of the neurologic progression with age, which can be associated with compromised cerebral perfusion

Routine monitoring of other cardiovascular problems that can worsen with age (e.g., a greater degree of postural hypotension, worsening of supine hypertension, development of ischemic glomerulosclerosis, and cardiac arrhythmias) [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]

Monitoring for adequate hydration by measurement of blood urea nitrogen levels

Screening for sleep-disordered breathing with polysomnography

Periodic eye examination for strabismus, corneal opacities, or abnormal eye movements

Annual examination of the spine for early evidence of scoliosis to permit timely institution of bracing and exercise therapy

Periodic assessment of psychomotor development and behavior in children
Routine follow up for any of the above-listed medical issues by the appropriate specialist is warranted.
Children who are at risk based on family history should undergo regular fundus examination to evaluate for the development of retinal neovascularization, traction, or exudate.

Asymptomatic individuals with a small region of peripheral avascularity may require annual review only. Those with active neovascularization or exudate may well require treatment and close observation thereafter.

Individuals with retinal traction require review at intervals depending on the degree of stability of the clinical findings. The frequency of the review varies by individual depending on the assessment of the examining clinician.
The following are appropriate:

Growth parameters followed on a regular basis and plotted on age-appropriate curves

Regular follow up to monitor developmental progress, behavior concerns, gastrointestinal functioning, and neurologic issues

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation for evidence of strabismus and any visual issues

Annual audiology evaluation for evidence of hearing loss in XLOS

Regular dental evaluations for individuals with XLOS and LS
Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual:

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Audiologic screening; more frequent evaluation if there is a history of multiple episodes of otitis media

Blood pressure measurement and assessment of renal function

Standard monitoring for renal anomalies

Monitoring of bone age and for early puberty especially in cases of growth hormone use

Sonographic evaluation for renal cysts in teenage/adult years as indicated by abnormalities on the renal function tests and/or blood pressure measurement
Vertebral anomalies can lead to progressive scoliosis; orthopedic monitoring is therefore indicated.

If an individual with Larsen syndrome is born without dislocated hips, careful surveillance should be maintained to ensure that dislocation does not occur.
All individuals with FMF including those not currently being treated, those being treated with colchicine, and those receiving medication other than colchicine should undergo an annual physical examination, a urine spot test for protein, and an evaluation for hematuria [Twig et al 2014]. Kosan et al [2013] additionally recommended monitoring acute-phase reactants (ESR and fibrinogen levels) at regular intervals during attack-free periods, particularly in those with the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant.
The following should be considered as part of routine medical care for individuals with focal dermal hypoplasia:

Skin. Routine follow-up with a dermatologist to anticipate and manage common skin problems

Papillomatosis

Monitoring for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease and swallowing difficulties at routine health visits. When present, refer to an otolaryngologist for evaluation of possible verrucoid papillomas and management with surgical or laser therapy as needed.

Routine monitoring for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea (snoring, gasping, breathing pauses). If present, a sleep study should be performed [Bostwick et al 2016].

Skeletal. Routine physical examinations and/or spine radiographs to evaluate for scoliosis, particularly in individuals with costovertebral segmentation abnormalities

Dental. Regular examinations

Other

Routine monitoring of growth and body composition to determine if early nutritional intervention is needed [Motil et al 2016]

Regular eye examinations to monitor for changes in visual acuity and risks for retinal detachment in individuals with retinal colobomas. Any acute changes in vision should be considered a medical emergency as retinal detachment can lead to total blindness.

Routine screening of cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and adaptive ability, with appropriate referrals to therapeutic interventions as indicated [Deidrick et al 2016]
The following should be monitored periodically to assess the adequacy of treatment, and more frequently following initial diagnosis when treatment is being optimized:

Complete blood count

Serum and CSF folate concentrations. In particular, monitoring the trough CSF folate concentration is critical to assure that the dose of folate is sufficient to achieve CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to what is normal for the affected individual’s age.

Neurologic/cognitive status to ensure that CSF folate levels are adequate

Serum and CSF homocysteine concentrations. A high homocysteine concentration is the most sensitive indicator of folate deficiency.

Serum immunoglobulin concentrations until they are within the normal range and the hemoglobin and serum folate levels are normal and stable
The following are appropriate:

Routine care by a general pediatrician

Follow-up evaluations with standardized tests by a speech and language pathologist
Published clinical management guidelines provide detailed discussion of recommended surveillance [Corben et al 2014, www.curefa.org].

The following are appropriate.

If ECG and echocardiogram performed at the time of initial diagnosis are normal, annual repeat testing

Annual fasting blood sugar to monitor for diabetes mellitus

Hearing assessment every two to three years or more often if symptoms are present. This should include testing of hearing in background noise, as it is more often abnormal than the common audiogram assessed in a quiet environment [Rance et al 2008]

Sleep study to investigate for obstructive sleep apnea if concerns are raised by clinical history or a screening test such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale
There are no specific surveillance guidelines for Fryns syndrome. In those who survive the neonatal period, surveillance depends on the types of malformations present and is specific to the individual.

Infants with successful CDH repair should be followed by a multidisciplinary team at a specialized center, with periodic evaluations by a pediatric surgeon, nurse specialist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, and nutritionist.
For those with a confirmed diagnosis of FSHD, the following surveillance applies:

Pain. Pain should be assessed at regular visits to primary care physicians and physical therapists.

Respiratory dysfunction

Affected individuals with moderate to severe FSHD, defined as those with proximal lower extremity weakness, should be routinely screened for hypoventilation.

Yearly forced vital capacity (FVC) measurements should be monitored for all affected individuals who are wheelchair bound, have pelvic girdle weakness and superimposed pulmonary disease, and/or have moderate to severe kyphoscoliosis, lumbar hyperlordosis, or chest wall deformities.

Hearing loss

As in children who are at risk for hearing loss for other reasons, hearing can be followed routinely by periodic assessment as part of school-based testing.

Hearing screens are particularly important in severe infantile onset forms of FSHD, as hearing loss can result in delayed language acquisition.

Adults should have a formal hearing evaluation based purely on symptoms. No additional audiometry screening of asymptomatic individuals is necessary.

Ophthalmologic disease

Annual dilated ophthalmoscopy in childhood is indicated.

In adults, a dilated retinal exam should be performed at the time of diagnosis; if vascular disease is absent, follow-up exams are only necessary if visual symptoms develop.

In children known to be at risk for FSHD (because of family history) but for whom the diagnosis has not yet been confirmed, annual dilated ophthalmoscopy is indicated.
Members of the Danish family with FTD3 are followed in the Copenhagen Memory Disorders Clinic, a multidisciplinary clinic involving neurologic and psychiatric services, genetic counseling, molecular genetic testing, and clinical diagnostic and follow-up medical service.
Specific recommendations should be provided after evaluating the individual needs of each affected person. However, the authors would recommend at least annual visits with pediatric neurology (most importantly, to monitor for and/or treat epilepsy) and physical medicine (most importantly, to monitor for equipment needs and to monitor for and/or treat manifestations of spasticity). As part of a special needs program, periodic visits with genetics, ophthalmology, and orthopedic surgery will also be required.
The following are appropriate:

Routine management of congenital heart disease, renal and urinary tract malformations

Routine management of hormone deficiencies

Consideration of oral steroids for inflammatory bowel disease [Desplantes et al 2014] or anti-TNF treatment [Bégin et al 2013]. Some complications of IBD such as bowel stenosis may require appropriate surgical intervention.

Consideration of pancreatic enzyme supplementation if steatorrhea is present [Desplantes et al 2014]

Chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for acute myelogeneous leukemia

Frequent follow up by a hematologist or immunologist to monitor infection frequency and neutrophil counts to ensure an adequate response to G-CSF (i.e., absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L)

Monitoring of growth in children and pubertal development in adolescents

Biochemical profile including lipid profile

Monitoring for development of varicose veins, especially in adults

Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the following evaluations can be used to help clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs: full blood count, bone marrow examination (if persistent severe neutropenia is detected on full blood count), directed general examination for prominence of superficial veins, echocardiogram, and a renal and pelvic ultrasound examination.
No specific guidelines address the issue of surveillance. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical findings, and need to be more frequent in those with a more severe presentation.

One individual reported in the literature was followed with clinical evaluation and assessment of mineral homeostasis every three months; echocardiography, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), and low-dose radiation CT every six months; and x-rays of the wrists and knees every year [Edouard et al 2011].

Another individual was followed with weekly assessment of mineral homeostasis and troponin, monthly echocardiograms, and CT every three to four months [Michael A Levine, personal communication].

When individuals with GACI develop hypophosphatemic rickets that requires treatment with calcitriol and phosphorus supplementation, urine calcium should be followed regularly so as to avoid hypercalciuria.
See also the management guidelines published by Welling et al [2017] (full text).

Biochemical Testing

Individuals with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia should be monitored routinely [Walter et al 1999] for the accumulation of analytes:

Measure erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at each clinic visit and as needed (e.g., during the introduction of a new food). Concentrations <5 mg/dL are considered within the therapeutic range.

Note: Erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate is a good way to evaluate for acute ingestion of galactose.

Urinary galactitol (a product of an alternate pathway for galactose metabolism) levels may be performed but are not necessary for long-term monitoring.

Note that erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate and urine galactitol may provide comparable information regarding compliance with a lactose restricted diet.

Urinary galactitol analysis is especially valuable in affected individuals who have been given red blood cell transfusions; values >78 mmol/mol creatinine are abnormal.

Urinary galactitol is often not affected by acute dietary ingestion of galactose.

If sudden increases in either erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate or urinary galactitol are detected, dietary sources of excess galactose should be sought or evaluation undertaken for other causes.

Schedule for Individuals with Classic or Clinical Variant Galactosemia

Biochemical genetics clinic visits

Every three months for the first year of life or as needed depending on the nature of potential acute complications

Every six months during the second year of life

Yearly thereafter

Metabolic dietician clinic visits. As above, plus interim visits and phone consultations as necessary

Ophthalmologic evaluations. The timing of follow-up examinations depends on the presence or absence of neonatal cataracts. If absent, an examination may be performed at age one year, age five years, and during adolescence. Note: It is very unusual for a person with classic galactosemia to present after early infancy with cataracts, as cataract development probably requires significant intake of cow’s milk and dairy products.

Speech evaluations

Evaluation by a speech expert at age 18 months (recommended for all affected children)

If the initial evaluation does not reveal a diagnosis of a speech or language disorder, reevaluation every three to 12 months during infancy and early childhood depending on the assessments performed by the developmental specialists and physicians

Developmental evaluations. Affected individuals should undergo a developmental examination by a psychologist and/or developmental pediatrician at age one year and thereafter every one to three years depending on the extent of delay in one or more spheres of development.

Evaluations for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). Measurement of plasma 17-beta-estradiol and FSH in females is recommended if they reach age 12 years with insufficient secondary sex characteristics or age 14 years with no regular menses [Welling et al 2017].

Evaluations for osteopenia

Measure plasma calcium, phosphorous, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D on a yearly basis and as needed.

Because decreased bone mineral density is prevalent in individuals with classic galactosemia, a DEXA scan is recommended for surveillance at age six years, during puberty, through adolescence, and then every five years during adult life.

Routine metabolic dietetic visits should verify that calcium and vitamin D intake is adequate for age and that plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is within the normal range. Even so, bone mineral density may be decreased in certain affected individuals for reasons that are not understood. Under these circumstances, consultation with a pediatric and/or adult endocrinologist may be warranted.
The following are appropriate:

Monitor hemolysate gal-1P or urinary galactitol, especially if the diet is to be normalized. Acceptable levels of gal-1P in GALE deficiency are not known but are estimated from experience with classic galactosemia to be <3.5 mg/100 mL in red blood cells.

Follow growth.

Monitor developmental milestones; propose supportive intervention as needed.
The following should be monitored in persons with GAN:

Intellectual development/deterioration

Progression of the peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, spasticity, and cranial nerve dysfunction

The frequency of the monitoring should depend on disease progression; annual or more frequent evaluation is recommended.
Depending on the phenotype of the disease, complete blood counts should be monitored so that supportive care can be provided as needed. Individuals with mild cytopenias require infrequent monitoring (yearly), while those with severe cytopenias who require transfusions should have complete blood counts monthly or as indicated by clinical signs and symptoms.

Individuals undergoing repeated erythrocyte transfusions should be monitored for iron overload and managed appropriately with iron chelation therapy.
Physicians who are the US regional coordinators for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry (ICGG) and other groups have published recommendations for comprehensive serial monitoring of the severity and rate of disease progression [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004, Vom Dahl et al 2006]:

Medical history (at least every 6-12 months) including weight loss, fatigue, depression, change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities, bleeding from the nose or gums, menorrhagia, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, early satiety as a result of abdominal pressure, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (at least every 6-12 months) including: heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, evidence of bleeding (bruises, petechiae). In children, attention should be given to growth (height, weight, and head circumference using standardized growth charts) and pubertal changes (using the Tanner staging system). Neurologic evaluation is particularly important in the early detection of type 2 and type 3 disease in children. A severity scoring tool has been developed to evaluate neurologic features of neuronopathic GD [Davies et al 2007].

Assessment of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count (with frequency based on symptoms and treatment status). Hemoglobin, platelet count, and coagulation indices should also be assessed prior to surgical or dental procedures.

Other blood tests at the physician's discretion may include measurement of the following:

Serum concentrations of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferanse or alanine amino transferase), iron, ferritin, and vitamins B12 and D.

Plasma activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage-derived chitin-fragmenting hydrolase, and plasma concentration of PARC/CCL18. Levels are typically elevated, and are felt to correlate with body-wide burden of disease. An enzyme dose-dependent decrease in plasma chitotriosidase activity has been observed in affected individuals on ERT; however, up to 40% of affected individuals of European origin are homozygous or heterozygous for a common null variant, confounding interpretation of test results [Grace et al 2007].

Assessment of spleen and liver volumes by MRI or volumetric computed tomography (CT). Parenchymal abnormalities can be identified as well. In situations in which access to an MRI or CT is problematic, abdominal ultrasonography (US) may be performed. Abdominal US may provide information on organ volume and parenchymal abnormalities and also call attention to the presence of gallstones [Patlas et al 2002]. MRI or US are the preferred modalities in the pediatric population.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension. EKG and echocardiography with Doppler studies to identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure

Skeletal assessment

Plain radiographs of the femur (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view), and any symptomatic sites. Radiographs can reflect the status of both the compact/mineralized compartment and medullary compartment. In children, particularly those with signs of growth and pubertal delay, x-ray of the left hand and wrist to determine bone age is appropriate.

Coronal T1- and T2-weighted MR images of the hips to the distal femur. T1-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for following bone marrow infiltration. T2-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for detecting active bone infarcts, osteonecrosis, and osteomyelitis [Maas et al 2002b]. The developmental transition from cellular (red) to fatty (yellow) bone marrow, which normally occurs from childhood to early adulthood, may confound interpretation of the extent of long bone infiltration by Gaucher cells (lipid-engorged macrophages) in affected children younger than age 15 years [McHugh et al 2004]. Semiquantitative methods (BMB score and S-MRI score) have been developed to facilitate serial assessments [Robertson et al 2007, Roca et al 2007].

Other methods include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to identify osteoporosis and risk for pathologic fractures, technetium Tc-99 sulfur colloid nuclear scanning to assess location and extent of infiltration [Mariani et al 2003], and quantitative chemical-shift MRI or spectroscopy to quantify decrease in bone marrow fat content as a marker of bone marrow infiltration [Maas et al 2002a].

Assessment of disease severity. Two recent reports have delineated a means for scoring disease severity, incorporating standard assessments of disease severity [Di Rocco et al 2008, Weinreb et al 2010]. With increasing therapeutic options, the ability to benchmark response may inform the modality of choice and selected regimen [Weinreb et al 2008].
Serial neuropsychological evaluation for neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral deterioration is appropriate.

EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.
Annual multidisciplinary examination to assess:

Height

Joint range of motion by an orthopedist/physiotherapist

Heart by echocardiography for evidence of valvular stenosis and/or arterial narrowing

Trachea for evidence of stenosis and respiratory compromise

Liver size for evidence of hepatomegaly
Lifelong monitoring is necessary to ensure control of IOP to preserve remaining vision and to prevent further loss of vision; the intervals at which monitoring needs to be performed vary depending on the severity of disease and control of IOP.

Once IOP is controlled and the child is visually rehabilitated, follow up is typically every three months to keep IOP at the "target" level, which depends on the severity of the glaucomatous optic nerve damage and the age of the individual. Standard clinical follow-up tests include optic nerve photography and visual field testing. The complete ophthalmic evaluation often requires examination under anesthesia or sedation in infants and in young and uncooperative children. This process may be challenging to the individual, the family, and the treating physician [deLuise & Anderson 1983, Ho & Walton 2004].
The following are appropriate:

Blood ketone concentrations should be monitored daily, weekly or as needed to document the state of ketosis. A blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 3-5 mmol/L is recommended to insure a proper ketotic state.

Urinary measurement of ketonuria is only qualitative, and may be falsely reassuring as a strongly positive urine test for ketones may correlate with hypoketonemia. Blood measurement of ketone concentration is the preferred method.
GM1 Gangliosidosis

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist; yearly and before/after major medical events

Musculoskeletal

Yearly history and physical examination to evaluate for new skeletal abnormalities that might lead to decreased quality of life

Yearly evaluation for cervical spine instability including detailed physical examination and assessment for new neurologic findings, followed by imaging if indicated

Monitoring of hip joint stability re risk of hip dislocation. Obtain straight and frog-leg imaging if there is pain with movement or a change in mobility (which in neurologically compromised patients can present as inability to ambulate, unexplained crying, or pain).

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years, if there is a history of cardiac dysfunction and/or new symptoms

Growth. Monitoring of growth and nutrition by a nutritionist with knowledge of neurodegenerative or metabolic disease

Eye. Evaluation for visual acuity and corneal clouding every 1-3 years

Seizures. Yearly evaluation by a neurologist; consideration of EEG if there is an acute change in mental status, a sudden decline in activity/milestones, or abnormal movements

MPS IVB

Note: The recommendations for MPS IVA are appropriate for MPS IVB since MPS IVA and MPS IVB are clinically indistinguishable.

Assessment of quality of life by a physiotherapist:

Yearly: track progress and optimize ambulation

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, and as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) and three-minute stair climb test (3MSC) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal and nervous systems

Musculoskeletal. Assessment for the following:

Lower-extremity misalignment: yearly clinical examinations to assess lower extremity alignment

Hip dysplasia/subluxation: yearly radiographs of the hips, as clinically warranted

Cervical spine instability

Note: Solanki et al [2013] recommend the following guidelines for monitoring spinal involvement in those with MPS IVA:

Neurologic examination every six months

Plain x-rays of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion/extension) every six months

Plain x-rays of the spine (AP and lateral thoracolumbar) every two to three years if there is evidence of kyphosis and/or scoliosis

MRI neutral position: whole spine every year

MRI: flexion/extension of the cervical spine every one to three years

These guidelines can be modified as appropriate.

Cardiac. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Respiratory. Assessment for the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea: yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Polysomnography if any clinical suspicion exists.

Restrictive lung disease: assessment of pulmonary function when age-appropriate at diagnosis and then yearly. Note: The benefit of non-invasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use of MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]

Eye

Yearly: measurement of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination of cornea; examination of the posterior segment

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy: Retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions at onset, then every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]

Dental. Evaluation every six months

Hearing. Yearly audiogram
Regular follow up with an interdisciplinary DSD team including endocrinology, clinical genetics, obstetrics/gynecology, psychology, and urology is indicated.
Affected individuals require follow up as needed on a "system by system" basis:

Monitoring for hypocalcemia, including ionized calcium level every three to six months in infancy, every five years through childhood, and every one to two years thereafter

Monitoring of calcium levels preoperatively and postoperatively, and regularly during pregnancy

Thyroid studies annually

Reevaluation of immunologic status between age nine and 12 months; consideration of repeat immunologic evaluation prior to any live virus vaccine

Annual complete blood count and differential

Repeat ophthalmologic evaluation between age one and five years, or as needed based on symptoms

Evaluation of nasal speech quality after language emersion to screen for VPI

Repeat audiology evaluation in infancy and prior to school enrollment

Routine surveillance for the development of scoliosis

Routine dental care with consideration of sealants in those individuals with enamel hypoplasia/increased incidence of caries

Regular developmental assessments benefit the child and assist the school in providing appropriate remediation.

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist can apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations.
The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations

Evaluation by a neurologist for changes in behavior or regression of skills

Monitoring for symptoms (e.g., vomiting, incessant crying, irritability, severe headaches) that may indicate increased intracranial pressure secondary to a subarachnoid cyst

Routine monitoring of cardiac abnormalities

Monitoring for lymphedema that may occur in teenage or adult years; in severe cases, monitoring by a vascular surgeon

Routine dental examinations to monitor problems such as malocclusion, crowding, and accelerated tooth decay caused by poor enamel formation attributable to recurrent antibiotic therapy, acid reflux, and extended use of bottle feeding

Ophthalmologic examination at routine intervals by a specialist trained in evaluating individuals with developmental delay
Monitoring of growth every six to 12 months on standard growth charts with special attention to growth velocity is recommended.
Routine monitoring of speech and language by a speech pathologist should be considered for all children, particularly those diagnosed before reaching school age.

Developmental surveillance should be conducted in all affected children.
Follow GSDI guidelines published recently through a group of experts in the field [Kishnani et al 2014].

Annual ultrasound examination of the kidneys for nephrocalcinosis should be initiated after the first decade of life.

Surveillance of the liver may include the following:

In younger children (age <16 years), liver ultrasound performed at diagnosis and thereafter every 12 to 24 months. In affected individuals who are 16 years and older, liver computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning using intravenous contrast should be done every six to 12 months to monitor for hepatic adenoma formation [Franco et al 2005].

Hepatic profile: serum AST, ALT, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR, and aPTT, and creatinine every six to 12 months to monitor for liver damage

When hepatic adenoma is detected. Abdominal CT/MRI with contrast should be performed in older individuals or individuals within the pediatric age group once adenomas are detected on ultrasound. Imaging should be repeated every 6-12 months or more often depending on laboratory and clinical findings. Liver imaging studies (MRI/CT scan) should evaluate liver size, adenomas, evidence of portal hypertension, or features suggestive of liver carcinoma (nodules, heterogeneous echogenic shadows) [Franco et al 2005].

Note: Serum AFP and CEA levels are not reliable markers of hepatocellular carcinoma [Shieh et al 2012].

For those individuals treated with G-CSF serial blood counts should be performed approximately every three months to assess response to treatment and, although the risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is low, to evaluate for the presence of myeloblasts in the blood. Any imaging performed for liver surveillance (e.g., ultrasound, CT, or MRI) should include measurements of the spleen to identify and monitor splenomegaly.

Cardiovascular surveillance

Systemic blood pressure measurements should be obtained at all clinic visits beginning in infancy.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension by echocardiography every three years beginning at age ten years (or earlier if symptoms are present) is appropriate.

25(OH)-vitamin D levels should be monitored routinely and treated as needed.
Close follow up is indicated. Management and surveillance guidelines have been proposed by the ACMG Work Group on Management of Pompe Disease [Kishnani et al 2006b]. Given the wide age range in individuals with LOPD, most of the recommendations can be applied to both IOPD and LOPD.

Twice-yearly clinical review of development, clinical status, growth, and use of adaptive equipment

Assessment of respiratory status with each visit with regard to cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise tolerance:

Chest x-rays at regular intervals

Pulmonary function tests; yearly or more frequently as indicated

Periodic sleep evaluation, which may include regular capnography and pulse oximetry

Monitoring of overall musculoskeletal and functional status to guide therapies aimed at preventing or minimizing physical impairment and its complications. This may include assessment for scoliosis and bone densitometry.

Regular nutritional and feeding assessment

At least annual renal function studies to monitor for secondary complications related to cardiac and/or pulmonary impairment as well as medication effects

Annual cardiology evaluation in those with LOPD and as needed for those with IOPD:

Periodic echocardiography. Aortic dilatation has been detected by echocardiography in late-onset Pompe disease [El-Gharbawy et al 2011].

24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring) at regular intervals [Cook et al 2006]. Sacconi et al [2014] noted that enzyme replacement therapy did not prevent development of significant conduction abnormalities in four of 131 adults with LOPD.

Screening for cerebral arteriopathy with aneurysmal dilation and rupture leading to cerebral infarcts (strokes) and death, which have also been reported [Laforêt et al 2008, Sacconi et al 2010]. Screening strategies for these findings are being developed, but care teams should have a high index of suspicion for cerebral arteriopathy if an individual with late-onset Pompe disease develops unexplained stroke-like symptoms [Sacconi et al 2010].

Note: Individuals with LOPD may not be able to tolerate supine positioning in an MRI scanner due to diaphragmatic weakness.

Annual hearing evaluation
To identify periods of suboptimal metabolic control, blood glucose should be measured between 2 AM and 4 AM or urine ketones should be measured upon awakening at least several times per month.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon in older children and adults upon awakening since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring blood glucose concentrations at 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations less than 0.3 mmol/L. Alternatively morning urine ketone measurements may be assessed with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

The following are appropriate annually:

Measurement of height and weight to monitor growth

Liver ultrasound examination to screen for adenomas and evidence of liver scarring. MRI scans are limited to those individuals with abnormalities on the primary ultrasound screen.

Laboratory studies: LFTs, CK, lipid profile

Echocardiogram to monitor for cardiomyopathy; ECG

Bone density measurements are recommended after growth is complete.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases, albumin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Note: If cardiomyopathy was not observed on the baseline screening echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiograms are recommended every three months during infancy, every six months during early childhood, and annually thereafter.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual routine physical examination

Annual review of diet
Routine monitoring of blood glucose concentration and blood ketones to assess control is recommended as well as monitoring of both around periods of increased activity and illness. Note: Since ketosis is usually more severe than hypoglycemia, blood ketone level is more indicative of control than blood glucose concentration.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations lower than 0.3 mmol/L.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon on waking since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring of blood glucose concentrations at 2 AM to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Height and weight should be measured annually to monitor growth.

Although formal studies are lacking, the theoretic small risk of hepatic adenoma increases with age; thus, annual liver ultrasound examinations are recommended beginning at age five years.

Bone density determinations are recommended after growth is complete.

During pregnancy, women with GSD VI should monitor blood glucose concentrations, given that exacerbations of hypoglycemia may occur.
Liver PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement

Regular monitoring of blood glucose concentration and ketones, as recommended by a metabolic physician and nutritionist. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during times of stress including illness, intense activity, rapid growth, puberty, and pregnancy; and at any time in which intake of food is reduced or meal and/or cornstarch dose or scheduling is altered. Note: It is possible that blood glucose concentrations may be normal when moderate to large ketosis in liver PhK deficiency results from increased fatty acid oxidation and upregulated gluconeogenesis. The role of ketone monitoring in this setting as a marker of metabolic control requires further systematic investigation.

Liver imaging. In children younger than age 18 years, liver ultrasound examination every 12 to 24 months. With increasing age, consideration of CT or MRI using intravenous contrast to evaluate for complications of liver disease

Follow-up echocardiogram. No guidelines established. Follow up approximately every two years or earlier if symptoms are present

Muscle PhK deficiency

Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement.

Regular evaluation by a physical therapist to look for progression in symptoms and to guide exercise program
For those who have chronically elevated ALA (which is infrequent in those who are asymptomatic) and/or are older than age 60 years, an annual check of liver and kidney function is recommended.

Current noninvasive techniques for assessment of fibrosis in the liver include transient elastography (FibroScan®) and a blood-based test (FibroTest® or FibroSure®). Note: They have been vetted mainly for people with chronic viral hepatitis or steatohepatitis but may also be useful in porphyria.

For anyone with evidence of chronic liver injury, annual screening for hepatocellular carcinoma with abdominal imaging (such as ultrasound) and serum alpha-fetoprotein is indicated.
Nutrition and swallowing should be monitored. Feeding changes should be implemented when necessary to minimize the risk of aspiration.

Gait should be monitored, with consultation as needed from physical therapists to provide the most appropriate strategies or devices to minimize falls.

Driving safety should be monitored, with consideration of formal driving safety evaluations if safety is uncertain.

Monitor mood and irritability so that measures to decrease the risk of suicide, other behavioral abnormalities, and distress may be implemented.
Periodic clinical evaluation to monitor for the following is appropriate:

Changes in mobility, communication, and behavior, which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (wheelchair/ personal assistance)

Onset of seizures and need for antiepileptic therapy

Contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions and actions, problems following directions, memory loss, incontinence, which indicate curtailing of independence

Difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration for gastrostomy

Need for physical therapy to minimize contractures and maintain locomotion

Longitudinal MRI studies can potentially help with prognosis, as during the disease course the more rapid the confluence of patchy or focal T2 hyperintensities and the progression of cortical atrophy, the poorer the prognosis appears to be [Van Gerpen et al 2008, Sundal et al 2012c].
Persons with hemophilia who are followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia A should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by their parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is indicated at least once during the first ten to 20 treatment days in children with severe hemophilia, and then every three to six months after treatment with factor VIII concentrates has been initiated either for bleeding or prophylaxis. After 50 to 100 exposure days, annual screening and screening prior to elective surgical procedures is sufficient. Testing for inhibitors should be performed in any individual with hemophilia whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia A benefit from at least yearly contact with an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia A can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years. Affected individuals with comorbidities and other complications or treatment challenges may require more frequent visits.
Persons with hemophilia followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia B should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by the parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, viral testing if indicated, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is usually done in those with severe hemophilia B after treatment with factor IX concentrates has been initiated for either bleeding or prophylaxis. Affected individuals at increased risk for inhibitor formation should be closely monitored during initial infusions and additional screening is usually performed up to a few years of age when the genotype is a large partial deletion, complete F9 deletion, or early termination variant (<100 predicted amino acids) (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations and Molecular Genetics, Pathogenic variants). Testing for inhibitors should also be performed in any individual with hemophilia B whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity; with hemophilia B, the onset may be heralded by an allergic reaction to infused factor IX concentrate.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia B benefit from at least yearly assessments at an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia B can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years.
Clinical HFE-HH

Once the serum ferritin concentration is <50 ng/mL, monitor serum ferritin concentration every three to four months.

It is reasonable to perform follow-up T2* MRI for assessment of cardiac iron among persons with a history of cardiac involvement or known cardiac iron deposition.

Since cirrhosis is a crucial stage in the natural history of hemochromatosis, the diagnosis of cirrhosis is important because management changes. Individuals with cirrhosis should be followed regularly and screened for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) [Tavill 2001]. The AASLD Practice Guidelines recommend imaging every six months with good ultrasonography [Sherman 2010]. This may be accompanied with measurement of alpha fetoprotein. Noninvasive methods that use results derived from values of serum markers such as HepaScore® and FibroMeter™ can also be used to assess the stage of liver fibrosis [Martínez et al 2011].

Although the gold standard for the diagnosis of cirrhosis is biopsy, FibroScan® has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for cirrhosis [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. FibroScan (also known as transient elastography) quantifies fibrosis with ultrasound in a non-invasive manner [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. The results from a meta-analysis suggested a cut-off value for diagnosis of cirrhosis of 13.01 kPa [Friedrich-Rust et al 2008]. Individuals with normal transient elastography (TE) values on FibroScan would not need a biopsy while individuals with intermediate or high TE values should have biopsies to confirm cirrhosis. These results should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical and biochemical parameters.

Note: The AASLD Guidelines recommend that individuals with cirrhosis undergo surveillance regardless of whether or not they have been iron depleted [Bacon et al 2011] (full text).

Biochemical HFE-HH

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010].
There are currently no recommendations or guidelines for surveillance in those with HEP.
General health should be closely followed. Decreased growth rate should be investigated as it is less likely to be the result of PH than of other associated problems, such as reduced renal function.

Extrapolating from studies in persons with cirrhosis, individuals with CHF should be screened for esophageal varices particularly when the platelet count decreases significantly over time or prior to interventions such as renal transplantation [Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Screening is controversial in children and should only be undertaken if a therapeutic intervention (e.g., beta-blocker therapy, variceal banding) is being considered.

Small varices warrant a repeat esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) in a year.

If no varices are identified when EGD is performed because of a decline in platelet count, EGD should be repeated every two to three years.

Screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome is achieved by measuring upright oxygen saturation; screening for portopulmonary hypertension is performed with echocardiogram to estimate pulmonary artery pressure [Whitworth & Sokol 2005] in the presence of sustained platelet decrease and/or prior to an intervention.

Imaging allows:

Assessment of spleen size to indirectly follow PH;

Visualization of bile duct abnormalities (e.g. cysts in the liver) that could identify individuals at greater risk for cholangitis, bile duct stones, and cholangiocarcinoma.

The appropriate frequency of surveillance imaging is not well defined, and depends on disease severity. For individuals with mild disease, ultrasound examination every two years would be adequate; for those with more severe disease, an annual ultrasound examination could enable adequate monitoring of disease progression.

Note: No data on surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma in this setting are available. However, the incidence in children is thought to be extremely rare (see Definition, Clinical Manifestations of Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis).
Follow-up with a urologist in the presence of vesicoureteral reflux and/or documented urinary tract infection is warranted.
There are no formal guidelines for surveillance for individuals with HFI (e.g., frequency of subspecialty visits with physicians and/or dieticians with expertise in management of inherited metabolic diseases).

Once the diagnosis of HFI has been made, periodic evaluation of liver function, renal function, and growth is reasonable, particularly if there are concerns regarding compliance with the fructose/sucrose/sorbitol-restricted diet.

While isoelectric focusing of transferrin and/or monitoring of aspartylglucosaminidase (elevated in untreated HFI) have been suggested as markers of disease control in HFI, neither of these clinically available tests has definitively proven utility in diagnosis or surveillance [Pronicka et al 2007, Michelakakis et al 2009, Quintana et al 2009].
Annual surveillance beginning at the time of diagnosis (to be adapted to patient’s symptoms):

Dermatologic evaluation for poikiloderma, lymphedema of the limbs, eczema-like lesions, changes in the nails and hair

Physical therapy assessment for muscle weakness or contractures

Pulmonary function testing

Blood test:

Complete blood count with differential

Liver function testing: SGOT, SGPT, ALP, GGT

Ophthalmologic examination

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures (with attention to Achilles tendon contractures) and scoliosis
Gastric Cancer

Although it has been proposed that individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant undergo routine surveillance for gastric cancer, the optimal management of individuals at risk for a gastric cancer is controversial because of the unproven value of surveillance regime. In most cases, the gastric cancer is not detected until it reaches an incurable, advanced stage. Samples obtained at the time of prophylactic gastrectomy of six asymptomatic individuals with a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant revealed occult disease on microscopic analysis even though each individual had had normal screening tests prior to surgery [Norton et al 2007].

Due to the highly penetrant nature of HDGC caused by a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant, it is recommended that at-risk individuals who are not ready to undergo PTG or who have declined it be screened every six to 12 months by upper endoscopy with multiple random biopsies [Norton et al 2007, Barber et al 2008, Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text). Screening should begin five to ten years prior to the earliest cancer diagnosis in the family.

Several screening modalities have been tested:

Endoscopy. The effectiveness of endoscopy (currently the only method in use) in detecting the early lesions of gastric cancer has not been proven. Endoscopy permits direct inspection and biopsy of suspicious areas; however, diffuse gastric cancer is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage because the lesions tend to spread in the submucosa rather than as exophytic masses. The submucosal lesions are difficult to identify; an additional challenge is sampling bias in a macroscopically normal-appearing gastric mucosa [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004, Norton et al 2007]. It is recommended that individuals at risk who do not wish to have prophylactic gastrectomy undergo a detailed 30-minute endoscopic examination of the gastric mucosa with multiple random biopsies and biopsies of subtle lesions at six- to 12-month intervals [Caldas et al 1999].

Chromoendoscopy, using indigo-carmine staining, has been shown to improve the detection rate of early gastric cancer [Stepp et al 1998, Fennerty 1999]. Charlton et al [2004] studied six stomachs removed prophylactically after macroscopically normal gastric endoscopies. A pH-sensitive Congo red dye followed by pentagastric stimulation revealed signet ring foci that were five times more prevalent in the transitional zone of the distal stomach, a finding in contrast with other studies [Carneiro et al 2004]. The transitional zone occupies less than 10% of the stomach and lacks gastric-secreting G cells. The authors suggest that chromoendoscopy using Congo red dye and pentagastric stimulation may highlight this area during endoscopy and thus increase the chances of detecting cancer foci. Further research is needed to evaluate this possibility.

The same group of investigators reported a year later on a follow up of 99 surveillance endoscopies over five years [Shaw et al 2005]:

69 of 99 (70%) endoscopies were normal.

23 lesions with signet ring cell cancer were identified in ten individuals.

The Congo red/methylene blue dye detected foci between 4 and 10 mm, not less than 4 mm.

These findings need to be evaluated in a larger group of heterozygotes for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. However, concerns over the toxicity of Congo red have precluded the use of this stain in chromoendoscopy.

Endoscopic ultrasound examination is important in the detection and staging of gastrointestinal cancers [Pfau & Chak 2002], but is not believed to be useful in detecting precursor lesions [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004].

Other. Several other tools utilized include PET scan [van Kouwen et al 2004], endoscopic ultrasound, stool for guaiac, abdominal CT, and multiple random stomach biopsies [Barber et al 2008]. However, none of these reliably detects DGC, as demonstrated by the finding – one week after a number of these screening investigations were performed – of multiple small cancer foci in six of six gastrectomy specimens from individuals who were heterozygous for a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Norton et al 2007].

Lobular Breast Cancer (LBC)

Currently the data on women with germline CDH1 pathogenic variants and development of lobular breast cancer are insufficient to determine the best cancer screening strategies. Recommendations for LBC risk management in CDH1 heterozygotes or at-risk women are based on recommendations for women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant (see BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer). At-risk women should undergo regular breast screening as determined by their physicians, including monthly breast self-examinations and a clinical breast examination every six months.

Because lobular breast cancer is often difficult to diagnose on clinical examination and mammography, it may also be prudent to refer a woman who has a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant to a high-risk breast cancer screening program and to consider use of MRI, which appears to be more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in such women [Schelfout et al 2004; Lehman 2006; Schelfout, personal communication].

The screening should begin by age 35 years or five to ten years prior to the youngest age of breast cancer diagnosis in the family [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Colon Cancer

Although evidence is insufficient to conclude that colon cancer is a manifestation of HDGC, it is prudent to recommend colonoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 40 years or ten years prior to the youngest age at diagnosis of colon cancer in families in which both DGC and colon cancer have occurred [Fitzgerald et al 2010].
The following are appropriate:

ECG, measurement of blood pressure, echocardiogram, and carotid duplex scans annually or semi-annually to monitor for cardiovascular disease. Note: Children may experience severe carotid artery atherosclerotic blockage prior to any significant ECG changes.

Annually:

Neurologic assessment

MRI/MRA of head and neck to assess for vascular changes and silent strokes, which are true strokes that do not result in any clinical symptoms

Lipid profiles

Dental examination, x-ray, and cleaning

Hip x-rays to evaluate for avascular necrosis and progressing coxa valga

Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and/or peripheral cutaneous computed tomography scan of spine, hips, and total body to assess bone density and body fat composition

Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment for joint contractures and activities of daily living

Complete audiologic assessment with special attention to possible low-frequency conductive hearing loss

Complete ophthalmologic examination with special attention to possible exposure keratopathy
All surveillance of patients with HHH syndrome should be a combined effort of the general pediatrician or adult practitioner and a metabolic specialist.

Height, weight, and head circumference should be assessed routinely in children from the time of diagnosis to adolescence.

Plasma ammonia concentration, plasma and urine amino acid concentrations, urine organic acids, and urine orotic acid need to be monitored routinely, based on age and history of compliance and metabolic decompensation.

Low plasma concentrations of essential amino acids could trigger a catabolic state, requiring readjustment of the diet/formulas.

Low plasma concentrations of lysine may lead to delays in growth and development in infants.

Parents of infants and small children should be alert to subtle changes in mood, behavior, and eating and/or the onset of vomiting, which may suggest that plasma concentrations of glutamine and ammonia are increasing.

School performance should be monitored since poor school performance may lead to low self-esteem and/or behavioral problems that could influence compliance with a protein-restricted diet.

Periodic neurologic evaluation is warranted to monitor for neurologic deterioration even when metabolic control is optimal.
The following protocol is recommended for follow up of all individuals for whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite and for all individuals at risk for HHT based on family history in whom HHT has not been ruled out by molecular diagnosis [Faughnan et al 2011]:

Annual evaluation by a health care provider familiar with HHT, including interval history for epistaxis or other bleeding, shortness of breath or decreased exercise tolerance, and headache or other neurologic symptoms

Periodic hematocrit/hemoglobin and ferritin determination with appropriate treatment for iron deficiency anemia

Reevaluation for pulmonary AVM at approximately five-year intervals [Nawaz et al 2008]:

Contrast echocardiogram is used (if available) if the previous contrast echocardiogram did not reveal evidence of a pulmonary or intracardiac right to left shunt.

Chest CT with contrast rather than pulmonary angiography is used if the previous contrast echocardiogram revealed evidence of a right to left shunt.

Reevaluation for cerebral AVM. While cerebral AVMs are nearly always congenital, development or evolution of cerebral AVMs in the first two decades of life has been reported [Hetts et al 2014]. Accordingly, many HHT experts recommend rescreening the brain once more after puberty if the initial brain MRI was done in childhood.

Periodic screening for gastrointestinal polyps and malignant change in persons with juvenile polyps

Childhood

Because serious complications of pulmonary and cerebral AVM can occur at any age [Mei-Zahav et al 2006, Curie et al 2007], screening for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs is recommended in children from families with HHT, especially those with ENG pathogenic variants [Al-Saleh et al 2009].

Head MRI with and without gadolinium is recommended as early as the first few months of life [Faughnan et al 2011].

Pulse oximetry in the supine and sitting positions every one to two years during childhood is recommended as a minimum to screen for pulmonary AVMs. It may be of concern if the sitting value is even a few percentage points below that of the supine value. (Since most pulmonary AVMs are in the lower lobes, many individuals with pulmonary AVMs have higher oxygen saturation when lying than when sitting because of the effect of gravity.) Oxygen saturations below 97% should be followed up with contrast echocardiography. Many, but not all, serious complications of pulmonary AVM during childhood have occurred in hypoxemic children.

By at least age ten years, additional evaluation should be performed by contrast echocardiography, with a follow-up CT if positive.
In persons with clinically mild disease, episodes of subtle, undiagnosed hypoglycemia can cause permanent brain damage. Therefore close monitoring and vigilance is just as critical in mild cases as it is in severe cases. Furthermore, in persons with mild disease and in those with severe disease in clinical remission, severe hypoglycemia may be precipitated by intercurrent viral illness. Thus, it is imperative that parents monitor glucose concentrations closely especially during intercurrent illness, even in the absence of symptomatic hypoglycemia.
Individuals with AD-HIES often lack systemic signs of infection and feel better than one would expect when actively infected; therefore, a high index of suspicion for infection is necessary to permit recognition of pneumonias and institution of antibiotic treatment prior to development of extensive lung damage.

Periodic chest imaging is helpful, especially if pneumonias have occurred, to assess whether structural lesions to the lung (e.g., pneumatocoeles) have formed.

Because the microbiology of damaged lung tissue may change over time, it is important to obtain sputum samples intermittently and with acute infections, to direct therapy. Sputum samples should be obtained for microbiology during lung infections.

Scoliosis screening of adolescents is indicated to guide any necessary intervention.

Dental visits should ensure that primary teeth are removed in a timely fashion if necessary to allow secondary teeth to emerge.

Periodic laboratory monitoring should be performed for individuals on chronic antimicrobial therapy.

Individuals with AD-HIES have an increased incidence of lymphoma, which should be considered in the evaluation of lymphadenopathy, masses, or bony lesions.
The following are recommended annually after HCT:

Neuropsychological evaluation

Regular follow-up by transplant specialists to monitor for late complications relating to growth and hormone function
There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the following recommendations are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with the clinical diagnosis of HLRCC, individuals with heterozygous pathogenic variants in FH without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone molecular genetic testing should have the following regular surveillance by physicians familiar with the clinical manifestations of HLRCC.

Skin. Full skin examination is recommended annually to every two years to assess the extent of disease and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Uterus. Annual gynecologic consultation is recommended to assess severity of uterine fibroids and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Renal

Yearly examination with abdominal MRI is recommended for individuals with normal initial baseline or follow-up abdominal MRI. MRI is preferred because of the potential added radiation exposure associated with CT over lifetime. Abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated.

Any suspicious renal lesion (indeterminate lesion, questionable or complex cysts) detected at a previous examination should be followed with a CT scan with and without contrast. The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in the characterization of cystic lesions. PET-CT may be added to identify metabolically active lesions suggesting possible malignant growth. Caution: Ultrasound examination alone is never sufficient.

Renal tumors should be evaluated by a urologic oncology surgeon familiar with the renal cancer of HLRCC.
Close monitoring of liver function and disease markers such as hemoglobin, iron indices, and whole-blood manganese is required at three-month intervals.

Routine follow up with a neurologist and hepatologist should be provided with repeat assessment of MRI brain, and liver ultrasound and biopsy when clinically indicated (e.g., worsening of liver function) and for monitoring of treatment.

Adverse effects of chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate include hypocalcemia, nephrotoxicity, trace metal and vitamin deficiency, and thrombocytopenia and leukopenia [Lamas et al 2012].

Complete blood count and renal function including urinalysis are assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose. Additionally, the following need to be monitored: trace metal levels including manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium; liver function; electrolytes; calcium, magnesium, and phosphate concentrations; and iron status. Trace metal supplements are provided as needed.

Treatment may need to be discontinued if:

White blood count <3.5x10^9/L

Neutrophils <2.0x10^9/L

Platelets <150x10^9/L

>2+ proteinuria on >1 occasion (and no evidence of infection)

The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent mortality and morbidity in SLC39A14-related early-onset parkinsonism-dystonia, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. The clinical treatment benefit needs to be carefully weighed against occurring adverse effects for each affected individual.

Toxicity of iron supplementation. In order to avoid iron toxicity, serum iron and total iron binding capacity need to be monitored regularly. If serum iron exceeds 80% of total iron binding capacity, iron supplementation should be stopped or reduced.
The following are appropriate:

Pulmonary function testing at intervals of 6-12 months, or guided by patient findings

Reassessment of muscle strength and clinical status annually with a neurologist who can coordinate any additional required services
As chronic pain resulting from altered biomechanics of the shoulder or upper extremity tends to develop during the first one to two years, follow up every six to 12 months after the initial diagnosis is recommended.
Colon cancer. Regular colonoscopy with removal of precancerous polyps reduces the incidence of colon cancer in individuals with Lynch syndrome. A 2009 study of a Finish cohort with high compliance with screening found no increase in mortality for individuals with Lynch syndrome over their mutation-negative relatives, indicating that annual colonoscopy could help with the prevention and detection of colon cancer [Järvinen et al 2009]. In this study four individuals were diagnosed with colon cancer and lymph node metastases: one was diagnosed during baseline colonoscopy; the other three were diagnosed more than two years after their last colonoscopy. Therefore, the current recommendation is colonoscopy every one to two years beginning between ages 20 and 25 years or two to five years before the earliest diagnosis in the family, whichever is earlier [Järvinen et al 2009, Engel et al 2010, NCCN 2013].

In MSH6 and PMS2 heterozygotes the risk for colon cancer is lower; thus colonoscopy screening may be delayed until age 30 years [Senter et al 2008, Baglietto et al 2010].

Note: Colonoscopy is recommended rather than flexible sigmoidoscopy because of the predominance of proximal colon cancers in Lynch syndrome [Lynch & Smyrk 1996].

Endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer surveillance is less well established than that for colon cancer.

Because many endometrial cancers can be diagnosed at early stages on the basis of symptoms, women should be educated about the signs of endometrial cancers.

Currently the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does not recommend any specific screening for endometrial or ovarian cancer [NCCN 2013].

Studies on the effectiveness of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy have had conflicting results. Further studies are needed to determine if the combination of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy detect endometrial cancers at an early age.

In a study of the use of transvaginal ultrasound examination to screen for endometrial cancer, no cancers were detected; however, two cancers were detected on the basis of symptoms manifest during the course of the study [Dove-Edwin et al 2002].

A report from a Finnish cohort found that endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasound every two to three years resulted in the diagnosis of early stage cancers. However, because endometrial cancer often presents with symptoms at an early stage, it was not clear that the screening improved detection [Järvinen et al 2009].

Ovarian cancer. No specific ovarian cancer screening trials have been conducted in women with Lynch syndrome. Of note, screening for ovarian cancer using CA-125 blood tests and transvaginal ultrasound examination has not been effective in other high-risk populations such as women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant [Evans et al 2009].

Gastric and duodenal cancers. Upper endoscopy surveillance can be used to screen for cancers of the stomach and duodenum. Currently the NCCN recommends beginning upper endoscopy with a side-viewing scope and extended duodenoscopy between ages 30 and 35 years and repeating them every three to five years depending on the findings. Those with evidence of chronic inflammation, atrophic gastropathy, and/or intestinal metaplasia would be candidates for more frequent evaluation. Note: Biopsies should be evaluated for H pylori infections so that appropriate treatment can be given as needed [NCCN 2013].

Data regarding the effectiveness of upper endoscopy examination for the early detection of gastric cancer in Lynch syndrome are limited.

One study suggested no benefit from this screening for gastric cancer because of the lack of identifiable precursor lesions [Renkonen-Sinisalo et al 2002].

A study looking at gastric cancer risk in a Dutch study suggested that the level of risk is sufficient to warrant screening; however, since 87% of the cancers occurred after age 45 years, it may be most cost effective to initiate screening at age 45 years [Capelle et al 2010].

Schulmann et al [2005] found that approximately 50% of the small bowel cancers in a cohort with Lynch syndrome were located in the duodenum, suggesting that upper endoscopy may be useful for screening. However, no trials to determine the efficacy of upper endoscopy for screening for duodenal cancers have been conducted.

Distal small bowel. At this time data are limited regarding screening for cancer development in the distal small bowel. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enterography are available for evaluating the small bowel, but at this time there is no recommendation for routine use of these approaches for small bowel screening, although they may be helpful for evaluating symptomatic individuals.

Urinary tract. NCCN recommends consideration of annual urine analysis beginning between age 25 and 30 years [NCCN 2013].

Other cancers. At this time, no specific screening recommendations for other Lynch syndrome associated cancers exist. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow other general population screening guidelines and to seek prompt medical attention for changes in health or persistent symptoms.
Affected individuals should be monitored at regular intervals to detect any clinical complications that may develop, to assess dietary compliance, and to measure plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations. Infants should be monitored monthly for the first six months of life and bimonthly until age one year, then every three months until age three years. Semiannual monitoring through the remainder of childhood and annual monitoring in adolescence and adulthood are indicated. Complications should be promptly addressed with appropriate therapy.

Plasma total homocysteine and methionine concentrations should be monitored in all persons receiving betaine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Betaine treatment).

Vitamin B12 and folate levels should be monitored.

Regular ophthalmology assessments can identify eye complications such as progressive myopia and ectopia lentis and allow for early treatment and prevention of further complications such as retinal detachment.

DXA scans should be performed every three to five years following adolescence to monitor for osteoporosis [Morris et al 2017].
Children with hypophosphatasia should be seen by a pediatric dentist twice yearly, beginning at age one year.

Children with the infantile type of hypophosphatasia are at elevated risk for increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis, and should be monitored for this complication.
ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of potential septal defects, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.
Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured during health maintenance evaluations.

Evaluation for endocrine deficiencies should be undertaken at appropriate intervals and during health maintenance visits.
The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's signs and symptoms and response to preventive treatment. Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness associated with myopathy.

Questionnaires completed by the affected individual may be used to evaluate disease severity without treatment and with treatment.

For those individuals who take acetazolamide the following parameters should be evaluated every three months: complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, uric acid, and liver enzyme levels. Renal ultrasound should be performed annually.
Eyes. Annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error, is indicated.

Skin. Over many years, exposure to the sun of lightly pigmented skin can result in coarse, rough, thickened skin (pachydermia), solar keratoses (premalignant lesions), and skin cancer. Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma can develop. Although skin melanocytes are present in individuals with HPS, melanoma is rare. Examination for these findings should be performed at least annually.

Pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary function testing should be performed annually in adults.

Colitis. Colitis is suspected in those with a history of cramping, increased mucus in the stool, and rectal bleeding; colonoscopy is used to confirm the diagnosis.
There are currently no well-established surveillance guidelines for individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant. Based on an extensive literature review, the authors make the following management recommendations:

Measure serum concentrations of calcium, iPTH, and 25-(OH) vitamin D (to evaluate for possible coexisting vitamin D deficiency as a cause of elevated iPTH levels or unexpectedly “normal” calcium concentrations) every 12 months starting at age five to ten years.

In patients with a history of parathyroid carcinoma who develop a rise in calcium levels, consider the possibility of a new primary parathyroid tumor in addition to recurrence/progression of malignant disease.

Consider periodic parathyroid ultrasound examination for the detection of non-functioning parathyroid carcinoma, which has developed on rare occasion in individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant [Guarnieri et al 2006].

Obtain panoramic x-ray dental imaging with neck shielding at least every five years, in addition to regular dental hygiene maintenance, starting at age ten years. Dental providers should be notified of the presence of a CDC73-related disorder and the need for monitoring for osseous fibromas of the maxilla and mandible.

Monitor for kidney lesions by renal ultrasound examination at least every five years starting at the age of diagnosis. Serum creatinine concentrations should be monitored in those individuals with renal cysts. Individuals with solid lesions should be referred for appropriate subspecialty care.

Starting at reproductive age, women with a CDC73-related disorder should undergo regular gynecologic care (including pelvic examination). Care providers in obstetrics and gynecology should be notified of the risk of uterine tumors. Pelvic ultrasound examination should be obtained in any woman with a menstrual disorder (particularly abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia) with further imaging studies (CT or MRI) as clinically indicated.

The age at which genetic testing and surveillance should begin for at-risk relatives is also not well established.

The authors recommend considering testing and surveillance for primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumors beginning at around age five to ten years, as this is the age of the youngest reported case of hyperparathyroidism and is ten years younger than the earliest reported age of parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis.

The age at onset of kidney lesions is not well described; renal ultrasound examination can be considered at time of diagnosis.

Uterine tumors have only been reported in adults; surveillance can begin at reproductive age.
The feet in particular should be inspected daily for injuries and sources of wear.

Patients should be followed annually by centers with comprehensive care for diabetes and/or CMT.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury;

Regular examinations by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology to identify serious injuries and initiate early treatment;

Annual follow up at a center that fosters comprehensive care and communication between the various subspecialties that are needed for optimal care.
Feet should be inspected at least daily for injuries or sources of wear.
Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist and physiatrist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies to maximize walking ability and reduce symptoms.
Guidelines for surveillance have been developed [Scarpa et al 2011].

Modes of surveillance for complications over time depend, like treatment, on organ system and disease severity. Because all persons with MPS II face the same organ failure issues, with the time of failure being dependent on severity, when and how often to monitor for change cannot be generalized. However, the following studies/evaluations are likely indicated on at least a yearly basis beginning in early to mid-childhood:

Cardiology visit with echocardiogram

Pulmonary clinic visit with pulmonary function testing

Audiogram

Eye examination, including examination through a dilated pupil to view the optic disc

Developmental assessment

Neurologic examination

The following are appropriate at baseline and/or when symptoms/age dictates:

Sleep study for obstructive sleep apnea

NCV study for evidence of carpal tunnel syndrome

Head/neck MRI to document ventricular size and cervicomedullary narrowing

Opening pressure on lumbar puncture

Orthopedic evaluation to monitor hip disease
Regular evaluations should be made to address the appearance and severity of chorea, rigidity, gait problems, depression, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline [Anderson & Marshall 2005, Skirton 2005].

The Behavior Observation Scale Huntington (BOSH) is a scale developed for the rapid and longitudinal assessment of functional abilities of persons with HD in a nursing home environment [Timman et al 2005]. For longitudinal studies, the Unified HD Rating Scale is used (UHDRS) [Huntington Study Group 1996, Siesling et al 1998, Youssov et al 2013]. The total functional capacity (TFC) scale is used to describe the progression of HD, the patient level of functioning, and requirements for additional caregiver aid (TFC scale).
Individuals with known aHUS. Measure serum concentration of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, and C4, and haptoglobin:

Every month in the first year after an aHUS episode, then every three to six months in the following years, particularly for persons with normal renal function or chronic renal insufficiency as they are at risk for relapse. Note: Individuals with ESRD usually do not relapse.

Every two weeks for those rare individuals with homozygous CFH pathogenic variants that result in very low or undetectable levels of the CFH protein

Note: The proposed time intervals for checking hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin are suggestions [Authors, personal observation]; each center may follow different guidelines based on their own experience.
For individuals with HCM who do not currently meet criteria for placement of an ICD for primary prevention, risk for SCD should be reassessed approximately every 12-24 months (or sooner if any clinical parameters change) [Gersh et al 2011].

For relatives at risk for HCM. Screening guidelines for HCM have been proposed for the longitudinal evaluation of clinically unaffected at-risk family members (see Table 2). Note that the following screening guidelines apply both to relatives in whom a pathogenic variant has been identified and to asymptomatic first-degree relatives (adults and children) of an individual with primary HCM in whom a pathogenic variant has not been identified.

Because penetrance of diagnostic features (i.e., LVH) is age dependent, a single unremarkable evaluation does not exclude the possibility of future development of HCM. Diagnostic clinical manifestations are often not present in infancy/early childhood; they commonly develop during adolescence and early adulthood, but may also develop late in life. Therefore, longitudinal follow up is required at a frequency based on the individual’s age and family history, and physician discretion. Screening should be performed in response to any symptoms that develop or any change in clinical status.

Table 2. 

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Age

Screening Guideline

<12 yrs

Optional unless any of the following are present:

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complicationsCompetitive athlete in intense training programSymptomsOther clinical findings that suggest early LVH

12-18 yrs

Repeat evaluation every 12-18 months

>18-21 yrs

Repeat evaluation every ≤5 years or in response to any change in symptomsMore frequent evaluation if the family has late-onset LVH or HCM-related complications

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complications

Competitive athlete in intense training program

Symptoms

Other clinical findings that suggest early LVH

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]
Measure hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine annually starting at the time of diagnosis.
The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's clinical features and the response to preventive treatment.

During prophylactic treatment, measure serum potassium concentration twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia.

Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness.

Permanent weakness requires continuous medication, eg. with a thiazide diuretic, and MRI of the leg muscles once every one to three years. During treatment, serum potassium concentration should be measured twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia. The value should be between 3.0 and 3.5 mmol/L.

Annual monitoring of thyroid function is appropriate.
Children. Guidelines for the management of children have been published by multiple national and international organizations [Daniels et al 2008, DeMott et al 2008, Descamps et al 2011, Martin et al 2013] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full texts).

A child who has a family history of FH or of premature CAD, who is heterozygous for the FH pathogenic variant in his or her family, or who has an elevated serum cholesterol concentration should have lipid levels checked starting as early as age two years [Goldberg et al 2011]. It is reasonable to check a non-fasting lipid level first and, if borderline, to follow with measurement of LDL-C. Some guidelines state that elevation of two consecutive measures of LDL-C are needed to confirm a diagnosis of FH [Martin et al 2013].

An LDL-C level of >130 mg/dL (>3.4 mmol/L) in a child is suspicious for FH and an LDL of >160 mg/dL (>4.1 mmol/L) is relatively specific for FH.

During treatment, individuals of any age with:

FH should have lipid levels monitored as recommended;

HoFH should be monitored with various imaging modalities (including echocardiogram, CT angiogram, and cardiac catheterization) as recommended [Raal & Santos 2012].
Surveillance includes periodic:

Neurologic evaluation to identify neurologic complications;

Evaluation by a physiatrist to aid with assistive devices as needed;

Eye examination if cataracts were not identified in the neonatal period.
Height, weight, and head circumference should be monitored using achondroplasia-standardized growth curves.

Because an increased prevalence of mild-to-moderate intellectual disability and/or learning disabilities in children with hypochondroplasia appears likely, developmental milestones should be followed closely during early childhood and a timely referral to an appropriate professional made if there are any indications of learning difficulties during school-age years.

Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression should be performed at routine well-child visits, with referral to a pediatric neurologist if needed.

History for evidence of sleep apnea should be taken at routine visits, with formal sleep study obtained when indicated.

MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum is indicated if there is evidence of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression or central sleep apnea.

Affected individuals should be evaluated for emerging leg bowing at routine visits, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking.

Social adjustment should be monitored.
No schedule for eye examinations has been established, but the following has been suggested [Holmström & Thoren 2000]:

Monthly until age three to four months

Every three months between ages four months and one year

Every six months between ages one and three years

Annually after age three years

Neurologic function should be assessed at routine visits with a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, or developmental pediatrician.

Ongoing evaluation by a pedodontist or dentist is appropriate.
Routine monitoring:

For feeding difficulties and assessment of diet to assure that the risk of aspiration is reduced

For early detection and treatment of hip dislocation and/or spine deformities
Annual routine follow-up with the multidisciplinary team is recommended. Affected individuals should be screened for signs and symptoms of cardiac dysfunction, as two affected siblings with cardiomyopathy have been reported [Chai et al 2011]. Affected individuals should also be evaluated for respiratory dysfunction, with appropriate investigations and treatment as needed.
At periodic intervals:

Echocardiogram and EKG to monitor for evidence of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function studies

Alkaline phosphatase, skeletal x-rays, and bone scans for monitoring of the PDB if symptomatic and for monitoring of therapy

Monitoring of behavior and mental status
No standard tests allow prediction of the triggering of an ANE event or progression of an event once one occurs.

In intervals between ANE events neurologic function is stable. Follow-up evaluations focus on developmental progression and addressing functional deficits related to neurologic damage. In the absence of other risks for seizures, anticonvulsant therapy started during an ANE event can often be discontinued.
Surveillance includes:

Frequent evaluations by an endocrinologist for management of adrenal insufficiency and growth hormone therapy;

Evaluation by an orthopedist as needed to monitor skeletal complications such as scoliosis, tibial/femoral bowing, or pain associated with the skeletal dysplasia;

Neurologic follow up as needed for evaluation of developmental delay and/or hypotonia.
Periodic assessment of vision and hearing of nonverbal children is indicated as needed to determine the level of sensory deficits.
No guidelines regarding surveillance of persons with AIP-related FIPA have been established. The following recommendations are based on the authors’ personal experience with more than 200 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic AIP-related FIPA.

Persons with AIP-related FIPA who have had a pituitary adenoma. The following are recommended to monitor for recurrence of the previous adenoma and development of new adenomas.

Yearly clinical assessment and basal pituitary function (IGF-1, spot GH, prolactin, LH/FSH, estradiol/testosterone, TSH, fT4, morning cortisol) and if necessary dynamic testing (e.g., glucose tolerance test, insulin tolerance test) to evaluate for hormone excess or deficiency

Repeat pituitary MRI. Note: Frequency depends on clinical status, previous extent of the tumor, and treatment modality.

Persons with acromegaly. Follow established guidelines regarding clinical monitoring for related complications including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and colon cancer.

Persons with hypogonadism. Follow established guidelines. Because long-standing untreated hypogonadism may result in the early onset of osteoporosis, bone density needs to be assessed at baseline and if necessary monitored with DEXA scanning.

Persons with an AIP pathogenic variant and no history of pituitary adenomas. Recommendations follow. Note, however, that long-term experience with asymptomatic AIP heterozygotes is limited; more data are needed to develop appropriate future guidelines.

In a family in which an AIP pathogenic variant has been identified, relatives who have the family-specific AIP pathogenic variant or who have not been tested:

Adults

Baseline. Clinical assessment, pituitary function tests (IGF-1, prolactin, estradiol/testosterone, LH, FSH, and fT4), and pituitary MRI

Thereafter

Perform annual clinical assessment and pituitary function tests.

Consider repeating a pituitary MRI every five years if clinical findings and pituitary function tests remain normal.

Consider discontinuing monitoring about age 50 years, after which the likelihood of developing new pituitary adenomas is low.

Children

Yearly beginning at age four years

Measure height and weight with calculation of height velocity. Document pubertal development, Tanner stages

Perform pituitary function tests (as for adults).

Perform baseline pituitary MRI at about age ten years.

Consider repeating the pituitary MRI every five years if clinical and pituitary function tests remain normal.
Appropriate surveillance includes periodic evaluation of complete blood count, thyroid function, glucose tolerance, kidney function (measurement of serum concentration of BUN, creatinine), and liver function (measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT) for evidence of autoimmune disease.
Periodic assessment by the multidisciplinary team with particular attention to the following:

Nutritional status

Neurologic status including evaluation of dosages of antiepileptic drugs and their side effects

Degree of spasticity and related complications, including scoliosis

Periodic sleep studies
Regular evaluation by a rehabilitation specialist may identify potentially helpful interventions.
Whenever hepatic cirrhosis is identified, monitoring for hepatocellular cancer is recommended. Most hepatologists propose twice-yearly screening with abdominal ultrasound examination and serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration [Tavill 2001].
Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects, and doses altered as needed. Because dose adjustment is especially important in growing children, evaluation is appropriate every three to six months during rapid growth phases.

Regular, periodic evaluation of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications is indicated.
Because no uniformly reliable distinguishing characteristics allow prediction of the complications that may develop in an infant or young child with Joubert syndrome, a number of annual evaluations are recommended (see also Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site):

Pediatric and neurologic evaluation and monitoring of growth, sexual maturation, breathing (including apnea symptoms), and motor function

Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation and testing, as appropriate

Ophthalmologic evaluation for visual acuity, tracking ability, and development of retinal dystrophy

Abdominal ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible liver and kidney abnormalities

Liver function tests

Evaluation of renal function: measurement of blood pressure, serum concentrations of BUN and creatinine, CBC, and assessment of first-morning void urinalysis
Neurologic follow-up every six to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.
For individuals with JPS who have undergone surgical resection of bowel, endoscopic follow up is required regardless of the surgical procedure because of the high rate of subsequent development of polyps in the rectum and the pouch [Oncel et al 2005].

For individuals with an SMAD4 or BMPR1A pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing, individuals with a clinical diagnosis of JPS, or individuals with a family history of JPS who have not undergone molecular genetic testing or whose molecular genetic test results were uninformative [Howe et al 1998a] (see NCCN guidelines):

Monitor for rectal bleeding and/or anemia, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color. These symptoms may warrant additional screening.

CBC, colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy screening should begin in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier.

If negative, screening should be repeated in three years.

If only one or a few polyps are identified, the polyps should be removed. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

If many polyps are identified, removal of most of the colon or stomach may be necessary. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume.

In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant, predictive molecular genetic testing may be appropriate before age 15 years because surveillance for potential complications of HHT begins in early childhood [Gallione et al 2004]. Until the frequency and spectrum of HHT complications in JPS/HHT syndrome are known, it may be appropriate to follow the HHT surveillance guidelines for individuals with JPS/HHT syndrome or a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant.

Precautionary screening for individuals at risk for JPS who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant was previously recommended [Howe et al 1998a]; however, this screening is unnecessary if molecular genetic testing was performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory. Family members who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be screened for colon cancer as recommended for the normal U.S. population.

For surveillance recommendations for individuals with HHT, see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
The following are recommended for individuals with KS:

Frequent monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference (at each well-child visit and, at a minimum, yearly)

Evaluation of developmental milestones at each well child visit; referral for formal developmental evaluation if delays are identified

Following prepubertal girls expectantly for possible premature thelarche, so that the healthcare provider can reassure parents if this finding becomes apparent

Annual monitoring of vision

Annual hearing evaluation

Expectant monitoring for otitis media in children. An ear examination is indicated at all well-child visits; prompt evaluation for all children with symptoms suggestive of otitis media.

Regular follow up by an immunologist for those with abnormal immunologic studies or those who have recurrent infections
The following should be assessed annually:

Developmental progress

Ophthalmologic conditions such as amblyopia (which develops in a majority of patients with SBBYSS)

Thyroid function

Cardiac function if malformations are present

Renal function if hydronephrosis or multiple renal cysts are present

Contractures and/or scoliosis
Table 5. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Growth

Evaluation of nutritional status & growth

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation to assess for evidence of decreased lacrimation & increased risk for corneal dryness

At least annually

ENT/Mouth

Evaluation of feeding difficulties

Every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Respiratory

Sleep study (if history of sleep disturbance)

Pulmonary evaluation every 6 months until age 2 years, then annually

Musculoskeletal

Evaluate for scoliosis

At least annually

Endocrine

Monitor serum glucose levels to monitor for hypoglycemia secondary to poor feeding & increased risk for hyperinsulinemia

Every 6 months until age 2 years

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome
BFNE. EEG at onset, age three, 12, and 24 months is recommended. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

BFIE. EEG at onset, 12, 24, and 36 months is recommended. The EEG at 36 months should be normal.
Appropriate measures include:

Strength testing (annually)

Pulmonary function tests (annually in advanced cases)
Screen for premalignant keratoses and early squamous cell carcinomas starting in adolescence and repeat annually.
Cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities should be monitored as needed.
Children of both sexes with findings suggestive of IGD (e.g., microphallus, anosmia) should be monitored at regular intervals from age 11 years onwards with the following:

Assessment of sexual maturation by Tanner staging (Table 1)

Measurement of serum concentrations of LH, FSH, and total testosterone (T) in males and estradiol (E2) in females

Bone age determinations

In individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of IGD, serum sex steroid levels (to guide optimal hormone replacement) and bone mineral density should be monitored at regular intervals.
The following should be assessed at least annually:

Growth

Developmental progress

Vision, hearing

Contractures and/or scoliosis
Surveillance includes the following:

ECG and echocardiogram every six to 12 months to monitor cardiac conduction and contractility

Yearly audiometry and endocrinologic evaluation
Evaluation by a child neurologist at regular intervals is appropriate.
Clinical and psychosocial evaluation should be performed at three- to six-month intervals throughout the teen years.
No standard guidelines for the surveillance of individuals with LAL deficiency have been developed. The following screening practices can be considered to monitor for the most common symptoms associated with CESD.

Children

Special attention should be paid to growth and nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or failure to thrive could indicate malabsorption.

Consider monitoring fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes every six months.

Adults with CESD should be evaluated every six to 12 months depending on disease severity.

Special attention should be paid to nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or weight loss could indicate malabsorption.

Monitor routinely fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes.

Individuals with severe liver disease should be evaluated for esophageal varices by upper endoscopy every three years.

Individuals with hepatosplenomegaly should be monitored and treated for thrombocytopenia to prevent bleeding complications.

Both children and adults. Obtain serial liver and spleen imaging to monitor for hepatosplenic volume and to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma which has arisen in the setting of advanced cirrhosis [Riva et al 2008]. Consensus on optimal screening protocols has not been published.
LBSL is very slowly progressive in most cases. Annual clinical evaluations suffice. In case of rapid worsening more frequent evaluations are appropriate. Follow-up MRI can be performed once every few years. Only in severe, early-onset cases are more frequent evaluations necessary.
Affected individuals should be periodically seen for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and when residual vision is present, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma, or cataract.

Rarely, vision appears to improve beyond expectations; in such cases, a repeat ERG is indicated.
Consider periodic evaluation by a clinical geneticist to discuss manifestations associated with disorders of the Ras/MAPK pathway that may eventually be associated with Legius syndrome

Routine screening for developmental delays and behavioral and learning problems is appropriate.

Although vascular abnormalities have been reported in a few individuals with Legius syndrome, hypertension has not been reported. However, given the prevalence of vascular abnormalities and hypertension in NF1, it would seem appropriate to have regular blood pressure monitoring at each physician visit.
Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new manifestations. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, audiologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.
The following are appropriate:

Annual ophthalmologic examination for those with residual vision given the predisposition to glaucoma and high hyperopia from foreshortening of the globe

Monitoring of renal function (BUN, creatinine, and urine analysis) in those with known renal/ureteral anomalies

Developmental assessments performed with each well-child visit as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics. More frequent and specialized assessments are tailored to each child if development is not on track.

Lifelong case management to help affected individuals gain access to social services and assistive devices for the blind
If anomalies are found in any system, periodic follow up should be planned and lifelong monitoring may be necessary, especially of cardiovascular abnormalities.

For hearing loss, twice-yearly examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment and repeat audiometry to confirm the stability of the hearing loss is recommended.

Surveillance for intellectual and developmental disabilities as per routine pediatric care is of particular importance due to the higher prevalence of these issues in individuals with NSML.

Surveillance for growth delay as per routine pediatric care is important due to the higher prevalence of poor linear growth in affected children.
Standard surveillance includes the following:

Routine measurement of weight and height to assess growth and nutritional status

Physical examination and/or serial x-rays of the hips and spine to monitor for orthopedic complications

Routine history re signs and symptoms of seizures

Certain disorders require specialized surveillance, for example monitoring for the development of hydrocephalus in Alexander disease.
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Monitoring of respiratory function

Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those LGMD types known to have cardiac involvement
The following are appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, such as foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures

Referral for pulmonary evaluation (eventually including pulmonary function tests) when there are complaints of excessive daytime somnolence, non-restorative sleep, early morning headache [Narayanaswami et al 2014]. Measurement of forced vital capacity should be made in sitting and supine position.

Examination of cardiac function in the advanced stage of disease (although it is not frequently compromised) [Dirik et al 2001, Okere et al 2013].
Ongoing surveillance of asymptomatic individuals harboring LHON-causing mtDNA variants is not necessary; however, they should be advised to seek immediate medical attention should they experience any visual disturbance.

The frequency of follow-up for affected individuals varies depending on the individual’s personal circumstances and the availability of healthcare locally.
Regular physical examination for evidence of infection and control of skin involvement is appropriate; frequency depends on the severity. In adults, regular surveillance for skin cancer is appropriate (cases with atypical melanocytic nevi, malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinoma have been reported) [Fernandes et al 2010, Natsuga et al 2011].
Clinicians and families need to be aware that currently no monitoring regimens have been definitively proven as beneficial for children or adults with germline TP53 pathogenic variants. Nonetheless, this is an important area of ongoing investigation.

The following is recommended:

Children and adults should undergo comprehensive annual physical examination including careful skin and neurologic examinations. Clinicians should be aware of the high risks for rare, early-onset cancers and also for second malignancies in cancer survivors [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should pay close attention to any lingering symptoms and illnesses, particularly headaches, bone pain, or abdominal discomfort. When present, the individual should see a physician promptly for evaluation [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

Women should undergo breast cancer monitoring, with annual breast MRI and twice-yearly clinical breast examination beginning at age 20-25 years. The use of mammograms has been controversial because of radiation exposure and limited sensitivity. When included, annual mammograms should alternate with breast MRI, with one modality every six months [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012].

The following is suggested:

Adults should consider routine screening for colorectal cancer with colonoscopy every two to three years beginning no later than age 25 years [NCCN 2012].

Individuals should consider organ-targeted surveillance based on the pattern of cancer observed in their family [NCCN 2012].

In adults with LFS, a pilot trial of screening [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scans detected tumors in three of 15 individuals. However, significant concerns were raised regarding the potential adverse consequences of the radiation exposure associated with PET/CT scans [Masciari et al 2008]. For this reason, attention has shifted to the utilization of whole-body MRI for adults with TP53 pathogenic variants.

Several groups have begun to utilize an intensive screening strategy including rapid whole-body MRI, brain MRI, abdominal ultrasound examination, and biochemical markers of adrenal cortical function. Preliminary data suggest that such a surveillance protocol may improve survival of individuals with LFS through presymptomatic detection of tumors [Villani et al 2011]. However, further prospective studies are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of this protocol in adults and children with LFS.

Individuals with LFS have been surveyed regarding their attitudes toward cancer surveillance, given its lack of known clinical benefit. Most individuals believed in the value of surveillance to detect tumors at an early stage and also reported psychological benefits (specifically, a sense of control and security) associated with participation in a regular surveillance program [Lammens et al 2010b].
The following are appropriate:

Routine follow up of children to monitor general health as well as psychomotor, emotional, and cognitive development

Monitoring of the airway and vocal cords by an otolaryngologist
No surveillance guidelines for LMS have been published.

Ongoing monitoring by the appropriate subspecialists for neurologic, developmental, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, genitourinary, and/or gastrointestinal issues is indicated.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Monitor plasma uric acid concentration and urinary excretion of oxypurines.

Review medical history for signs or symptoms of silent or active renal stones.

Monitor affected individuals for early signs of self-injury.
All individuals with LDS require echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta. The frequency of MRA or CTA evaluations should be tailored to clinical findings.

Individuals with cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.
Eye evaluations should be done at regular intervals, depending on the type and severity of abnormality. No formal guidelines exist. Because approximately 50% of males either present with glaucoma or develop glaucoma in time, regardless of cataract surgery, intraocular pressure should be monitored at least every six months life-long. Presence of clinical findings suggestive of increased intraocular pressure (e.g., excessive tearing, eye rubbing, change in the clarity/transparency of the cornea) warrant prompt evaluation.

Kidney function should be assessed at least yearly with measurement of serum concentrations of electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, intact parathyroid hormone, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.

If the patient has Fanconi syndrome requiring therapy with supplemental bicarbonate or citrate, serum concentrations of phosphate or calcitriol should be measured every three to six months or more often after dose changes.

BUN and serum creatinine are appropriate screening tests to detect the onset of chronic renal failure and to monitor its progression.

Urinalysis and random urine protein, calcium, and creatinine are useful to follow proteinuria and hypercalciuria.

If the patient has renal Fanconi syndrome and bone disease, radiographs of the long bones and growth plates should be obtained at regular intervals as needed, but no more than every six months.

Growth should be monitored regularly with height/length and weight plotted on growth charts for age. Height/length and weight should be measured more frequently in infants (every 2-3 months) than in older children and adolescents who are still growing (every 3-6 months). If patients are treated with growth hormone, growth assessment every three months is indicated.

Developmental progress should be assessed and the educational plan updated twice yearly for the first three years and annually after that. Any regression in abilities should be investigated with high-resolution imaging studies of the central nervous system.

Scoliosis and joint problems should be monitored as part of a routine annual physical examination.

Dental examinations should be performed twice a year by a pediatric dentist experienced in treating children with developmental delay.
Individuals with LPI should be referred for follow-up to physicians with expertise in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism. The age of the patient and the severity of the clinical features determine the frequency of clinical visits and monitoring.

Monitoring should include the following:

Plasma concentrations of amino acids to identify deficiencies of essential amino acids induced by the protein-restricted diet (similar to that used in urea cycle disorders)

Attention to early signs of hyperammonemia including lethargy, nausea, vomiting, and poor feeding in young children, and headache and mood changes in older children

Fasting and postprandial blood ammonia concentrations

Urinary orotic acid excretion

Evaluation of renal function

Attention to early clinical signs of lung involvement

Serum concentrations of LDH and ferritin

The development of a multiorgan pathology in LPI requires careful surveillance of several complications including lung and renal diseases and osteoporosis. No specific guidelines have been proposed. Therefore, a tailored approach is necessary for the follow-up of a specific complication.
Plasma triglyceride levels need to be followed over time to evaluate the affected individual’s success in following the very low-fat dietary recommendations. When the triglyceride level is above 1000 mg/dL, a fasting sample is not required for this evaluation. Other components of the lipid profile do not need to be routinely measured.

Affected individuals who develop abdominal pain need to contact their physician.
Annual neurologic examination should assess gait, tremor, rigidity, cognition, and mood.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of pulmonary function and oxygenation, at least yearly, or more frequently if indicated clinically

Repeat imaging of:

Gastrointestinal tract

Urinary tract

Cardiovascular system
The growth of a child with SHOX deficiency should be monitored every six months.
Click here (pdf) for an overview of the common medical and surgical management recommendations for children with craniofacial microsomia (Adapted from Birgfeld & Heike [2012], published with permission from Semin Plast Surg).
The following are appropriate:

Routine CBC to determine if red blood cell transfusion is necessary

Regular pediatric care
Individuals with Biallelic Germline 

In the US-based National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines [NCCN 2012]:

Pan colonoscopy should be performed every one to two years beginning at age 25-30 years. Following surgery, endoscopy of any remaining colon or rectum should be performed every one to two years.

Upper endoscopy and side viewing duodenoscopy should be performed every three to five years beginning at age 30-35 years.

At this time there is no consensus regarding screening intervals for thyroid abnormalities [LaGuardia et al 2011].

Regarding extraintestinal malignancies, to date no specific surveillance beyond existing protocols that are offered to the general population in most Western countries is recommended.

In Europe:

Recommended ages at which screening should begin differ based on the consensus meeting in Mallorca [Vasen et al 2008] (full text; registration or institutional access required):

Pan colonoscopy beginning at age 18-20 years

Upper endoscopy with side viewing duodenoscopy beginning at age 25-30 years

Recommended intervals between screenings depend on disease severity [Spigelman et al 1989]

Individuals Heterozygous for a Germline 

NCCN guidelines do not propose specific screening recommendations for individuals heterozygous for a germline MUTYH pathogenic variant.

Available data suggest that heterozygous relatives of individuals with MAP have a two- or at most threefold increase in their risk for colorectal cancer at an age similar to that in the general population (see Clinical Description, MUTYH heterozygotes). Thus, they are expected to benefit from population screening measures or could be offered average moderate-risk colorectal screening based on their family history [Jones et al 2009].
Eye. An annual ophthalmologic examination should include a specific assessment for glaucoma and cataracts.

Skeletal. Individuals with severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.

Cardiovascular. Echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta is indicated:

Yearly examinations when the aortic dimension is relatively small and the rate of aortic dilation is relatively slow

More frequent examinations when the aortic root diameter exceeds approximately 4.5 centimeters in adults, the rate of aortic dilation exceeds approximately 0.5 cm per year, and significant aortic regurgitation is present

More frequent evaluations by a cardiologist are indicated with severe or progressive valve or ventricular dysfunction or with documented or suspected arrhythmia.

All individuals with Marfan syndrome should begin intermittent surveillance of the entire aorta with CT or MRA scans in young adulthood. Such imaging should be performed at least annually in anyone with a history of aortic root replacement or dissection.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Periodic neurodevelopmental and behavioral evaluations to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems;

Periodic reevaluations by a clinical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information regarding MBD5 haploinsufficiency.
A metabolic specialist should be consulted immediately during intercurrent illness, especially when it involves fever and/or poor calorie in-/uptake.

During the first months of life, monthly visits should be considered to ensure that families understand and are comfortable with treatment while the infant is otherwise well. A dietician should be involved to ensure proper nutrition in terms of quality and quantity.

The frequency of routine follow-up visits is individualized based on comfort level of the patients, families, and health care providers.
Fibrous Dysplasia

Individuals with craniofacial FD should have yearly vision and hearing evaluations, and periodic computed tomography of the skull.

Individuals with spine FD should be monitored closely for progressive scoliosis.

Radiographs should be performed periodically to evaluate new or worsening symptoms and to provide additional information about FD anatomy and bone quality.

Phosphorus levels should be checked periodically to monitor for the development of FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia.

25-hydroxyvitamin D levels should be checked periodically as part of routine bone health surveillance.

Endocrinopathies

Precocious puberty. All children should be monitored for growth acceleration and other clinical signs of precocious puberty.

Thyroid

Thyroid function tests should be monitored routinely in all children younger than age five years. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Individuals with abnormalities on ultrasound examination but normal thyroid function tests should continue to have laboratory testing periodically throughout childhood, as the development of frank hyperthyroidism may occur later. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Patients who retain abnormal thyroid tissue following thyroid surgery should be monitored with regular physical examination and periodic thyroid ultrasound examination because of the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth.

Testicular lesions likely have low potential for malignant transformation [Boyce et al 2012]; however, it is prudent to monitor all males with regular physical examinations and testicular ultrasound examinations. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys.

Growth hormone excess. See Growth Hormone Excess Evaluation:

All children should be monitored for growth acceleration.

Patients treated medically with octreotide should be monitored for gallbladder disease, and with those treated with pegvisomant should be monitored for hepatotoxicity.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Serum phosphorus levels should be monitored routinely in all patients.

Hypercortisolism

Routine biochemical surveillance is not indicated; however, all infants should be monitored for clinical signs of hypercortisolism.

Patients with a history of Cushing syndrome that has spontaneously resolved should be monitored for late-appearing adrenal insufficiency.

Other

GI. See Gastrointestinal Management (pdf).
Annually, starting at the time of diagnosis and continuing until chronic kidney disease (CKD) Stage 3:

Hemoglobin concentration

Serum concentrations of uric acid and creatinine

Blood pressure

After CKD Stage 3, follow up as determined by the treating nephrologist is appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Measurement of serum creatinine concentration at least annually in affected individuals, and more frequently in those with severe disease

Measurement of serum uric acid concentration at least annually
Early recognition and treatment of cardiac problems and seizures is important, as these potential complications may be severe and appear to cause premature death [Danek et al 2001a].

If no pathologic findings are identified at initial evaluation, cardiac examinations (Holter ECG and echocardiography) should be repeated every two to three years.

In the case of suspected epilepsy, EEG should be performed. If AED treatment is indicated, medication-specific laboratory parameters and serum concentrations should be followed.

One individual with MLS developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis; thus, serum CK concentrations should be carefully monitored, in particular if excessive movement disorders are present or if neuroleptic medications are being used [Jung & Brandner 2002].
Standards of care have been reviewed recently [Wang et al 2010] (full text).

Early-onset LAMA2 MD

At least biannual evaluations during the first five years by a nutritionist and gastroenterologist to monitor weight gain and to identify early recurrent aspiration

At least annual follow up with a pulmonologist to assess respiratory function. After age four to six years: annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of forced vital capacity (FVC).

Annual measurement of FVC to allow trending of FVC

Annual evaluation of strength and joint range of motion by a physical therapist

At least annual evaluation of the spine by an orthopedist. Note: (1) More frequent evaluations are warranted during periods of rapid growth, loss of function, and/or progression of deformities. (2) Annual lateral spinal x-rays (in addition to the standard anterior-posterior x-rays) can be used to evaluate the anterior posterior intra-thoracic cavity diameter; however, if respiratory function declines rapidly without known cause or without prior spinal surgery, a CT may be needed.

Cardiac monitoring:

In the absence of symptoms, evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram at age five years, ten years, and then every two years

In patients with severe respiratory insufficiency on mechanical ventilation, annual echocardiography (required)

In patients reporting palpitations, increased fatigue, or loss of consciousness without a clear neurologic origin, cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor and echocardiogram (recommended)

Pre-surgical cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor, echocardiogram, and a dopamine test of cardiac function

Note: The brain MRI findings seen in both complete and partial laminin α2 deficiency do not need to be followed with serial scans over time [Geranmayeh et al 2010].

Late-onset LAMA2 MD

Respiratory. Monitor for respiratory insufficiency with serial pulmonary function tests.

Orthopedic. Monitor with frequent spinal examinations to detect scoliosis and assess bone health.

Neurologic. Monitor to detect and treat seizures.
Close assessment/monitoring of neurocognitive development and developmental milestones are recommended during childhood for all children who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion, with referral to early intervention programs if required.

Medical surveillance for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental assessments

Monitoring of specific identified medical issues
Periodic:

Developmental evaluations because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and other behavioral features

Monitoring of cardiac, renal, urologic, and/or dental abnormalities, as needed

Reevaluation by a medical geneticist who can apprise the family of new recommendations for monitoring for medical or mental health concerns.
Renal structure/function

Renal ultrasound examination to monitor for kidney cysts 12 months after establishing the diagnosis, then every two to three years in childhood/adolescence and every three to five years in adulthood. If an abnormality is detected, more frequent ultrasound examinations may be warranted.

Periodic monitoring of renal function; serum concentration of magnesium, potassium, uric acid; and possibly urine magnesium and creatinine, preferably under the guidance of a nephrologist. Annual or more frequent monitoring may be advised for patients who have laboratory findings suggesting renal impairment, are taking potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), or have structural renal abnormalities [Verbitsky et al 2015]

MODY5

HgbA1C annually

Patients and families should be educated on how to monitor for the clinical signs and symptoms of diabetes mellitus (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss [sometimes with polyphagia], fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and blurred vision) in order to promote early diagnosis and treatment.

Note: Endocrinology consultations as indicated depending on an individual’s clinical manifestations

Psychomotor development. Routine monitoring through early childhood. A full neuropsychological evaluation is indicated for children who experience difficulty with school.

Other. Audiologic and ophthalmological evaluations on a regular basis
The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care

Specialized neurologic care for individuals with epilepsy

Ophthalmologic examinations at routine intervals due to increased risk for hypermetropia and strabismus

Monitoring for spine deformities

Monitoring as needed of cardiac and renal/urologic abnormalities
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Routine pediatric care

Routine developmental and learning assessments

Monitoring of any specific medical issues that are identified
Continued assessment of:

Feeding and nutrition

Developmental milestones

Cognitive development

Possible psychiatric manifestations
The following recommended surveillance is the same as that for Gorlin syndrome (see Gorlin Syndrome).

Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus.

Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computer tomography (CT) should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity.

Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts.

Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months.

While there are currently no published guidelines regarding monitoring for intraabdominal embryonal tumors in individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion, 12% of the published cases have been diagnosed with Wilms tumor. Thus regular abdominal ultrasound for Wilms tumor, similar to surveillance for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, is recommended for individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion until disproven otherwise.
Follow-up evaluations should be performed every three to four months to ensure effective seizure control and monitor for changes in clinical findings.
The following should be monitored from early childhood:

Developmental progress

Neurologic features, with special attention to the onset of spasticity

Onset and frequency of seizures and response to antiepileptic medications

Number and type of infections

Autistic-like features

Gastrointestinal symptoms
Surveillance includes neurologic and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings.
Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Annual ophthalmologic, cardiologic (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.
Routine surveillance using biochemical testing and imaging is recommended for asymptomatic individuals with an MEN1 pathogenic variant and others at risk for MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (i.e., those known to have MEN1 syndrome and those with an affected parent who have not undergone molecular genetic testing); surveillance should begin in early childhood and continue for life. Early detection and treatment of the potentially malignant neuroendocrine tumors should reduce the morbidity and mortality of MEN1 syndrome. Such screening can detect the onset of the disease about ten years before symptoms develop, thereby providing an opportunity for earlier treatment [Bassett et al 1998].

MEN1 Minimal Surveillance Program 

For individuals known to have MEN1 syndrome or a family-specific pathogenic variant in MEN1 2, 3

Biochemical investigations

Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin, IGF-1, fasting glucose and insulin from age five years 2

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration, chromogranin–A, pancreatic polypeptide, glucagon, vasocative intestinal peptide for other pancreatic NET from age eight years 2

Fasting serum gastrin concentration from age 20 years 2

To be considered: fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH

Imaging

Every three to five years beginning at the specified age; the interval depending on whether there is biochemical evidence of a neoplasia and/or signs and symptoms of an MEN1-related tumor 2:

Head MRI from age five years 2

Abdominal CT or MRI from age 20 years 2

To be considered: yearly chest CT, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) octreotide scan

Notes:

1. Brandi et al [2001], Thakker et al [2012]

2. According to the International Guidelines for Diagnosis and Therapy of MEN Type 1 and Type 2 [Brandi et al 2001], and Clinical Practice Guidelines for MEN Type 1 [Thakker et al 2012]

3. Can be modified according to clinical suspicion and/or findings in an individual

For individuals at 50% risk of having MEN1 syndrome in whom genetic status is unknown

Biochemical investigations. Yearly, beginning at the specified age:

Serum concentration of prolactin from age five years

Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration from age ten years

Fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH from age ten years

Fasting serum gastrin concentration if individual has symptoms of ZES (reflux or diarrhea) from age 20 years
MTC. Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with MTC who have undergone total thyroidectomy and neck nodal dissections have recurrent disease [Cohen & Moley 2003]. Furthermore, thyroid glands removed from individuals with a RET pathogenic variant who had normal plasma calcitonin concentrations have been found to contain MTC [Skinner et al 1996]. Therefore, continued monitoring for residual or recurrent MTC is indicated after thyroidectomy, even if thyroidectomy is performed prior to biochemical evidence of disease.

The screening protocol for MTC after prophylactic thyroidectomy is an annual measurement of serum calcitonin [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. More frequent follow up is recommended for those with residual disease.

Hypoparathyroidism. All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy and autotransplantation of the parathyroids need monitoring for possible hypoparathyroidism.

Pheochromocytoma. For individuals whose initial screening results are negative for pheochromocytoma, annual biochemical screening is recommended, followed by MRI and/or CT if the biochemical results are abnormal [Pacak et al 2005, American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Women with MEN 2 should be screened for pheochromocytoma prior to a planned pregnancy, or as early as possible during an unplanned pregnancy [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. Other screening studies, such as scintigraphy or positron emission tomography, may be warranted in some individuals.

MEN 2A. Annual biochemical screening beginning at age eight years has been recommended for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634 and at age 20 years for a pathogenic variant in all other codons [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Screening as for MEN 2A is indicated, as not all families classified as FMTC are MTC-only [Moers et al 1996].

MEN 2B. Annual screening should begin at age eight years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia. Annual biochemical screening is recommended for affected individuals who have not had parathyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation.

MEN 2A. Screening should start at age eight years for individuals with a pathogenic variant in codons 630 and 634, and by age 20 years for individuals with other RET pathogenic variants [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

FMTC. Periodic screening should begin at age 20 years [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

MEN 2B. Screening is unnecessary as individuals with MEN 2B do not have an increased risk of hyperparathyroidism.
For infants being treated with copper histidine or copper chloride, monitor serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels to avoid supranormal levels.
Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be followed at regular intervals (e.g. every 6-12 months initially) to monitor progression of disease and the appearance of new symptoms.

Annual neurologic, ophthalmologic, cardiology (electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), and endocrinologic evaluations (fasting blood sugar and TSH) are recommended.

If normal for three years, less frequent evaluations can be considered.
Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in the disorder (typically a pediatrician). Clinical follow up should include measurement of growth parameters as well as specific enquiry into symptoms of seizures and obstructive sleep apnea.
The following are appropriate:

Physical examination to monitor disease progression yearly or less often depending on rate of progression

Electrocardiogram and/or echocardiogram yearly for early detection of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function tests for individuals with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea.
Ophthalmologic, neurologic, and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings are appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular follow up with a child neurologist for seizure management

Regular follow up with a complex care/palliative care team or experienced pediatrician to monitor for complications associated with severe neurologic impairment (e.g., aspiration, constipation, contractures, pressure sores)

Periodic reevaluation with a clinical geneticist to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with MIC-CAP syndrome
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of head circumference and stature using standard growth charts

Neurologic follow-up from birth to adulthood to detect behavioral difficulties, hyperactivity, attention disorder, and motor problems (spasticity), and to monitor for evidence of seizures which can be late onset

Periodic neuropsychologic evaluation in order to adapt interventions and schooling to the level of the individual's cognitive abilities
Monitoring and follow up with ophthalmologist, dermatologist, pediatric neurologist, or other professionals as needed is appropriate.

For those with cardiomyopathy, complete and periodic cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of heart failure is needed.
Routine follow up in a clinic specializing in the care of lymphedema is appropriate.
The following surveillance is appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function

Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those subtypes with known occurrence of cardiac involvement
The following are appropriate:

In individuals with renal abnormalities, monitoring of blood pressure and renal function.

In individuals with interim history of severe constipation, rectal biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung disease

Continuing surveillance for manifestations that would establish the diagnosis of BBS including the following:

Serial growth measurements to track height and weight until at least age five years to document obesity that can occur with BBS

Developmental assessments until at least age five years to detect developmental disabilities that can occur with BBS

Regular ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram (ERG) (if appropriate) after age five years to evaluate for visual signs and symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa [A Verloes, personal communication]

As diabetes mellitus is a rare complication of BBS, measurement of fasting blood glucose as appropriate

Investigations for rarer complications of BBS, including hearing assessment, dental assessment, electroencephalogram, and thyroid function tests as appropriate

Consideration of later complications of surgery for HMC, including recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis and infection of the vaginal tract [Lueth & Wood 2014]. Surveillance as appropriate for each individual is recommended.
Infants and toddlers with ML II and their families benefit from outpatient follow-up visits approximately every three months. Subsequently throughout early childhood, two outpatient visits per year may be adequate until cardiac and respiratory monitoring need to be more frequent.
Young children with ML III alpha/beta and their families benefit from outpatient clinic visits about twice a year.

From age six years similar follow-up visits are recommended on a yearly basis unless bone pain and deteriorating ambulation become major handicaps and/or cardiac and respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention.
Young children with ML III gamma and their families usually benefit from out-patient clinic visits once a year, unless cardiac and/or respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention. Orthopedic assessment should be done at least once a year, with more frequent follow-up visits if any deterioration is observed. Annual ophthalmologic assessment should address possible ophthalmologic changes. If necessary, an ERG should be considered to better evaluate for retinal impairment.

During yearly visits, attention should be paid to pain relief, daily functional abilities, and psychological interventions.

Although cardiac manifestations are usually asymptomatic, monitoring for progressive valvular insufficiency using echocardiography should occur at least once a year.

Surveillance for metabolic bone disease includes DEXA scan in five-year intervals.
Annual follow up with a generalist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

A program of periodic MRI monitoring developed by the neurologist and primary care physician:

Wang et al [2011] propose guidelines for confirmatory testing and subsequent clinical management of presymptomatic individuals suspected to have MLD and other lysosomal storage diseases (click here for full text).

Eichler et al [2009] propose a scoring system for brain MR images in individuals with MLD.

Dali et al [2010] report that N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brains of patients with MLD as assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) correlate with motor and cognitive function. This finding could be used to monitor disease progression and the effects of treatments.

Not all persons with MLD show white matter lesions as the initial MRI finding. Cranial nerve enhancement by MRI in a child age 25 months with apparent MLD and without intraparenchymal white matter involvement was seen by Singh et al [2009]. Likewise, Morana et al [2009] report that cranial nerve and cauda equina nerve root enhancement by MRI may precede typical white matter abnormalities and could facilitate earlier diagnosis. Haberlandt et al [2009] present three individuals with peripheral neuropathy in whom initial MRI showed no white matter changes, but who later developed MLD.

Monitoring of changes in locomotion, communication, and behavior which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (e.g., introduction of walking aids and/or a wheelchair). A classification system for gross motor function for children with MLD has been developed and tested by Kehrer et al [2011b]; it can be used to monitor the course of the disease and should prove extremely useful in evaluating therapeutic trials.

Monitoring for onset of seizures and/or contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy

Monitoring for behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions or actions, problems in following directions, memory loss, and/or incontinence, which indicate a need for increasing physical restriction and curtailing of independence

Monitoring for difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration of gastrostomy

Special attention following general anesthesia or an infection with a high fever as these may trigger exacerbation of disease progression
During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated as frequently as every week. No guidelines regarding the recommended type or frequency of laboratory testing have been published.

The following should be monitored on a regular six-month to one-year basis or more frequently if the patient is unstable and requires frequent changes in management:

Plasma amino acids

Plasma and urine MMA levels

Serum acylcarnitines and free and total carnitine levels

Chemistry: Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin (T/U), triglycerides, and cholesterol

Liver, kidney, and bone health

Bone marrow indices

Monitoring of kidney function periodically with creatinine, cystatin-C, and, if available, studies of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (e.g., iohexol plasma decay), in addition to imaging of the kidneys, will allow for early referral to nephrology and appropriate timing of renal transplantation when needed [van't Hoff et al 1999, Kruszka et al 2013]. Combined equations based on creatinine and cystatin-C are expected to reflect more accurately the kidney function in this patient population [Schwartz et al 2009].

Regular ophthalmology and audiology evaluations to screen for optic nerve thinning/pallor and hearing loss [Authors, unpublished observations] are recommended.
Monitoring for potential complications that can influence the prognosis of MmD includes the following:

Frequent and regular monitoring of the spine particularly during childhood and adolescence when scoliosis can rapidly progress during the adolescent growth spurt

Careful monitoring of respiratory function from an early stage because of the risk for insidious nocturnal hypoxia and sudden respiratory failure. Monitoring of respiratory function should include the following:

Close attention to nocturnal hypoventilation symptoms including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance

Lung function tests (FEV1 and FVC)

Sleep studies

Assessment of the need for intermittent or permanent ventilation. Nocturnal ventilation, when indicated, may significantly improve the prognosis.

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk of cardiac impairment secondary to respiratory involvement

Growth should be assessed regularly.

Regular neuromuscular evaluation to assess disease progress is indicated.
Breath test to screen for bacterial overgrowth is recommended.

Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.
The following are appropriate:

Annual assessment of joints by a rheumatologist or orthopedic surgeon

Follow up of congenital heart defects as per the treating cardiologist
If transplant therapy is not pursued due to lack of donor availability or family preference, annual monitoring of bone marrow karyotype and FISH for chromosome 7, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels should be coordinated by specialists in oncology and bone marrow transplantation. The goal is to identify bone marrow abnormalities (cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia) prior to the development of AML or MDS by annual monitoring of cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels.
After establishing the diagnosis (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) and instituting the indicated therapies (see Treatment of Manifestations), annual review is recommended.

Additional recommendations include:

Spinal review for evidence of scoliosis and/or kyphoscoliosis, especially during the years of rapid growth in adolescence;

Repeat electrocardiogram and echocardiogram if symptoms of cardiac insufficiency occur;

Respiratory function and assessment if symptoms suggest either sleep apnea or sleep-related respiratory insufficiency.
Periodic funduscopic assessment is appropriate [McAvoy et al 2004].
Given the limited number of individuals reported with MPPH syndrome, no formal surveillance guidelines exist; however, recommended surveillance includes the following:

Follow-up with a pediatric neurologist, at least every six months until age six years, and annually thereafter.

Brain MRI to detect hydrocephalus and/or cerebellar tonsillar ectopia; provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Long-term neurologic follow up is recommended for management of epilepsy.

Routine follow up with a developmental pediatrician is appropriate, given the high risk for developmental delays and/or intellectual disability.
The recommended minimal schedule of assessments is highlighted in Muenzer et al 2009].

Persons with MPS I, regardless of disease severity and mode of treatment, should be actively followed at a center that is experienced with the care of individuals with MPS disease.

Aggressive orthopedic management for all patients regardless of treatment choices and disease severity; yearly or more frequent assessment by an experienced orthopedic surgeon is recommended.

Routine median nerve conduction velocity testing because of the high incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome [Van Heest et al 1998]

Annual ophthalmologic assessment with assessment of corneal status and retinal function

Cardiac assessment including annual echocardiogram

Annual assessment by an audiologist as well as by an otolaryngologist to determine the degree and cause of hearing impairment

Early and continuous monitoring of head growth by measuring occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) in infants and children

Cranial ultrasound examination and other brain imaging studies are recommended if a rapid increase in OFC occurs.

MRI can show ventriculomegaly, but imaging studies often cannot reliably distinguish between brain atrophy and brain compression.

Lumbar puncture with measurement of opening pressure of CSF is a preferred method for assessing the degree of pressure elevation [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Annual assessment for evidence of spinal cord compression by neurologic examination with consideration of spinal MRI studies when indicated

Developmental assessment in all patients; consideration of psycho-educational assessment of children with attenuated disease prior to primary school entry
Individuals on ERT

The following should be assessed before and after initiation of ERT to determine treatment efficacy:

Physical and neurologic evaluation at least every six months

Annual assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance (see All Individuals)

Annual pulmonary function tests, including maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) and forced vital capacity (FVC)

Note: (1) Changes in urine keratan sulfate (KS) levels do not correlate with efficacy of treatment; therefore, the benefit of following urine KS (or urine GAG) levels during elosulfase alfa treatment is limited. (2) The benefit of monitoring anti-elosulfase alfa antibodies is unknown.

All Individuals

Assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance

Every 6-12 months: track growth, pubertal stage, and progress; optimize ambulation

Pain severity assessment every six months; age-appropriate quality of life questionnaires every year

Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, or as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk (T25FW) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Respiratory rate, pulse oximeter, and heart rate should be measured before and after the annual testing.

Musculoskeletal.

White et al [2014] recommended the following guidelines for monitoring musculoskeletal involvement in those with MPS IVA (full text):

Upper and lower extremities. Evaluate severity and progression of upper and lower extremity involvement at least annually.

Evaluation of range of motion, grip and pinch strength, and functional assessments (e.g., functional dexterity test) of the upper extremities

Assessment of lower extremity alignment, including standing AP radiographs (as clinically indicated) and AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis to assess hip dysplasia/subluxation until skeletal maturity or when clinically indicated

Spine. Neurologic examination every six months to assess for spinal cord compression [Solanki et al 2013]:

For children who are reliable historians, at each clinic visit obtain a history of exercise tolerance and symptoms of myelopathy (e.g., extremity weakness; clumsiness; unsteady, changing gait; bowel or bladder dysfunction or lower back/leg pain).

In those with multisegmental myelopathy, SSEPs and MEPs (if available) may provide detailed information.

Perform plain radiography of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion-extension) every six months.

Perform plain radiography of the spine (AP and lateral views for the thoracolumbar spine) every one to three years.

Perform MRI whole spine (neutral position)* annually and flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine every one to three years.* Neutral, flexion, and extension lateral radiographs of the cervical spine should be obtained prior to cervical MRI to assess for atlanto-occipital instability.

Cardiac. Evaluate heart rate annually; perform electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015].

Respiratory

For obstructive sleep apnea, yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Annual in home screening sleep studies (which monitor oxygen saturation). Polysomnography every three years.

To assess pulmonary function, annual MVV and FVC until children stop growing, then every two to three years. The benefit of noninvasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010].

Growth. Use MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Length/height and weight should be measured at every visit.

Eye

Monitor for vision and ocular abnormalities at every visit; refer to an ophthalmologist as needed.

For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy, perform retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013].

Dental. Evaluate every six to 12 months.

Hearing. Perform yearly audiogram.
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Hepatic ultrasound examination to screen for liver masses that might suggest HCC

Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) concentration

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Urinalysis and urine amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Ophthalmologic examination
The following are appropriate:

Regular follow-up with a child or adult neurologist and physiatrist and/or physical therapist

If the diagnosis is made prior to the development of cataracts, ophthalmologic examination beginning in infancy and at regular intervals
The authors recommend that infants with MSUD be evaluated by a pediatrician and metabolic specialist once monthly and have a full amino acid profile measured (either from plasma or filter paper) at least once a week. At the authors’ center, strict adherence to these guidelines by 15 Mennonite infants managed between 2005 and 2008 was associated with a 64% reduction in the overall hospitalization rate to 0.14 admissions per patient per year [Strauss et al 2010].

Children, adolescents, and adults also need to be followed closely and should ideally have amino levels monitored once per week. This is usually not practical without a “send-in” filter paper method.

The Denver Developmental Screening Test II or a comparable tool is useful for monitoring development of infants and young children with MSUD.

School-age children, adolescents, and adults should have neurocognitive testing if indicated by school performance or behavioral problems [Shellmer et al 2011, Muelly et al 2013]. Referral to a psychiatrist is appropriate for individuals who show signs of ADHD, anxiety, or depression.
The following assessments are indicated:

Annual audiometric assessment to evaluate stability or progression of hearing loss

Annual examination by a physician to assess for related clinical findings (e.g., palmoplantar keratosis)
Patients are typically followed most closely by a neurologist for medication management and for interval assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing. This is often done every three to six months, but may be annual for patients who are more stable.

Patients receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism) are monitored for adverse neuropsychiatric effects; conversely, patients receiving typical or atypical dopamine antagonist agents (for psychiatric features) are monitored for the development or worsening of parkinsonism.

Annual ophthalmologic examination is recommended.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual pulmonary assessment, including pulmonary function testing if able to be performed;

Polysomnography every one to three years unless symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing are present on history;

Spinal examination for signs of scoliosis, particularly in late childhood and adolescence;

Annual ophthalmologic exams for ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and myopia;

Assessment for dental malocclusion, with referral for orthodontia if indicated.

Currently, the risk for non-neurologic events including bleeding diatheses and gastrointestinal complications is uncertain. Furthermore, the benefit of screening tests for such abnormalities has yet to be determined or systematically studied. Potential screening tests include the following:

Annual blood counts [Herman et al 1999]

Annual liver function test and abdominal ultrasound to address the potential risk of peliosis hepatis [Herman et al 1999]
The following are appropriate:

Regular developmental assessments of affected children

Periodic repeat audiograms

Periodic assessment for strabismus

As part of protocol-driven care and management: annual multidisciplinary reviews and periodic review by a social work team. Protocol-driven approaches to surveillance currently in use include those of Flapper et al [2009] and de Jong et al [2010].
Surveillance includes the following:

Annual eye examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors

Monitoring for the development of otitis media (OM); for those individuals with chronic OM, referral to an otolaryngologist

Regular developmental assessments to plan and refine educational interventions

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations
The following evaluations should be considered at the suggested maximum intervals:

Every six months. blood count in individuals with bleeding episodes to identify anemia; more frequent counts are appropriate in cases of recurrent profuse bleeding.

Every year

Urinalysis (including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on spot urine sample)

Measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

For individuals with an established renal defect, referral to a nephrologist

Every three years

Audiometric evaluation. Once hearing loss is identified, the frequency of follow-up evaluations is determined by the treating hearing specialists.

Ophthalmologic evaluation. Once cataract is identified, the frequency of evaluations is determined by the treating ophthalmologist.

Measurement of serum AST, ALT and GGT

In individuals with alterations of liver enzymes, alternative causes of liver damage should be investigated.

If alternative causes are excluded, the frequency of the liver enzyme measurements depends on the severity of the alteration.
Cardiovascular

After normal baseline evaluations of upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements, two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler, and cardiology evaluation

In asymptomatic individuals with a normal echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiogram every 1-3 years. Note that pericardial effusion and restrictive cardiomyopathy may occur at any age and may be clinically asymptomatic [Starr et al 2015, Garavelli et al 2016, Lin et al 2016].

In individuals with abnormal findings at the time of initial diagnosis, more extensive imaging may be indicated given the progressive nature of the disorder (e.g., MRI to evaluate for pericardial thickening or effusion).

Respiratory

Consider oxygen saturation in children, with monitoring as needed for symptoms suggestive of restrictive/obstructive pulmonary disease and annual pulmonary function studies in children older than age six years if able to cooperate with test maneuvers.

Evaluation for upper airway stenosis (e.g., laryngotracheal stenosis) should be considered based on symptoms.

Other

Annual ophthalmologic and audiology evaluations

Monitoring of physical skill development and joint mobility
Gagnon et al [2010] provide guidelines for surveillance.

The following are appropriate:

Annual ECG to detect asymptomatic cardiac conduction defects. Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring of individuals with DM1 who do not have cardiac symptoms [Sá et al 2007, Sovari et al 2007, Cudia et al 2009]. Tissue Doppler monitoring has also been proposed [Parisi et al 2007, Wahbi et al 2012].

Annual measurement of fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin concentration, with treatment for diabetes mellitus if indicated [Matsumura et al 2009]

Ophthalmologic examination every two years to evaluate for cataract formation

Attention to nutritional status including mastication and trouble eating [Motlagh et al 2005, Engvall et al 2009, Umemoto et al 2009]

Polysomnographic follow-up of sleep complaints [Kumar et al 2007]
Annual ECG and echocardiogram or possible cardiac MRI is indicated to detect asymptomatic and progressive cardiac conduction defects and cardiomyopathy.

Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring even in the absence of cardiac symptoms.

Fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin level should be measured annually.

Males should be tested for hypogonadism if they become increasingly fatigued or have reduced sexual energy, and should be tested every few years even without symptoms to see if they would benefit from replacement therapy.
Annual measurement of the following is appropriate:

Measurement of blood pressure

Urinalysis

Urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should be referred to a nephrologist.

Screening for glaucoma from the time that a child is compliant with the examination

Dental examination is indicated at least every six months.

DEXA scanning frequency in adults is based on clinical symptoms, abnormalities detected on previous evaluations, and standard practice in peri- and post-menopausal females and older males.
Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.
The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Assessment of ambulation and speech abilities
Surveillance includes the following:

At least yearly evaluation by a neurologist to assess for and/or manage seizures

Yearly evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and therapeutic and educational interventions

Regular follow up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities
Routine medical management of children and young adults with complex neurodisability will be relevant to all those affected by NCL. This may include clinical surveillance for the following:

Swallowing difficulties and recurrent aspiration

X-ray surveillance of hip joints and spine

Screening ECG for those individuals with CLN3 disease who are older than age 16 years
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth and development in infants and children

Periodic measurement of serum sodium concentration to identify unrecognized hyperosmolality and early dehydration

Note: Urine output and urine specific gravity are useless as indicators of hydration status.

Annual renal ultrasound evaluation to monitor for hydronephrosis and megacystis [Shalev et al 2004]
The following are appropriate:

Regular formal assessment of respiratory function, including monitoring of sleep studies when significant respiratory impairment is identified

Routine assessment for scoliosis and joint contractures

Routine assessment of physical function and the need for mechanical assistance, such as a wheelchair
Evaluations are recommended at least annually. More frequent monitoring is recommended for individuals with advanced-stage CKD, individuals at higher risk of disease progression, or when assessment will affect therapeutic decision making [KDIGO 2013].

Monitoring of blood pressure, growth parameters, and development

Renal function including serum creatinine concentration and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), urea or BUN, electrolytes, CBC, CKD metabolic bone disease including serum calcium, phosphate, PTH and alkaline phosphatase activity

Liver function including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin and prothrombin time

Urinalysis to monitor proteinuria

Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate progression of renal disease and possible liver, bile duct, spleen or pancreas anomalies

Routine evaluations for extrarenal manifestations of syndromic NPH that can appear with time, especially ophthalmologic examination for visual acuity, visual field examination, and evidence of retinal dystrophy
Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013].

The following are recommended:

Annual physical examination by a physician who is familiar with the individual and with the disease

Annual ophthalmologic examination in early childhood, less frequent examination in older children and adults

Regular developmental assessment by screening questionnaire (in childhood)

Regular blood pressure monitoring

Other studies (e.g., MRI) only as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms

Monitoring of those who have abnormalities of the central nervous system, skeletal system, or cardiovascular system by an appropriate specialist
For at-risk individuals (1) in whom the known pathogenic variant in the family has been identified or (2) whose genetic status cannot be clarified by molecular genetic testing:

MRI is usually begun between ages ten and 12 years but can be delayed in families in which the onset is known to be later [Evans et al 2005a]. MRI should be continued on an annual basis until at least the fourth decade of life. It is not clear if earlier surveillance (i.e., cranial MRI before age 10 years) is beneficial, and it is not known at what age monitoring can be safely stopped. Although some individuals with NF2 do not have symptoms until they are in their fifties, it is likely that "silent" tumors would be detected on an MRI performed at a younger age.

Hearing evaluation, including BAER testing, may be useful in detecting changes in auditory nerve function before changes can be visualized by MRI.

Routine complete eye examinations should be part of the care of all individuals with NF2.
Affected individuals

Periodic follow-up to monitor developmental progress, physical growth (including weight, length/height, and head circumference) and frequency of infections; monitoring for weight loss, which may signal the presence of a malignancy

Lifelong monitoring of immune biomarkers to include the parameters listed in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Careful follow up by oncologist: in individuals with NBS who are immunodeficient symptoms of lymphoid malignancies can be misleading.

Monitoring for pubertal progression in both females and males and for premature ovarian insufficiency in females [Chrzanowska et al 2010b]

Breast self-examination and ultrasonographic evaluation recommended in affected females

Carriers (heterozygotes)

Parents. As obligate carriers, parents should be monitored for malignancy, in particular breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men. No consensus tumor screening protocols for carriers have been published.

At-risk sibs. Evidence of cancer risk in young carriers is insufficient to warrant screening in childhood.
Developmental assessment should be performed throughout the first years of life.

Neurologic assessments in the first year can identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and early development of chorea in more mildly affected patients.

Severely affected individuals should be monitored for scoliosis.
The following are appropriate:

For individuals with no neurologic manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual neurologic evaluation

For individuals with no pulmonary manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for pulmonary dysfunction (pulmonary function tests) and pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest

For individuals with no manifestations of thyroid disease or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for thyroid dysfunction (serum concentration of thyroid stimulating hormone) and for thyroid cancer (physical examination that includes thyroid palpation)
If anomalies are found in any system (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis), periodic follow up should be planned and life-long monitoring may be necessary; for example, periodic eye examination if a refraction error or strabismus is found, urinalysis if there are structural abnormalities of the collecting system. Despite the apparent increased incidence of hematologic and solid tumor malignancies, no surveillance strategies have been evaluated or recommended.
The following are recommended:

Routine follow up with an ophthalmologist in all individuals with an NDP-related retinopathy, even when vision is severely reduced

Given that most individuals with the NDP-related spectrum of retinopathies are blind, routine monitoring of hearing so that hearing loss can be detected early and managed appropriately

Observation for clinical evidence of venous stasis or ulcer disease
Individuals with NPD-A should receive routine care from a pediatrician and a neurologist including evaluation of the following:

Nutrition status

Occupational and physical therapy needs

Individuals with NPD-B should be evaluated at least yearly for the following:

History (at least every 6-12 months): growth and weight gain in children; fatigue; any change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities; bleeding, shortness of breath; abdominal pain; headaches; extremity pain

Physical examination including assessment of neurologic function

Blood tests including liver enzymes, platelet count, and fasting lipid profile

Pulmonary function testing and chest radiograph

Skeletal assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)

Nutrition assessment
General pediatric evaluations, with special attention to pulmonary function, swallowing, bowel habit, and mood (for occult depression) at six-month intervals are appropriate for most juvenile and adult affected individuals. Sleep disturbances are common in NPC; the affected individual or caregiver should be questioned regarding sleep hygiene as a part of regular evaluation.

Annual psychometric testing may be helpful in arranging appropriate school or work placement.

Teenagers and adults with motor or sensory impairments who are driving should be monitored at six- to 12-month intervals to ensure that they do not present a risk to themselves or others.
CHILD syndrome

Regular surveillance for cutaneous manifestations as new lesions may occur in puberty or early adulthood

Orthopedic surveillance for musculoskeletal deformities such as scoliosis and joint contractures

Neurologic, cardiologic, or renal surveillance depending on clinical involvement

CK syndrome

Neurologic surveillance of seizures for readjustment of medications if necessary

Orthopedic surveillance for scoliosis/kyphosis
The following are appropriate:

During the first few years of life, annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error and strabismus

In adults, dermatologic surveillance of unusual skin thickening, hyperkeratosis, and erosive lesions that may be harbingers of skin cancer
The following are appropriate:

Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment and accurate correction of refractive errors, and related strabismus or face turn

Annual to biennial search for evidence of sun-related skin damage and pre-cancerous or cancerous lesions, especially in areas of high intensity or prolonged sunlight exposure
Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment for accurate correction of refractive error are appropriate.

There is no definitive guideline supported by scientific evidence as to how often an individual should be evaluated by a dermatologist, though an evaluation of the skin for cancer screening every six months is recommended.
Surveillance includes the following:

Annual audiology evaluation and assessment of speech development and frequency of ear infections in children if cleft lip and/or cleft palate is present

Annual blood pressure examination and serum creatinine concentration to monitor renal function in individuals age ten years or older

Annual ultrasound examination for renal, hepatic, pancreatic, and ovarian cystic disease in individuals age ten years and older
The following are appropriate:

Dental examinations twice a year for those with DI or at risk for DI

Hearing evaluation at three- to five-year intervals perhaps beginning as early as age five years until hearing loss is identified, then as indicated based on the nature and degree of hearing loss and associated interventions
For all individuals with CCHS, the following evaluations are recommended:

At least yearly (every 6 months until age 3 years) comprehensive, multiple-day in-hospital physiologic evaluation (see Table 4)

Yearly echocardiogram to identify right ventricular hypertrophy and/or cor pulmonale

Yearly hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte counts to identify polycythemia

Table 4 summarizes the recommended clinical evaluations for affected individuals with CCHS based on the PHOX2B variant present.

Table 4. 

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

PHOX2B Variant

Annual In-Hospital Comprehensive Testing 1

Annual Neurocognitive Assessment

Annual 72-hr Holter and ECG

Hirschsprung Disease Assessment

Tumors of Neural Crest Origin Assessment

PARM genotype:20/24, 20/25

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/26, 20/27

X

X

X

X

PARM genotype: 20/2820/33

X

X

X

X

X 2

NPARM

X

X

X

X

X 3

Deletion/ duplication 4

X

X

X

X

X 2

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

1. 

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

2. 

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

3. 

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

4. 

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication

Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant

Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010]

PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24

NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon)

Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis).

Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing

Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas

Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas

Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual ophthalmologic examination, including measurement of visual acuity and visual fields and optical coherence tomography (OCT);

Annual hearing evaluation.
Clinical evaluation for development of orthopedic manifestations (e.g., hand contractures in FMD, scoliosis in FMD and MNS) is appropriate. Head size and shape should be monitored as part of the surveillance for evolving craniosynostosis.

Monitoring of hearing loss should be ongoing, as the sensorineural component can be progressive.
Regular follow-up depending on the type of malformations present:

Craniofacial team follow-up for those with cleft lip/palate, including regular monitoring of hearing

Urology follow-up for those with significant hypospadias and/or renal defects

Cardiac follow-up for those with cardiac defects

Gastroenterology, pulmonary, and/or surgical follow-up for those with LTE defects

Gastroenterology and/or surgical follow-up for those with anal defects
The frequency of follow-up neurologic evaluations depends on the degree of ptosis, dysphagia, and muscle weakness.

Perform routine ophthalmologic evaluation o determine if ptosis interferes with driving or is associated with neck pain, and or if the eyelids cover more than 50% of the pupil, findings that might lead to consideration of surgical intervention.

Perform routine reevaluation for functional signs of dysphagia using videoscopy and fiberoscopy.
The following are appropriate:

At the start of therapy, measure plasma ammonia concentration at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months, as possible.

At the start of therapy, perform plasma amino acid (PAA) analysis at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months.

Perform liver function tests depending on symptoms every three to six months or more often if they have been previously elevated.

Perform neuropsychological testing at the time that significant developmental milestones are expected to be achieved (e.g., at 6-9 months, 18 months, 3 years)
Bleeding disorder. Regular follow up with a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is recommended. Such teams are often identified through the federal hemophilia treatment center network in the US.

For menstruating females:

Regular monitoring: hemoglobin and/or hematocrit and iron studies including ferritin for possible iron deficiency and/or anemia

Assessment of the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions such as antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppressive agents (oral contraceptives)

Cardiac fibrosis. Because of clinical experience (albeit limited to date) with cardiac fibrosis in persons with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Flevaris et al 2017; Author, personal observation], screening echocardiogram can be considered beginning at age 15 years. In those with no cardiac findings, follow-up screening in two years is indicated; and in those with cardiac findings, follow up yearly or more frequently if indicated by a cardiologist [Ghosh et al 2010; Ghosh et al 2013; Author, personal observation].
Surveillance for pancreatic cancer in high-risk groups with pancreatitis has been considered (see Definitions, Chronic pancreatitis for discussion of pancreatic cancer risk). However, because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Ulrich 2001, Brand et al 2007], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.
No disease-specific guidelines have been developed. The following ongoing evaluations are recommended in all individuals in whom pathogenic variants have been confirmed.

Follow up by a nephrologist to monitor renal function and blood pressure

Follow up by an ophthalmologist to monitor vision. Any change in vision could indicate a retinal detachment and should be treated as a medical emergency.

Audiometric evaluation with periodic follow up
Individuals known to have a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations of a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome but known to have a SDHA, SDHB,

SDHC, SDHD,

SDHAF2, or MAX pathogenic variant, and relatives at risk based on family history who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team with expertise in treatment of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes.

Screening should begin at age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family. Benn et al [2006] estimated that if lifelong screening were to begin at age ten years, disease would be detected in all persons with SDHD pathogenic variants and 96% of persons with SDHB pathogenic variants.

Although no clear consensus has been developed regarding when, how, and how often biochemical studies and imaging should be done in at-risk individuals, it is reasonable to consider lifelong annual biochemical and clinical surveillance. The findings of these evaluations should guide imaging studies [Mannelli 2006, Pacak et al 2007, Lenders et al 2014]. Monitoring includes the following:

Twenty-four hour urinary excretion of fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines, and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines to detect metastatic disease, tumor recurrence, or the development of additional tumors

Follow-up imaging by MRI, CT, 123I-MIBG, or FDG-PET if the fractionated metanephrine and/or catecholamine levels become elevated, or if the original tumor had minimal or no catecholamine/fractionated metanephrine excess. In some individuals the image modality that was most effective in identifying the original tumor may prove to be equally effective in surveillance. Given the concern for cumulative radiation exposure in individuals who harbor germline pathogenic variants in genes associated with PGL/PCC, MRI may be the preferable imaging modality, with CT and nuclear imaging modalities reserved to further characterize tumors that are detected.

In persons with SDHD and SDHC pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the skull base and neck to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) body MRI or CT and 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may occur beyond the neck and skull base

In persons with SDHB pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the abdomen, thorax, and pelvis to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may not be detected with MRI or CT

In individuals (especially children, adolescents, or young adults) who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia, consideration of evaluation for GISTs [Pasini et al 2008]

Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with an SDHB pathogenic variant
Hearing should be evaluated annually.

Annual ophthalmologic evaluation is indicated. (Although electroretinogram is useful in the diagnosis of a retinal dystrophy, it is not useful in follow up; visual field testing is much more helpful.)

Coagulation factors and other synthetic liver functions should be monitored. Persons with overt hepatic dysfunction require more routine monitoring.

The use of routine neuroimaging is uncertain. Individuals with peroxisomal disorders may develop a progressive leukodystrophy. No effective therapy exists, but identification of white matter changes may explain changes in cognitive and/or motor ability.
In patients with PCH2 monitoring of respiratory function may be necessary to detect sleep apnea.
In general, individuals with PC have no known associated systemic diseases or predispositions that require routine surveillance.
Follow up by a pulmonologist to monitor lung function and pathogens in sputum cultures as well as to assess pulmonary disease extent/progression is indicated.

For young children with chronic otitis media, routine hearing evaluation is essential, and should be continued until the teenage years, by which time hearing is usually normal [Majithia et al 2005]. Typically, the ear disease improves in later childhood and hearing screening is not necessary.
Monitor lactate levels regularly.
Affected individuals should be followed for the development of clinical signs of a sensory neuropathy, including regular assessments of joint-position sense, ankle jerks, gait, and station [Baxter 2001, Stockler et al 2011].

Regular assessments of intellectual function should be offered.
Surveillance includes:

Semiannual or annual examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment

Semiannual or annual examination by an endocrinologist familiar with PDS

Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months if hearing loss is progressive

Since goiter is more common than hypothyroidism, volumetric baseline measurement of the thyroid, obtained by ultrasonography with periodic (every 2-3 years) reassessment [Choi et al 2011b]
During induction of puberty, clinical assessment of pubertal staging and adjustment of estrogen dose takes place every three months.

For adults on maintenance estrogen replacement therapy, assessment of withdrawal bleed pattern and overall well-being should be undertaken on an annual basis and assessment of bone density approximately every five years.

Routine audiologic assessment is appropriate in individuals who have hearing impairment or are at risk for Perrault syndrome, as hearing loss is often progressive in nature. Audiologic surveillance is not required in individuals with profound hearing loss.
Routine evaluation of weight and calorie intake, respiratory function (particularly at night or during sleep), motor function, and mood/personality changes is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Assessment by a pediatric ophthalmologist every three months or as indicated to monitor for glaucoma and amblyopia

Regular developmental assessments
The frequency of follow-up evaluations for persons with FPF depends largely on

the patient's individual diagnosis and status. Surveillance would follow the

guidelines for IPF [Raghu et

al 2011] or the specific type of IIP. Those who are stable may be

evaluated every three to six months, while others may need more frequent follow

up.

Pulmonary function studies including the following to serially monitor

disease course [Raghu

et al 2011]:

Forced vital capacity (FVC)

Diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)

The six-minute walk test (6-MWT) distance and oxyhemoglobin

saturation change at baseline

Monitoring for progression of disease by HRCT of the chest

Oxygen saturation by resting pulse oximetry

Serologic monitoring for connective tissue disease (CTD) in patients

suspected of an underlying possibility for CTD-related ILD

Monitoring for any side effects known from pharmacologic treatments

Symptom control
The following are appropriate:

Regular cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of occasionally increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement.

Regular life-long follow up with investigation of any suspicious clinical events such as thromboembolic complications and symptoms that could be related to hyperviscosity

Regular life-long follow up to record manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)
Periodic monitoring for fat-soluble vitamin deficiency is recommended.

Hearing screening is recommended at five-year intervals in individuals with no symptomatic evidence of hearing deficits.

Monitoring for hepatobiliary malignancy has not been shown to be necessary in ATP8B1 deficiency.
According to the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium (OxalEurope) [Cochat et al 2012] individuals with:

Preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2) likely require only the following to evaluate/ensure treatment efficacy:

Regular renal ultrasound examinations and fundoscopic eye examinations to identify the extent of any oxalate deposition

Ongoing urinalysis (spot and 24-hour collections)

GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 should have the above evaluations as well as regular (not defined) measurements of plasma oxalate.

GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or a rapid deterioration in function should have the above evaluations as well as the following testing (performed prior to initiation of dialysis if possible, and repeated as needed):

Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required

Thyroid function testing

Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block

Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera for evaluation of calcification in such organs

Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate

History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition

Further testing and surveillance of other organ involvement can be inferred from the list in Table 4 – noting that at GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 the ongoing deposition of tissue oxalate (oxalosis) will, of course, predispose all patients to multi-organ involvement, and this will worsen/accelerate as the patient enters ESRD/ initiates dialysis.

Note: Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.
Frequency of testing depends on the center; however, as a guide, the following are recommended:

Quarterly. Assessment of renal function, blood pressure, and hematocrit

Six monthly to annually. Renal imaging (ultrasound or CT examination) to assess renal stone burden*

Annually. Examination for involvement of the skin, bone, eye, or thyroid*

For pregnant women with PH2, close monitoring by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis during pregnancy or after delivery

*Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.
Attention to ongoing care, including adherence to high fluid intake and medication schedule, is essential to good outcomes.

For patients who are stable and doing well* the following are recommended annually:

Clinical assessment of stone-related symptoms including pain, frequency of passage of stones or gravel in the urine, and urinary tract infection

Assessment of kidney function (serum creatinine and eGFR) and electrolytes

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, particularly in those with any impairment of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

24 hour urine oxalate and supersaturation study. During follow up, changes in the urine supersaturation can be used to monitor the effectiveness of therapy by confirming that the crystallization potential has decreased.

Renal ultrasound examination or other imaging to monitor for stone formation

*Very young patients, those with complex stone problems, and those with reduced kidney function need closer management with more frequent assessments.
Appropriate surveillance includes routine electrolyte and blood pressure measurements, monitored in the same manner as for any person treated with a thiazide diuretic.
During childhood:

Annual medical evaluations to assess growth and monitor for signs of precocious puberty

Annual screening for developmental delay or learning disorders
The most serious consequences of PHTS relate to the increased risk of cancers including breast, thyroid, endometrial, and to a lesser extent, renal. In this regard, the most important aspect of management of any individual with a PTEN pathogenic variant is increased cancer surveillance to detect any tumors at the earliest, most treatable stages. Current suggested screening by age follows:

Cowden Syndrome

Pediatric (age <18 years)

Yearly thyroid ultrasound examination** (on identification of a PTEN pathogenic variant)

Yearly skin check with physical examination

Adult

Yearly thyroid ultrasound** and dermatologic evaluation

Women beginning at age 30 years:

Monthly breast self-examination**

Yearly breast screening (at minimum mammogram); MRI may also be incorporated.**

Yearly transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial biopsy**

For men and women:

Colonoscopy beginning at age 35 years**; frequency dependent on degree of polyposis identified

Biennial renal imaging (CT or MRI preferred) beginning at age 40 years**

** For those with a family history of a particular cancer type at an early age screening may be initiated five to ten years prior to the youngest diagnosis in the family. For example, in a woman whose mother developed breast cancer at age 30 years breast surveillance may begin at age 25-30 years.

Note: Although the NCCN Guidelines removed endometrial surveillance after 2007 (without expert PHTS input), it is prudent to ensure the minimal surveillance for endometrial cancer as detailed if family history is positive for endometrial cancer.

Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome

Screening recommendations have not been established for BRRS. Given recent molecular epidemiologic studies, however, individuals with BRRS and a germline PTEN pathogenic variant should undergo the same surveillance as individuals with CS.

Individuals with BRRS should also be monitored for complications related to gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis, which can be more severe than in CS.

Proteus Syndrome/Proteus-Like Syndrome

Although the observation of germline PTEN pathogenic variants in a minority of individuals who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome is relatively new, clinicians should consider instituting the CS surveillance recommendations for individuals with these disorders who have germline PTEN pathogenic variants.
MCAP syndrome. Provisional surveillance guidelines include regular follow up, no less than every six months until age six years, and at least yearly thereafter. At each visit, the following are recommended with appropriate testing for any positive finding:

A medical history with attention to:

Childhood cancer

Breathing or sleep problems

Seizures or other undefined spells, headaches, or new or worsening neurologic symptoms

A detailed neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI. Based on limited retrospective data available, the risk for hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, or both with low brain stem or high spinal cord compression, appears to be highest in the first two years. Brain MRI is provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Renal ultrasound. Until additional data are available, screening for Wilms tumor following guidelines developed for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be considered (i.e., renal ultrasound examination every 3 months until age 8 years).

CLOVES syndrome

Given the associated morbidities including severe scoliosis, infiltrative lipomatous overgrowth, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems, central phlebectasias and thromboembolism, individuals with CLOVES syndrome require surveillance tailored to their specific needs with particular attention to surgical care [Sapp et al 2007, Alomari 2011, Alomari et al 2011].

Commonly occurring postoperative complications of surgical excision of the truncal lipomatous mass include recurrence, hypervascularity, and infiltrative growth. Therefore, diligent surgical care and monitoring are recommended.

Fibroadipose hyperplasia. Data regarding the natural history of fibroadipose hyperplasia are limited. However, given the extensive degree of somatic overgrowth in most individuals, the same surveillance guidelines for CLOVES are tentatively recommended for individuals with FH [Lindhurst et al 2012].
Neurologic follow up every three to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Ongoing developmental assessments to tailor educational services to an individual’s strengths

Regular follow up with an ophthalmologist to monitor for high myopia and strabismus

Periodic reevaluation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor to review the most current information and recommendations for individuals with PTHS
The surveillance program for the multiple organs at risk for cancer is outlined in Table 4. Note: The effect of such surveillance on morbidity and mortality has not been evaluated in controlled trials.

From birth, an annual history and physical examination with attention to testicular examination and routine blood work is recommended. A boy age 13 years with PJS was recently described as developing an unusually early presentation of small-bowel adenocarcinoma, thus supporting screening in childhood as illustrated in Table 4 [Wangler et al 2013].

Table 4. 

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Site

Procedure

Age at Initial Screening (yrs)

Interval

Stomach

Upper endoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Small intestine

Capsule endoscopy or MRE 2

8, 18 3

3 years

Large intestine

Colonoscopy

8, 18 1

3 years 1

Breast

Breast self-examination

18

Monthly

Clinical breast exam

6 months

Breast MRI or digital mammography 4, 5, 6

25

1 year

Ovary, cervix, uterus

Transvaginal ultrasound & serum CA 125;pelvic exam w/pap smear 6

18-20

1 year

Pancreas

MRI-MRCP or endoscopic ultrasound

30

1-2 years

Testes

Testicular exam; ultrasound if symptomatic or abnormality on exam

Birth to teenage years

1 year

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

1. 

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

2. 

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

3. 

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

4. 

Digital mammography if MRI not available

5. 

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

6. 

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

Digital mammography if MRI not available

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.
As the disease progresses, episodes of extreme distress may last for days or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain. These may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, mouth lacerations, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a nonambulatory individual with marked stress on long bones from dystonia places individuals with PKAN at especially high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.

The following should be performed on a regular basis:

Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status

Ophthalmologic assessment

Oral assessment for consequences of trauma

Assessment of ambulation, environmental adaptations, speech abilities, and communication needs to help affected individuals to maintain independence

Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments to assure adequate nutrition
Early detection of hypertension. Children with a family history of ADPKD should have their blood pressure (BP) monitored by a practitioner with experience in measurement of BP in children [Chapman et al 2015]. Screening from age five years onward, with an interval of three years in cases in which no hypertension is found, seems prudent. The diagnosis of hypertension is made when systolic or diastolic BP is ≥95th percentile for age, height, and sex, in accordance with prevailing pediatric guidelines

Renal cell carcinoma. There is currently insufficient evidence for recommending screening in asymptomatic individuals with ADPKD.

Intracranial aneurysms. Widespread screening is usually not recommended since most intracranial aneurysms found by screening asymptomatic individuals are small, have a low risk of rupture, and require no treatment [Gibbs et al 2004, Irazabal et al 2011, Chapman et al 2015], although dissenting opinions have been published [Rozenfeld et al 2014].

Indications for screening in affected individuals with a good life expectancy include a family history of intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage, previous rupture of an aneurysm, preparation for elective surgery with potential hemodynamic instability, high-risk occupations such as airplane pilots, and significant anxiety on the part of the individual despite adequate risk information.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice for presymptomatic screening because it is noninvasive and does not require intravenous contrast material. Because only one of 76 individuals with an initial negative study had a new intracranial aneurysm after a mean follow-up of 9.8 years, rescreening after an interval of ten years has been suggested as a reasonable approach [Schrier et al 2004].

Aortic dissection. Until more information becomes available, it is reasonable to screen first-degree adult relatives of individuals with thoracic aortic dissection using either echocardiography or MRI. If aortic root dilatation is found, yearly follow-up and strict blood pressure control with beta blockers should be recommended.

Cardiac valvular abnormalities. Screening echocardiography is not recommended unless a murmur is detected or there are other cardiovascular signs or symptoms [Chapman et al 2015].

Colon diverticulosis. Routine screening for diverticulosis is not recommended, but physicians should be aware of a possible increased occurrence of diverticulosis or diverticulitis in individuals with ADPKD who have reached ESRD [Chapman et al 2015].
The following should be monitored regularly, depending on disease course and complications:

Blood pressure monitored at periodic physician's visits as well as home blood pressure monitoring if indicated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Renal function in those with chronic kidney disease Stage III or less; close monitoring for the complications of CKD should be undertaken by the treating nephrologist according to standard practices outlined in the KDOQI Guidelines.

Electrolyte balance, monitored by obtaining serum concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride. Mineral balance, monitored by assessing calcium and phosphorous. If the calcium level is low, magnesium concentration should be evaluated [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Hydration status

Nutritional status, with growth plotted on standard growth charts and nutrition consultation as indicated

Hepatoportal duct involvement, by physical examination and complete blood counts, in addition to serum albumin levels, PT/PTT, and 25-OH vitamin D, vitamin E levels, and fat-soluble vitamin levels

If hepatomegaly is present and/or splenomegaly develops, additional monitoring including periodic ultrasonography or MRI. With hepatosplenomegaly, referral to a pediatric hepatologist is suggested for evaluation and periodic monitoring by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect esophageal varices [Telega et al 2013].

Consideration of MR cholangiography, a more sensitive measurement for biliary ectasia, at baseline and then as indicated [Shneider & Magid 2005, Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016]

Agents to Avoid

The following should be avoided:

For affected individuals with hypertension, sympathomimetic agents

In general, unless the clinical situation warrants their use, known nephrotoxic agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and aminoglycosides

Potentially hepatotoxic agents (e.g., acetaminophen doses >30 mg/kg/day, herbal supplements, and alcohol) should be minimized.

Work in cell and animal models suggests that caffeine, theophylline-like agents, and calcium channel blockers may exacerbate renal cyst formation and growth. However, this has not been rigorously studied in individuals with ARPKD or ADPKD.
Individuals with PKD can be monitored every one to two years, particularly with respect to medication needs and doses.
Plasma Phe and Tyr concentrations in individuals with classic PKU must be monitored regularly [National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel 2001] (see Treatment of Manifestations).

In infants, frequent in-clinic visits are recommended until Phe levels are stabilized, followed by weekly blood level monitoring of Phe and tyrosine levels until age one with closer monitoring during periods of rapid growth or diet transitions. In addition, plasma amino acid levels should be regularly monitored to foster optimal growth during the first year of life.

Between ages one and 12 years, biweekly to monthly sampling may be adequate.

In adolescents and adults who are stable and well controlled, blood level monitoring can be monthly.

Nutritional assessment should include growth evaluation and assessment of micronutrient intake and needs.

Some clinics perform monitoring of plasma amino acids, transthyretin, complete blood count, ferritin, and 25-OH vitamin D every six months in infants and annually thereafter even if growth is appropriate and analysis of the diet shows adequate intake.

If there is evidence for suboptimal dietary intake or over-reliance on nutritionally incomplete medical foods, evaluation of plasma amino acids (full panel), transthyretin, albumin, complete blood count, ferritin, 25-OH vitamin D, electrolytes, renal function, liver function, albumin, vitamin B12, red blood cell essential fatty acids, trace minerals (zinc, copper, selenium), vitamin A, and folic acid should be considered [Singh et al 2014, Vockley et al 2014].

Assessment of developmental milestones and overall developmental progress should take place at every visit.

Screening for mental illness should be considered at every visit and performed at regular intervals by primary care providers.
The interval of surveillance for bone lesions and neurologic and psychiatric manifestations must be determined individually.
Semiannual to annual neurologic and physical medicine evaluation is indicated to monitor developmental progress during childhood and to monitor and treat spasticity and orthopedic complications as needed.
No long-term sequelae are associated with PNKD. Monitoring medication requirements and dosage is appropriate.
Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist, ophthalmologist and, if necessary, endocrinologist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies.
No general surveillance guidelines have been developed to date; monitoring should be individualized.
From the time of diagnosis, annual monitoring for deficiencies of TSH, GH, LH, and FSH is indicated.

Surveillance of skin for premalignant lesions may be necessary depending on latitude and history of sun exposure. Malignant skin lesions have not specifically been reported to be associated with POMC deficiency, though a theoretic risk is assumed to exist.
It is advisable to follow porphyrin levels annually and resume phlebotomies (see Treatment of Manifestations) if porphyrin levels begin to rise in the presence of cutaneous signs. Note: Increase in urinary total porphyrins may also be caused by an increase in coproporphyrin (which is of no relevance with regard to the PCT); thus, when levels are only moderately increased, urinary porphyrin fractionation should be performed.

Because of reports of an association between diabetes mellitus and PCT [Muñoz-Santos et al 2011], annual screening with a fasting glucose level is recommended, particularly in those with hypertension (BP >135/80 mm Hg).

Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) surveillance relies on a combination of serum AFP determinations and hepatic ultrasonography. No guidelines as to the frequency of these tests are currently available due to the rarity of PCT and even rarer occurrence of HCC. Surveillance is usually performed annually; however, in those with advanced chronic hepatitis C and/or alcoholic cirrhosis, hepatologists generally agree that surveillance for HCC should be at least every six months.
Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop especially after age 50 years in patients with acute porphyrias and persistent elevations in porphobilinogen or porphyrins; liver imaging at six-month intervals beginning at age 50 years may detect early lesions [Andant et al 2000, Schneider-Yin et al 2010].
Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS

System

Evaluation

Frequency

Comments

Growth

Monitoring for growth deceleration, short stature, failure to thrive

At every visit

For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluationFor short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation.

Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation

Yearly

ENT / Mouth

Audiology evaluation

Newborn hearing screen, then as indicated for speech delay

Dental evaluation

Every 6 months starting in early childhood

Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram w/attention to aortic root dimension & ECG

Every 3 yrs, if initial evaluations were normal; otherwise, as directed by cardiologist

Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for development of scoliosis

Clinical examination at every visit

Scoliosis survey if scoliosis is clinically suspected; referral to orthopedist if indicated

Psychiatric

Behavioral assessment

Screen for behavior problems at every visit; consultation w/psychiatrist and/or psychologist if behavioral atypia present

Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), depending on age, for those with suspected autism

Miscellaneous / Other

Developmental monitoring by a developmental specialist

Annually, or at frequency directed by developmental specialist

A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities.A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS

For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluation

For short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation.

A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities.

A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.
No guidelines regarding initial screening evaluations or surveillance of persons with a germline DICER1 pathogenic variant have been established. Based on data from the International PPB Registry (IPPBR) which includes more than 500 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic DICER1-related disorders, the authors recommend (1) annual physical examination and targeted review of systems, and (2) imaging study type and frequency based on tumor type, patient age, and suspicious clinical findings.

PPB. Baseline chest CT to evaluate for lung cysts or tumors in a patient of any age

Note: The most critical age group for chest CT is children under age three years, the peak risk age for solid PPB. The negative predictive value of a normal chest CT for development of PPB is not known.

CN

Baseline kidney CT or ultrasound examination in a patient diagnosed with PPB

In a patient of any age, especially those younger than age four years, annual abdominal examination and monitoring for abdominal pain, swelling, or hematuriaNote: The negative predictive value of a normal kidney CT or ultrasound examination for development of CN is not known.

Thyroid gland neoplasia

Thyroid physical examination in a patient of any age

If thyroid gland asymmetry and/or a nodule are detected, perform thyroid ultrasound examination to confirm as well as to determine if surveillance or fine needle aspiration biopsy is warranted.

If no nodules are detected, continue annual physical examination and consider repeat thyroid US every three to five years.

Thyroid ultrasound examination if the patient has previously received chemotherapy or as a baseline if chemotherapy is anticipated

Thyroid function testing as indicated based on clinical signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism

Ovarian stromal tumors

Examination of all females of any age for signs and symptoms of precocious puberty or virilization, and masses in the abdomen or pelvis. If any are detected, perform appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluations.

Imaging: abdominal-pelvic US examination, MRI, or CT

Laboratory testing: serum markers AFP, beta-HCG, LDH, inhibin A and B, estradiol, testosterone, CA125, and serum electrolytes including calciumNote: There is no current recommendation for laboratory screening in the absence of a mass or clinical findings of sex hormone excess.

For women and the parents of young girls with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant: education regarding the possible presenting signs and symptoms of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (abdominal distension, precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and signs of virilization [hirsutism, voice changes, acne])

CBME

Evaluation of young children for ciliary body medulloepithelioma including measurement of visual acuity

Visual inspection of the eye and orbit

Botryoid ERMS. In infants, children, and young adults: when signs/symptoms of hematuria or abnormal vaginal bleeding are present, endoscopic evaluation of the bladder or direct visualization of the cervix, respectively

NCMH. In infants, children, adolescents, and adults:

Review of systems including respiratory and feeding difficulties, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, visual disturbances, and otitis media

Nasal endoscopy as warranted by ophthalmologic signs (e.g., ophthalmoplegia, proptosis, ptosis, hypotropia, and enophthalmos) resulting from orbital involvement of the tumor

Pituitary blastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of cortisol excess

Pineoblastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of increased intracranial pressure such as headache, full fontanel, vomiting, and lethargy, or other neurologic defects including upgaze paralysis and nystagmus
See McLaughlin et al [2013] for consensus document, including Reassessing Patients Over Time.

The clinical course of HPAH is highly variable, ranging from rapid progression to long periods of stable clinical status. The appropriate surveillance measures and timing are determined by the relative stability of the patient's clinical condition. Patients who are declining should be in frequent contact with their health care providers so that therapies may be changed or added.
No specific guidelines for surveillance have been published.

Recommendations include the following:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications including bone deformity, secondary joint disease, spinal deformities, and pain

Evaluation by a specialist in skeletal dysplasia or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia clinic every year
Affected individuals are examined at regular intervals for complications related to swallowing difficulties, intercurrent infections, and other disease manifestations.
In the absence of formal surveillance guidelines, the authors recommend:

Annual:

Skin examination for evidence of malignant transformation in persons with chronic recalcitrant skin ulcers

Complete blood count

Liver function tests

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver and spleen size

Follow up as recommended by a pulmonologist and immunologist;

Follow-up assessments of motor and cognitive development as recommended for educational planning.
Growth should be carefully monitored; if growth velocity is low, evaluation for GH deficiency should be undertaken.

In persons with PROP1 pathogenic variants without known ACTH deficiency, cortisol levels should be monitored because ACTH deficiency may develop at a later time.
The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on factors such as age, disease severity, and presence of catabolic stressors; evaluation frequency can range from every three months to annually.

Clinical evaluation should include assessment of the following:

Linear growth, weight gain, head circumference, and body mass index

Interval assessment for the need of G-tube

Neurologic evaluation including survey for seizures and movement disorders

Interval ophthalmologic evaluation including dilated eye examination

Audiology evaluation

Evaluation for clinical signs of cardiomyopathy (e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, shortness of breathy, hepatomegaly)

Evaluation of integumentary system (skin, hair, G-tube, and central line insertion sites)

Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate

Laboratory evaluation should include the following:

Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, pre-prandial plasma amino acids (especially, isoleucine, leucine, valine, threonine, and methionine), plasma ammonia concentration, plasma free and total carnitine, and quantitative plasma acylcarnitine profile

Nutritional studies: electrolytes, mineral panel, albumin, prealbumin, hemoglobin, vitamin D, iron studies, essential fatty acids, and trace minerals (selenium and zinc)

Complete blood count and differential to monitor for cytopenias

Renal function tests; serum cystatin C can be more sensitive than plasma creatinine in identifying early evidence of chronic renal failure.

Amylase and lipase as needed to evaluate for pancreatitis

Other evaluations:

Cardiology evaluation, screening for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias by echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitor, annual and as needed

Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess optic nerve and retinal changes, annually and as needed

DEXA scan

Brain MRI, MRS, and EEG as clinically indicated

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy services to determine need
Individualized surveillance plans for the skeletal, pulmonary, soft-tissue, and other manifestations of PS should be developed according to patients’ specific needs.

Because of the predisposition to a range of tumors (most of which are benign) patients should be monitored by their primary care provider with regular evaluations including a directed medical history and examination.
Monthly measurement of 24-hour uric acid excretion in the urine is particularly helpful in the assessment of the response to treatment. Alternatively, a spot urinary urate/creatinine ratio can be informative if accessibility to samples is restricted.

Once a normal serum urate concentration is achieved and maintained, serum urate concentration should be monitored at a minimum annually to assure that the targeted concentration is maintained.

A 24-hour urine should also be monitored at a minimum annually for urate and xanthine concentrations particularly to ensure that urinary xanthine does not exceed solubility (<1 mmol/L); plasma xanthine is cleared efficiently and does not accumulate.

Audiometry should be repeated as deemed appropriate by treating audiologist/otolaryngologist.

Neurologic evaluation should be performed annually or more frequently as recommended by the treating neurologist.

Note: Under usual circumstances, renal functional consequences are avoided if serum urate concentration and urinary excretion of urate are normalized and urinary xanthine does not routinely exceed its solubility (~1 mmol/L).
Long-standing chronic inflammation of the pancreas is associated with an increased risk for pancreatic cancer. Persons with hereditary pancreatitis are at high risk because their onset of chronic pancreatitis is 20-30 years earlier than in sporadic forms of chronic pancreatitis.

Because surveillance for early evidence of colon cancer is effective, it is hypothesized that such surveillance may benefit individuals with hereditary pancreatitis age 40 years and older who have long-standing chronic pancreatitis and a strong family history of pancreatic cancer. Because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Brand et al 2007, Ulrich 2001], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.
Affected individuals should be examined regularly for the following by a medical geneticist and/or orthopedist familiar with the phenotype:

Symptomatic lower limb malalignment

Evidence of kyphoscoliosis

Symptoms related to joint hypermobility

Evidence of degenerative joint disease manifesting as joint pain or by radiographs

Neurologic manifestations, particularly spinal cord compression secondary to odontoid hypoplasia
Individuals receiving long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk.

Selected 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy. (See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.)
Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Affected System

Evaluation

Frequency/Comment

Cognitive

Monitoring by developmental pediatrics

Long-term

Neurologic

EEG & video EEG monitoring

If seizures are suspected

Eyes

Ophthalmologic & vision evaluations

Routine

Gastrointestinal

Monitoring for dysphagia & constipation

Routine

Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for musculoskeletal complications including hip dysplasia & scoliosis

Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Health supervision guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) have been published [McCandless 2011] (full text).

To assure appropriateness of exercise program and diet, including adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake and monitor height, weight, and BMI (weight in kg/height in m2):

Every month in infancy;

Every six months in the first decade of life;

At least annually thereafter.

Cryptorchidism can recur after orchidopexy; therefore, testicular position should be monitored.

Evaluate for the presence of diabetes mellitus by standard methods (e.g., obtaining glycosylated hemoglobin concentration and/or glucose tolerance test) in anyone with significant obesity or rapid significant weight gain.

Test annually for hypothyroidism, including free T4 and TSH levels.

Obtain history of any sleep disturbance; if present, obtain a sleep study.

Monitor for development of scoliosis clinically or, in the presence of obesity, radiographically at least annually.

Perform bone densitometry by DEXA to evaluate for possible osteoporosis every two years in adulthood.

Obtain history for behavioral and psychiatric disturbance at least annually.
The following are appropriate:

Regular examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in retinal disease. Affected individuals benefit from learning to use the Amsler grid to monitor for central visual disturbances.

Regular physical examination with specific attention to the cardiovascular system

Monitoring by the affected individual for black tarry stool

Periodic monitoring of serum lipid concentrations
Patients with RDP need to be monitored for evidence of:

Dysphagia, which (rarely) requires use of a feeding tube

Psychiatric symptoms

Seizures, which are reported in some individuals following acute onset of RDP

Patients with AHC need to be monitored for evidence of seizures which occur over time in a large proportion of affected individuals.

Patients with CAPOS syndrome need to be monitored for evidence of swallow dysfunction in order to reduce the risk of aspiration
The clinician should have a low threshold to repeat imaging studies if clinical signs/symptoms of AVMs/AVFs become evident over time.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic follow up to monitor mental and physical growth and to determine if frequent infections are an issue

Regular follow up for assessment of speech and ear infections/hearing loss if cleft lip and palate are present

Annual screening for developmental delays or learning disorders

Monitoring as per specific ophthalmologic, cardiac, or renal anomalies
Based on a retrospective review of the natural history of 35 individuals with RCDP, White et al [2003] provide health supervision guidelines for primary caretakers of children with RCDP, including the following:

Growth curves that allow weight comparisons to help determine the need for gastrostomy

The ages at which developmental milestones are achieved to provide realistic expectations

Recommendations for medical assessments including seizure control, vision, hearing, orthopedic care, and prevention of respiratory infections and contractures
The following are appropriate:

Measurement of plasma phytanic acid levels every three to six months and more frequently during illnesses or increased stress that may lead to a catabolic state

Annual ophthalmologic examination to identify vision loss resulting from cataracts, which are treatable

Annual cardiac examination to identify cardiomyopathy and concomitant arrhythmias
Further information regarding medical surveillance for those who have had or are at risk of developing Rb is available in the guidelines for retinoblastoma care.

Detection of subsequent Rb after initial diagnosis. Following successful treatment, children require frequent follow-up examination for early detection of newly arising intraocular tumors:

It is recommended that children known to have an RB1 germline pathogenic variant have an eye examination under anesthesia every three to four weeks until age six months, then less frequently until age three years. Clinical examinations with cooperative children are performed every three to six months until age seven years, then annually and eventually biannually for life.

Individuals who have unilateral Rb without an identified heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant are at risk for low-level mosaicism and can develop a tumor in the other eye [Rushlow et al 2009, Temming et al 2013]. This risk is small enough that examination under anesthesia may be replaced with regular clinical examination of the eyes, including clinical ultrasound (a simple, noninvasive procedure).

Individuals with retinomas (premalignant retinal lesions associated with Rb) are followed with retinal examinations and imaging every one to two years, to detect any change early.

Detection of second non-ocular tumors in individuals with retinoblastoma. Because of the high risk for second cancers, including sarcomas, melanoma, and specific other cancers, prompt investigation of any signs or symptoms is indicated. Total body MRI at regular intervals is under investigation to determine when the technology will be specific and sensitive enough for screening for second cancers in persons with a heterozygous germline RB1 pathogenic variant.
Annual evaluation of children under age ten years by a pediatric ophthalmologist or retina specialist is recommended.

Patient education and close follow-up are the only clinical options that may allow for early identification and treatment of vision-threatening complications [Orphanet, accessed 8-21-14].

Older children and adults need less frequent monitoring.
The following are appropriate:

Examination at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, dentition, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills, hand function, and orthopedic and neurologic complications

Periodic ECG to screen for prolonged QTc

Examination at regular intervals for the progression of scoliosis
At three months and six months after initiation of riboflavin supplementation, recommended follow up is:

General examination

Neurologic examination

Discussion of any problems with riboflavin supplementation

Ideally, obtaining a blood sample for riboflavin/FAD/FMN, acylcarnitine analysis (if previous evaluation demonstrated abnormalities) to determine if these levels are normalizing

After one year of riboflavin supplementation, repeat examination/investigations as detailed in Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis except for consultation with a medical geneticist/genetic counselor.
Periodic clinical evaluation to assess for disease progression, treatment response, and therapeutic complications is indicated.

For individuals on calcitriol and phosphate therapy the following are recommended:

Quarterly monitoring of the following: serum concentrations of phosphate, calcium, and creatinine; alkaline phosphatase level; intact parathyroid hormone level; and urinary calcium, phosphate, and creatinine to identify and thus prevent therapeutic complications

Intermittent monitoring of lower-extremity x-rays (teleoroentgenograms) to assess skeletal response to treatment. The frequency has not been well established; although annual imaging can be considered, the decision for imaging should be based on symptoms and physical examination findings.

Renal ultrasound examination to assess for nephrocalcinosis. The frequency has not been well established.

Dental follow up twice a year (as for children and teenagers at high risk for caries)
The following are appropriate:

Head circumference measurements every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter

Developmental assessment every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter, or more frequently as needed if delays identified

Dental evaluation every six months to one year or as recommended by the dental professional on initial assessment

Regular cardiac and renal assessment by respective specialists as needed if abnormalities are identified
The following are appropriate:

Scoliosis surveillance in childhood and through adolescence, until growth is completed

Surveillance of growth in childhood for evidence of growth hormone deficiency
Generally Goldmann visual field perimetry (GVF) or full-field static perimetry [Weleber et al 2015] and a full ophthalmoscopic examination with dilation are performed on an annual basis, with more frequent follow up for active complications such as cystoid macular edema.

Modeling of full-field static perimetry with generation of volumetric indices that reflect both the magnitude and extent of visual field sensitivity are used: for monitoring for rate of progression; as endpoints for clinical trials [Bainbridge et al 2015, Weleber et al 2016]; and to explain to patients the effect of disease progression on visual field [Weleber et al 2015].
No clinical guidelines specific to RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease are available; however, detailed evaluations are outlined in Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research Clinical Guidelines.

The following evaluations should be considered:

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (encephalo-myopathic form with renal tubulopathy)

Regular assessments of neurodevelopment, speech, and language

Regular evaluations by a pediatric neurologist to evaluate for the presence and/or severity of encephalopathy, with consideration of EEG and video EEG monitoring to determine presence of seizures and/or subclinical status epilepticus

Regular evaluation by a pediatric renal specialist, including assessment of renal function (electrolytes in blood and urine and urine analysis)

Routine assessment of nutritional status, growth, and body mass index (BMI)

Regular pulmonary function testing including monitoring of blood gases for early detection of respiratory compromise

RRM2B-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome and mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain, and BMI, including regular review with speech and language therapist with consideration of gastrostomy as needed for nutritional support

Imaging and diagnostic procedures including EEG, ECG, and brain MRI as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

RRM2B-related multiple mtDNA deletions with external ophthalmoplegia

Care will be directed by clinical findings. The following general evaluations are recommended:

Biannual:

Comprehensive neurology consultation and clinical examination to include measures of functional neurologic status

Occupational therapy and physical therapy assessments

CBC, electrolytes, liver function (albumin, coagulation factors), liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT), blood glucose, and HBA1C

Annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of blood gases to monitor for early respiratory compromise

Routine assessment of nutritional status, weight gain and BMI, biannually

Imaging and diagnostic procedures to include EEG, ECG, and MRI brain- as indicated by clinical findings and rate of disease progression

ECG advised biannually (KSS phenotype)
The following are appropriate:

Monitoring of growth with special attention to growth velocity

In infancy and in older children with diaphoresis or poor appetite, monitoring of blood glucose concentration for hypoglycemia

At each well-child visit in early childhood, examination and measurement of limb-length discrepancy

Close monitoring of speech and language development
Surveillance includes the following:

Close monitoring of growth, especially in the first year of life

Annual follow-up evaluation for ophthalmologic abnormalities

Yearly audiologic screens; more frequent evaluation if a history of multiple episodes of otitis media exists

Monitoring as per routine for cardiac or renal anomalies

Regular dental and orthodontic follow up
The following are appropriate:

Annual evaluation by a physician familiar with RTS

Monitoring of growth

For individuals without cataracts, yearly eye examinations for screening purposes

Prompt skeletal radiographic examination when clinical suspicion of osteosarcoma is present (including bone pain, swelling, or an enlarging lesion on a limb) due to the high risk for this potentially lethal malignancy, particularly for those individuals with pathogenic deleterious variants in RECQL4

Frequent monitoring for any evidence of malignancy in affected family members of individuals with RTS and osteosarcoma (because of reports of more than one sib with RTS also developing osteosarcoma)

Close monitoring of the skin for lesions with unusual color or texture, as individuals with RTS are at increased risk for skin cancers
Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects; doses should be altered as needed. Dose adjustment including efficacy testing is especially important in growing children.

Individuals with an ICD implanted should have regular, periodic evaluations of ICDs for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications.
Monitor as follows:

Every six months: cardiac function (by ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording and echocardiography) starting at age five years.

Yearly: respiratory function, using pulmonary function testing or spirometry.

As needed: orthopedic complications (foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity) by clinical examination and x-rays as needed.
The following are appropriate:

Complete blood count annually. If cytopenias are identified these should be monitored more frequently.

Patient/family education to seek prompt clinical evaluation if any signs or symptoms suggestive of hematopoietic cytopenia develop (e.g., fatigue, pallor, unexpected bleeding, recurrent infections).

Annual evaluation of gait, coordination, and speech.
Small children

Neurologic, audiologic, and ophthalmologic evaluation every six to 12 months

Neurophysiologic studies when clinically indicated

Brain MRI every three to five years

Adolescents and adults

Neurologic examination annually

Audiologic and ophthalmologic examinations every one to two years

EEG and brain MRI at least during status epilepticus
Neurologic evaluation every three to six months is appropriate
Follow-up outpatient clinical evaluation every four to six months is indicated to identify early signs of potential complications and to adjust anticonvulsant treatments.
Annual evaluation by a neurologist is indicated to monitor the ataxia and to identify any new findings that may occur over time.
Annual reevaluation may be helpful for disability assessment and identification of comorbidities.
Evaluation by a neurologist is indicated annually, or more often in the event of an acute exacerbation.
Gait, coordination, and speech should be evaluated annually.
Follow up by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists every two or three years is appropriate.
Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing rapidly, as may happen in the advanced stages [Toyoshima et al 2004].
Affected individuals should be examined at least annually by a physician experienced in movement disorders and ataxia.
The following are appropriate:

Periodic speech assessment if dysphagia becomes a problem

Routine follow up with a neurologist about every two years or as needed
Annual assessment of the cerebellar ataxia using SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia), CCFS (Composite Cerebellar Functional Severity Score), or similar scales should be performe to evaluate stability or progression of the disease.

Monitoring of speech and swallowing difficulties is recommended.
Speech, swallowing, and gait function should be monitored annually or biannually to assess need for assistive devices.
The following routine monitoring is recommended after a diagnosis of SCA36 has been confirmed.

At least annual evaluation by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing

Annual or bi-annual evaluation by an otolaryngologist to detect or monitor hearing loss

Surveillance of speech and ambulation

In presymptomatic individuals who tested positive for the NOP56 expansion, it is appropriate to start surveillance of neurologic status and hearing by age 40-45 years.
Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist, with consultations as needed by physiatrist and physical and/or occupational therapist. Driving ability should be assessed by professionals periodically.
Routine follow up by an ophthalmologist is appropriate to measure visual acuity and visual fields and to help identify appropriate visual aids.
Affected individuals should regularly visit a neurologist familiar with the ataxia syndromes to identify potential complications that develop over time and to manage clinical challenges associated with decreased mobility and exercise or difficulties with speech and swallowing.
Longitudinal follow up of persons with SCAD deficiency may be helpful in order to more clearly define the natural history over the life span, including annual visits to a metabolic clinic to assess growth and development as well as nutritional status (protein and iron stores, concentration of RBC or plasma essential fatty acids, and plasma carnitine concentration).

For individuals with a history of metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and/or other acutely presenting symptoms, the need for closer follow up and surveillance should be determined by the physician.
Routine visits to a neurologist are appropriate.
Evaluate periodically for neurologic, cognitive, and/or behavioral deterioration.

Monitor with EEG and other modalities (e.g., video EEG telemetry or ambulatory EEG) when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Because of the increased risk of SUDEP, some families use oxygen monitoring during sleep.
Because increased intracranial pressure (ICP) can develop even after successful treatment of craniosynostosis, brain imaging or ophthalmologic evaluation for chronic papilledema should be obtained periodically until age 15 years, or at any time symptoms (e.g., headache, reduced school performance) are identified.

Examination for progression of facial asymmetry particularly in individuals with untreated unilateral coronal synostosis should continue until the completion of facial growth (age ~16 years).

Audiologic screening throughout childhood is indicated.

Regular ophthalmologic evaluations (frequency determined on the basis of symptoms) should begin before age two years or earlier if strabismus or severe ptosis is identified.

If cleft palate is present, monitor for ear infections and hearing loss.

Screen for sleep-disordered breathing at all visits.

At least annual assessment of developmental status of preschool-aged children is appropriate. If findings suggest developmental delay, comprehensive developmental assessment and referral to early intervention is indicated.
The following is recommended given the intermittent nature of some features of SDS and the evolution of the phenotype over time [Rothbaum et al 2002, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a]:

Complete blood counts with white blood cell differential and platelet counts at least every three to six months, or more frequently if peripheral blood counts are changing or infections are recurrent and debilitating

Developmental assessment every six months from birth to age six years and growth every six months.

Assessment of nutritional status every six months and measurement of serum concentration of vitamins to evaluate effectiveness of or need for pancreatic enzyme therapy

Repeat bone marrow examinations every one to three years following the baseline examination, and more frequently if changes in bone marrow function or cellularity are observed.

Monitoring for orthopedic complications with x-rays of hips and knees during the most rapid growth stages

Bone densitometry before puberty, during puberty, and thereafter based on individual findings. Results must be interpreted in the context of stature and pubertal status.

Neuropsychological screening in children age 6-8 years, 11-13 years, and 15-17 years

Note: Discussions to update and maintain recommendations are ongoing.
Affected individuals should be followed annually for the development of joint pain and scoliosis.

Cervical spinal films should be obtained prior to school age to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia.
The following are appropriate:

Clinical follow-up during and after infancy to confirm that CNS disease is not progressive (in contrast to free sialic acid storage disorders) and to document the gradual remission of signs and/or symptoms present in infancy

Follow-up evaluations three to four times in infancy, twice in the second year of life, and once every subsequent year
For males with SGBS1:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia in the newborn period

Physical examination to monitor for scoliosis during period of rapid growth rate; radiographs as needed

If development appears to be normal on initial assessment, routine monitoring of social and intellectual development

Monitoring of renal function if renal anomalies are present

Physical examinations to monitor for tumor risk [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every three months until age four years

Every four months from age four to seven years

Biannually after age seven years

The following screening recommendations require further study to determine benefit. The clinician and family should discuss the methods to be used:

Wilms tumor. Abdominal ultrasound examination every three or four months from birth until at least age seven or eight years, and yearly thereafter [Choyke et al 1999, Lapunzina 2005]. Abdominal ultrasound examination should assess for both Wilms tumor and hepatic tumors.

Note: When associated with an overgrowth syndrome, the risk for Wilms tumor decreases after age eight years [Beckwith 1998].

Gonadoblastoma or hepatocellular carcinoma. Serial measurement of serum alpha fetoprotein and beta human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months between ages four and seven years

Annually after age seven years

Neuroblastoma. Measurements of urinary catecholamine metabolites including vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic acid as well as urinary free fractionated catecholamines with the following suggested frequency [Lapunzina 2005]:

Every four months until age four years

Every six months from age four to seven years

Annually after age seven years

Annual lifelong chest radiograms have also been suggested [Lapunzina 2005].
All individuals with SGS should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with this condition.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of growth including height, weight, and body mass index

Ongoing eye examinations in individuals with evidence of an anterior chamber anomaly by an individual with expertise in developmental eye disorders or glaucoma

Screening for insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus beginning in mid-childhood

Periodic hearing assessments in childhood
Surveillance should be tailored to an individual's specific phenotype and clinical history; however, most individuals benefit from routine age-dependent screening to allow for early detection and treatment of end-organ damage [NHS 2010, Yawn et al 2014]. The following are general guidelines compiled from several sources. Recently NHLBI has released updated guidelines that readers are encouraged to review. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Comprehensive medical and social evaluation. Affected individuals should be seen routinely for evaluation of risks, review of care plan, education, and assessment of growth and development. Social work assessment with emphasis on support, resources, and the impact of disease on lifestyle should be performed. Routine dental care is recommended.

Mental health and neurocognitive assessment. Periodic mental health screening for signs of depression, anxiety, and isolation should occur. Neurocognitive testing should be performed prior to school entry and repeated periodically to identify learning difficulties that may be related to silent cerebral infarcts as well as other factors.

Annual laboratory assessment should include the following:

CBC with differential and reticulocyte count

Assessment of iron status

Liver function tests (LFTs), BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis (UA)

LDH as a marker of hemolysis

Vitamin D level; may be indicated because of the high prevalence of deficiencies in this population

Baseline values should be given to parents for comparison during times of illness.

Extended red cell phenotyping should be done once to decrease risk of alloimmunization with transfusions.

Assessment of stroke risk. Historically more than 10% of young children with Hb S/S and Hb S/β°-thalassemia (as well as some others) had overt strokes. Yearly screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) starting at age two years followed by initiation of chronic therapy for those with high-velocity blood flow has drastically decreased stroke incidence in SCD [Fullerton et al 2004]. Individuals with an abnormally high arterial blood flow velocity have a high rate of stroke, which can be prevented by chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. Children with normal velocities require yearly reevaluation as a proportion of them convert to higher-risk velocities over time [Adams et al 2004]. Initial studies suggest that this approach is decreasing the incidence of overt stroke in individuals with SCD, but additional measure may be of benefit as well [Fullerton et al 2004, Jordan et al 2012, Webb & Kwiatkowski 2013].

End-organ evaluation. While there is a clear consensus for use of screening TCD starting at age two years through at least age 16 years, there is variability in recommendations for additional screening. The NHLBI [Yawn et al 2014] suggests screening for a proliferative retinopathy by an ophthalmologist starting age ten years, and additional screening based on clinical history that may include:

Chest x-ray examination

ECG

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to determine the tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet with consideration of right heart catheterization depending on symptoms

Six-minute walk test

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study (to assess nighttime hypoxemia)

Iron overload by MRI
It is debated whether monitoring for possible iron overload is warranted in older individuals through routine screening of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), and serum ferritin concentration; iron overload is theoretically possible but has not been reported.
The following are appropriate:

Regular monitoring of the hips

Annual monitoring of renal, immune, and hematologic status
Routine monitoring of:

Height and weight using age and gender appropriate growth charts;

Swallowing and diet to assure adequate nutrition;

Ambulation and speech;

Whole-blood manganese levels and brain MRI to assess treatment response and disease progression.
The following are appropriate:

Evaluation every six to 12 months for early evidence of hip dislocation and/or spinal deformity

Regular swallowing assessment to evaluate risk for aspiration

Regular assessment by a dietitian/nutritionist to ensure adequate caloric intake
Routine health supervision by a physician familiar with SLOS, its complications, and its treatment includes the following:

History, physical examination, and monitoring of growth parameters, with the frequency to be determined by the severity of the child's condition

Age-appropriate developmental assessment at least twice a year until age three years and annually thereafter

Nutritional assessment at least every three to four months until age two years and twice yearly thereafter

Monitoring of cholesterol, serum concentration of 7-DHC, and serum amino transferases (ALT and AST) every three to four months in the first few years of life and twice yearly thereafter
The guidelines described below closely follow those presented in the consensus statement for standard care in spinal muscular atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Individuals with XL-SMA should be followed regularly by a physician familiar with this condition (e.g., a clinical geneticist). Other subspecialists involved in ongoing care include the neurologist, pulmonologist, orthopedist, physical and occupational therapists, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist as needed.

Affected children should be followed at least monthly until the severity and disease course are more clearly delineated. Affected children frequently die in infancy or early childhood; their clinical status should be followed closely to optimize management, and so that the family has a good understanding of the progression and can make informed decisions.

The following are indicated on a routine basis:

Neurologic evaluations to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management

Evaluation by a pulmonologist for evidence of progression of restrictive airway disease

Monitoring of caloric intake and weight, linear growth, head circumference, and growth velocity

Monitoring for scoliosis and kyphosis
Individuals with SMA are evaluated at least every six months; weaker children are evaluated more frequently.

At each visit nutritional state, respiratory function, and orthopedic status (spine, hips, and joint range of motion) are assessed.
Recommended annually:

Multidisciplinary team evaluation (including physical, occupational, and speech therapy evaluations and pediatric assessment) to assist in development of an individualized educational program (IEP). Periodic neurodevelopmental assessments and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric consultation can be an important adjunct to the team evaluation.

Thyroid function, including free T4 and TSH

Fasting lipid profile

Routine urinalysis to evaluate for occult urinary tract infections

Monitoring for scoliosis

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Otolaryngologic follow up for assessment and management of otitis media and other sinus abnormalities

Audiologic evaluation to monitor for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss annually or as clinically indicated
Because of the osteoporosis, individuals with SRS are at increased risk for fractures and should be investigated for factures if medically indicated.

While receiving calcium supplementation, patients should be monitored regularly for ectopic calcification with endocrine tests (including calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and hormone levels) and radiographs.
Annually from infancy onwards for the following:

Audiologic assessment

Assessment for increased intracranial pressure and medullary compression

Neurologic and otologic examination for consequences of cranial nerve entrapment

Dental and orthodontic evaluation of tooth malalignment and malocclusion on an individual basis.
Regular evaluation by a general pediatrician is recommended for younger children, individuals with many medical complications needing coordination of medical specialists, and families requiring more support than average [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007].

The clinician may wish to evaluate older children/teenagers and those individuals without many medical complications less frequently.

The following are appropriate at the clinical evaluation:

Thorough history to identify known clinical sequelae of Sotos syndrome

Cardiac auscultation

Blood pressure measurement

Examination for curvature of the spine

Urine dipstick to assess for quiescent urine infection

Referral to an ophthalmologist if strabismus or other problem with vision is suspected

Referral for audiologic assessment if hearing is a concern or if the child has had many upper respiratory tract infections

Referral to the appropriate clinical specialist if problems are identified

Note: Cancer screening is not recommended. (1) The absolute risk of sacrococcygeal teratoma and neuroblastoma is low (~1%) [Tatton-Brown et al 2005b, Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]. This level of risk does not warrant routine screening, particularly as screening for neuroblastoma has not been shown to decrease mortality and can lead to false positive results [Schilling et al 2002]. (2) Wilms tumor risk is not significantly increased and routine renal ultrasound examination is not indicated [Scott et al 2006].
The following measures are suggested:

Annual hearing test

Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference every three to six months during childhood

Neurodevelopmental assessment annually for the first five years of life
Specialized outpatient clinic evaluations are suggested every six months to adjust medication and physical rehabilitation.

Brain MRI can be used to follow the atrophy of the corpus callosum, cerebellum, and brain stem, and to monitor increases in the size and intensity of white matter hyperintensities.

Regular electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP) are recommended to follow the extent of the disease.
Annual neurologic evaluation of gait, strength, muscular atrophy, and deep tendon reflexes by a neurologist is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Specialized outpatient evaluations every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation

Cognitive testing

Repeat skeletal survey
There is no consensus regarding the frequency of clinical follow-up visits, but every person with HSP should be reevaluated once or twice a year to identify new complications early and to initiate aggressive therapy as indicated.
Specialized outpatient evaluations are suggested every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation.
Annual neurologic evaluation can help identify potential complications of spasticity that develop over time (e.g., contractures).
The following are appropriate:

Regular neurologic examinations (1-2 per year) to evaluate disease progression and avoid complications of spasticity, including joint contractures

Referral to a urologist for urodynamic testing and follow-up when symptoms appear
Growth, development, respiratory function, and spinal curvature should be monitored.

The parents/care providers of young males need to be alert for the signs of inguinal hernia and its potential complications.
Data are insufficient to determine how frequently CSF levels of dopamine and serotonin metabolites should be evaluated and whether these levels should be used to adjust medication doses. Practices range from at least annual assessment of CNS neurotransmitter metabolites to adjustment of neurotransmitter precursor therapy based solely on clinical manifestations.

Because clinical manifestations are more difficult to assess in children, it would seem prudent to evaluate CSF neurotransmitter metabolites two to four times yearly in children younger than age two years and at least yearly in children younger than age ten years.

Note: Plasma prolactin levels may inversely correlate with CNS dopamine levels but are neither a sensitive nor specific marker [Leuzzi et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2003, Concolino et al 2008].
Regular neurologic and developmental assessments are indicated.
Annual examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is appropriate.

Follow-up audiologic evaluations are appropriate every six months through age five years, and annually thereafter.

While the prevalence of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) among affected individuals is unclear, all individuals with Stickler syndrome should be screened for MVP through routine physical examination. More advanced testing (e.g., echocardiogram) should be reserved for those with suggestive symptoms.
Monitor plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, and the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas [Kidambi & Patel 2008] at least every six to 12 months.

Monitor platelet count for thrombocytopenia, CBC for evidence of hemolytic anemia, and liver enzymes for elevation beginning at the time of diagnosis with the frequency determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.

In those with longstanding untreated sitosterolemia, surveillance for atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease is indicated, with the level of monitoring determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.
There are no published guidelines for surveillance of individuals diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy. The following assessments and investigations can be performed as needed:

Neuropsychological assessment

EEG
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Routine developmental and neurologic assessment

Periodic nutritional and growth assessment

Periodic hearing evaluation

Periodic ophthalmologic examination

Routine physical examination of back and joints for kyphoscoliosis and joint contractures
No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the needs of the child:

Developmental and neurologic assessment

Nutritional and growth assessment

Echocardiogram

Liver function tests

Hearing evaluation

Ophthalmologic examination
Yearly evaluation by a neurologist or physiatrist to prescribe walking aids is appropriate.
Routine nutritional assessment is appropriate.

Periodic assessment for gastrointestinal malabsorption may aid in optimizing nutritional status.
Platelet count is indicated whenever evidence of increased bleeding tendency (bruising, petechiae) occurs.
Monitoring of the forced vital capacity and other parameters of ventilation should be performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation.

Routine screening for depression at clinic visits is appropriate.
Neurology evaluation with EEGs are appropriate, depending on seizure frequency and/or progression of clinical manifestations.

Perform yearly audiologic evaluation to assess for possible progression of hearing loss and/or the efficacy of hearing aids.

Yearly dental evaluation is appropriate.

Individuals with epilepsy, irrespective of cause, should have periodic ECGs as interictal and ictal abnormalities may predispose to sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP).
Annual hearing evaluation is indicated.

Renal function should be regularly monitored in all individuals with and without renal anomalies, even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination.
The following are appropriate:

Routine assessment of neurologic status on physical examination

Orthopedic evaluation upon the development of joint contractures or joint hypermobility [Wilcox et al 1998]

Audiology assessment

CT to evaluate for craniocervical constriction in long-term survivors if respiratory insufficiency is potentially the result of compression of the brain stem at the craniocervical junction

EEG for seizure activity
Serial nerve conduction studies can be used to objectively monitor the course of the polyneuropathy.

Serial electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level can be used to monitor the course of cardiomyopathy and conduction block.

Modified body mass index (mBMI) can be used to monitor nutritional status.
Once the serum ferritin concentration is around 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

Although hepatocellular carcinoma has not been reported in individuals with TFR2-associated hereditary hemochromatosis, surveillance for its development should be performed in persons with cirrhosis by monitoring liver ultrasound examinations and serum concentrations of alpha-fetoprotein, as in persons with cirrhosis with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor scoliosis or joint problems

Ongoing developmental assessments
Examination by a movement disorder specialist in pediatric or adult neurology at least several times yearly is recommended.
Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of serum glucose concentrations, especially in individuals treated with beta-blockers, which may mask hypoglycemic symptoms

A complete cardiac evaluation based on the status of the individual patient
Although no clinical guidelines are available, treating physicians should consider the following:

Beginning in infancy: periodic neurodevelopmental assessment and speech/language evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist

Soon after diagnosis is established:

Routine assessments of nutritional status, weight gain, and growth parameters

Routine pulmonary function tests, including assessment of blood gases, to monitor for respiratory insufficiency (alveolar hypoventilation and chronic hypercapnia)
For TRPS I and TRPS II

Monitor linear growth in childhood

Routine developmental assessments in childhood

For TRPS II only. X-ray evaluation of osteochondromas when symptomatic and at the end of puberty (when normal growth of osteochondromas has ceased) to provide a baseline for comparison with any future enlargement
The following are appropriate:

Regular dietary evaluation in infancy to ensure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring of developmental progress and educational needs

Behavioral assessment for attention, aggression, and/or social communication difficulties

Monitoring for spine deformities beginning in early childhood

Regular evaluation of teeth; frequency determined by a dentist based on dental condition
The following are recommended at least yearly to monitor the efficacy of the oral thiamine therapy as well as disease progression:

Hematologic tests (CBC, reticulocyte count)

Hearing test

Assessment for glucose intolerance (fasting serum glucose concentration, OGTT, urinalysis)

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Cardiac evaluation

Neurologic evaluation
The following are appropriate:

Routine evaluations of swallowing and feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration, and nutrition to prevent malnutrition

At least yearly:

Medical evaluation including physical examination to assess weight and medications

Evaluations by specialists in occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, and rehabilitation medicine

Evaluation by orthopedists to assess for scoliosis and joint dislocation

Annual neurologic evaluation to assess symptoms and any emerging complications
The following routine monitoring is recommended for individuals with TSC (adapted from Krueger et al [2013a], Table 3):

Central nervous system

Obtain MRI of brain every one to three years in asymptomatic (no symptoms referable to the central nervous system) individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to monitor for new occurrence of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). Those with asymptomatic SEGA in childhood should continue to be imaged periodically as adults to ensure that there is no growth.

In affected individuals with large or growing SEGA causing ventricular enlargement who are still asymptomatic, brain MRI scans should be performed more frequently and these individuals and their families should be educated regarding the potential for new symptoms.

Perform screening for TAND features at least annually. Perform comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key developmental points: infancy (0-3 years), preschool (3-6 years), pre-middle school (6-9 years), adolescence (12-16 years), early adulthood (18-25 years), and as needed thereafter.

Obtain routine EEG in individuals with known or suspected seizure activity. The frequency of routine EEG should be determined by clinical need.

Renal

Obtain MRI of the abdomen to assess for progression of angiomyolipomas and renal cystic disease every one to three years throughout the lifetime of the affected individual.

Assess renal function (including determination of GFR) and blood pressure at least annually.

Cardiac. In asymptomatic infants and children with documented cardiac rhabdomyomas, obtain an echocardiogram every one to three years until regression of the cardiac rhabdomyomas is documented. More frequent or advanced diagnostic assessment may be required for symptomatic individuals.

Pulmonary

Perform clinical screening (targeted history) for LAM symptoms, including exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath, at each clinic visit for women older than age 18 years or those who report respiratory symptoms. Counseling regarding smoking risk and estrogen use should be reviewed at each clinic visit for individuals at risk for LAM.

Obtain a high-resolution computed tomography (HCRT) of the lungs every five to ten years in asymptomatic individuals at risk for LAM who have no evidence of lung cysts on baseline HRCT. Individuals with lung cysts detected on HRCT should have annual pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function test and 6-min walk) and HRCT reduced to every two to three years.

Skin. Perform detailed clinical dermatologic inspection/exam annually.

Dental. Perform detailed clinical dental inspection/exam at minimum every six months and panoramic radiographs by age seven years, if not performed previously.

Ophthalmologic. Perform annual ophthalmologic evaluation in affected individuals with previously identified ophthalmologic lesions or vision symptoms at the baseline evaluation.
Frequent evaluation of the following parameters is typical in the management of individuals with tyrosinemia type I (Table 3) [CR Scott, personal recommendations].

Table 3. 

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

Evaluation

Initiation of Therapy (Baseline)

First 6 Months:

After 6 Months of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

After 2 Years of Rx: Every 6-12 Months

As Clinically Indicated

Monthly

Every 3 months

Tyrosinemia type I markers

Plasma concentration of methionine, phenylalanine, tyrosine

X

x

X

X

or X

Blood / urine succinylacetone

X

X(urine)

X

or X

Blood nitisinone concentration

X

X

X

or X

CBC

Hemoglobin, hematocrit, WBC, platelet count

X

X

X

X

or X

Liver evaluation

Serum AFP concentration

X

X

X

X

X

PT/PTT

X

X(until normal)

Bilirubin

X

ALT/AST/GGT

X

X(until normal)

X

Alkaline phosphatase

X

X(until normal)

X

X

CT or MRI 1

X

Renal studies

BUN / creatinine

X

Urine: PO4, Ca, Prot/Cr ratio

X

Skeletal evaluation

X-ray of wrist (for rickets)

X

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

1. 

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

Suggested Guidelines for Monitoring in Individuals with Tyrosinemia Type I Diagnosed by Newborn Screening

AFP = alpha-fetoprotein

ALT/AST = alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase

BUN = blood urea nitrogen

CBC = complete blood count

GGT = gamma-glutamyl transferase

PT/PTT = prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time

MRI with contrast to evaluate for liver adenomas or nodules and for kidney size

For monitoring children diagnosed based on clinical presention, see Table 4 (pdf).

For alternative management recommendations, see de Laet et al [2013].
Disease progression and the need for rehabilitation and orthotic treatment should be evaluated by neurologic examination every one to four years.
Annual evaluation with the following specialists is appropriate:

Pediatrician for growth assessment

Neurologist to identify and manage seizures

Orthopedist for evaluation of contractures and back examination for scoliosis

Ophthalmologist for ocular manifestations and corrective therapy if needed
Monitor for evidence of urinary tract features including vesicoureteric reflux (VUR) and hydroureteronephrosis. Renal function should be monitored at intervals determined by urinary tract features at presentation and their subsequent progression.
Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.
Routine auditory evaluation is recommended in order to detect changes that may require modifications to hearing aids.

Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended in order to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.
Individuals with known VHL syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations but identified as having a VHL pathogenic variant, and first-degree relatives who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team familiar with the spectrum of VHL syndrome.

Annual evaluation starting at age one year for neurologic symptoms, vision problems or hearing disturbance

Annual examination starting at age one year for signs of nystagmus, strabismus, or white pupils

Annual blood pressure monitoring starting at age one year

Monitoring for complications is as follows:

CNS lesions. MRI of the brain and total spine every two years starting at age 16 years. Attention should be given to the inner ear/petrous temporal bone (for ELST) and the posterior fossa.

Visceral lesions. Annual abdominal ultrasound; MRI scan of the abdomen (kidney, pancreas and adrenal glands) every two years starting at age 16 years

Retinal angiomas. Annual ophthalmology evaluation with indirect ophthalmoscope starting at age one year

Pheochromocytoma. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines starting at age five years

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). The best way to detect ELST is unknown.

ELST presents as a mass on the posterior wall of the petrous part of the temporal bone and can be missed on standard MRI. MRI with contrast and high signal intensity with T1 (to detect hydrops), using thin slices of the internal auditory canal is recommended in symptomatic individuals. Butman et al [2013] found that FLAIR MRI is useful to find ELST-associated hydrops.

Butman et al [2013] described three pathophysiologic ways in which ELST can cause symptoms: optic capsule invasion, hemorrhage, and endolymphatic hydrops. Symptoms can be caused by all three mechanisms and hemorrhage or hydrops can be present even without any lesion being visible on MRI (<3 mm).

Audiology assessment every two to three years (annually if hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo is present) starting at age five years. Audiology can be used to detect (early) hearing loss. Binderup et al [2013b] described a male patient with demonstrable hearing loss by audiometric data whose ELST was only detectable with MRI more than one year later, after the patient already suffered from complete right-sided hearing loss. Results from a large study on audiometric data in individuals with VHL are pending.

While current medical surveillance guidelines do not address structured psychological support for individuals with VHL, their partners, and their family members, research suggests a distinct need for psychosocial support [Lammens et al 2010, Lammens et al 2011b].

Note: The surveillance guidelines established for VHL are not evidence based and rely on experiential reporting, largely from North America. Guidelines may vary somewhat depending on the local standard of care.

In the United States, the VHL Alliance has worked extensively with healthcare professionals to assemble guidelines which are generally accepted throughout the world [VHL Handbook]. Other guidelines originate from Denmark and the Netherlands. For example, Dutch guidelines recommend screening for ELST only on indication. In addition, examination by a primary care physician and assessment of metanephrine levels start at age ten years, while ophthalmologic examination begins at age five years.

Two recent studies evaluated tumor progression. In one study, new tumor development was compared to age and genotype [Binderup et al 2013b]. According to their results, surveillance for retinal angiomas is essential during teenage years and central nervous system hemangioblastomas is mainly important in adults. In the other study, the optimal lesion-specific age to start surveillance and the optimal screening interval per organ system was analyzed [Kruizinga et al 2013]. The optimal time to start metanephrine measurements is age five years; retinal screening in patients with VHL can start at age 12 years. For central nervous system hemangioblastomas and visceral lesions, starting age was in line with current surveillance guidelines. Furthermore, to attain a 5% detection rate, surveillance intervals for retinal tumors can be twice as long, and for the adrenal gland, four times as long.

Improved surveillance guidelines have increased the life expectancy of individuals with VHL by more than 16 years since 1990 [Wilding et al 2012]. Two studies evaluated the implementation of national surveillance guidelines in Denmark and the Netherlands. One study showed that more than 90% of the 84 affected individuals included reported that they were familiar with their national VHL surveillance guidelines. However, daily practice showed that 64% of those individuals had received information that was only partially consistent with the Dutch guidelines [Lammens et al 2011a]. In a Danish study, compliance and frequency of follow up was surprisingly low with regard to the national VHL guidelines for individuals with VHL and subjects at risk [Bertelsen & Kosteljanetz 2011]. These studies collectively suggest that correct implementation of surveillance guidelines through a doctor- and patient-oriented information campaign could have an immediate positive impact for individuals with VHL.
Routine visits to the neurologist are appropriate.
Because VMCM lesions can increase in size over time and become painful or symptomatic, affected individuals should be reevaluated yearly or whenever symptoms arise.
The following are appropriate:

Regular surveillance of hepatic function, platelet count, and hemoglobin level in children with VODI as hepatic failure and portal hypertension may occur

Surveillance of serum and urine electrolytes as the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) may occur

Measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations prior to IVIG infusions

Broncho-alveolar lavage to diagnose Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral cultures or lung function studies as needed

Cerebrospinal imaging to diagnose leukodystrophy when clinically indicated
Individuals with milder forms of VWD can benefit from being followed by treatment centers with experience in the management of bleeding disorders.

Individuals with type 3 VWD should be followed in experienced centers and should have periodic evaluations by a physiotherapist to monitor joint mobility.
For VPS35-PD (as well as in Parkinson disease in general), follow-up clinical neurologic evaluations are recommended every three to 12 months (depending on the clinical scenario and the needs of the individual) to assess tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, gait, cognition, and neuropsychiatric symptoms as well as treatment effectiveness.
The following surveillance guidelines are adapted from the American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies. Click here for full text.

Neonatal period and infancy

Weekly assessment of nutritional intake and weight gain during the first month of life

Otolaryngologic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development

Dental evaluation

Consultation with other specialists as applicable

Longitudinal evaluation and treatment

Audiologic evaluation as soon as possible in a neonate and again at the time of an infant’s first visit to a cleft clinic. The timing and frequency of follow-up evaluations should be based on the individual’s history of ear disease or hearing loss. Evaluations should be carried out routinely through adolescence.

Dental evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within six months of the first tooth erupting, no later than age 12 months. Routine dental evaluation should continue throughout life.

Otolaryngologic evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within the first six months of life. These evaluations should continue throughout adolescence.

Speech-language pathology evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic to provide parents with information about speech and language development. By age six months, infants should be seen for assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development. During the first two years of life, children should be evaluated at least twice, and then at least annually until age six years. After age six years, evaluations should be at least annually until after adenoid involution, and then at least every two years until dental and skeletal maturity.

Consultation with other specialists as applicable
Annual ophthalmologic examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is indicated.
Regular follow-up is indicated to monitor blood counts, adequacy of the IVIgG replacement therapy, and other potential complications.
Regular review by a pediatrician is recommended for young children with EZH2-related Weaver syndrome to monitor developmental progress, camptodactyly (for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia.

If scoliosis is present, monitor as per the orthopedic recommendations.

The clinician may wish to review less frequently older children/teenagers who do not have medical complications.

Current data suggest that there may be a slightly increased relative risk for the development of neuroblastoma in individuals with heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variants. Although the numbers are too small to quantify the absolute tumor risk, it appears to be low. In addition, given that neuroblastoma surveillance has been inconsistent with no data to support the modality of surveillance, screening interval or duration, the current recommendations include clinical vigilance and thorough investigation of any symptoms that may be tumor related.
Periodic ophthalmic examinations for early detection and removal of an ectopic lens can help decrease the possibility of pupillary block and glaucoma.
Appropriate surveillance includes the following:

Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus at least annually

Annual lipid profile

At least annual physical examination for malignancies common in Werner syndrome and other skin manifestations

Annual ophthalmologic examination for cataracts

Attention to symptoms of angina, or peripheral or cerebrovascular disease
Wolfram syndrome. Regular evaluations including the following to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Diabetes mellitus: tests of glucose tolerance

Optic atrophy: ophthalmologic examination

Sensorineural hearing loss: audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing

Neurologic deficits: neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities: assessment for signs including depression, suicidal behavior, and changes in personal appearance and social behavior

Urologic abnormalities: urodynamic examination and assessment of ability to empty the bladder. Regular urine cultures when bladder dysfunction or other renal tract abnormality is present.

Diabetes insipidus: assessment of concentrating ability of the urine

Growth delay: monitoring of linear growth in children using standard growth charts

Hypogonadism

Puberty: monitoring for signs of onset of puberty

Once diabetes mellitus is present, regular follow-up for complications that can occur with time, including evaluations for:

Diabetic retinopathy

Microalbuminuria

Because women with WFS may develop diabetes insipidus during pregnancy [Rugolo et al 2002], monitoring for diabetes insipidus during pregnancy is warranted.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Regular audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing is appropriate.
Systematic follow up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Ferrarini et al 2003, Battaglia et al 2008, Battaglia 2010].

Complete blood count annually to evaluate for hematopoietic dysfunction

Annual renal function testing, including serum BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C; urinalysis; and creatinine clearance test

Consideration of routine liver ultrasonography to evaluate for liver adenomas
Table 3. 

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Interval / Age

Test/Measurement

In infants – toddlers

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 yearsThyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Annual / all ages 1

Medical evaluationVision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismusHearing evaluationMonitoring of blood pressure in both armsMeasurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysisCardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Every 2 years

Serum concentration of calciumThyroid function and TSH level

Every 10 years

Renal and bladder ultrasound

In adults

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenosesEvaluation for cataracts

1. 

Except as noted

2. 

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.

Surveillance for Williams Syndrome

Serum calcium determination every 4-6 months until age 2 years

Thyroid function test yearly until age 3 years

Medical evaluation

Vision screening to monitor for refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing evaluation

Monitoring of blood pressure in both arms

Measurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine and urinalysis

Cardiology evaluation at least yearly for the first 5 years, every 2-3 years thereafter for life

Serum concentration of calcium

Thyroid function and TSH level

Renal and bladder ultrasound

Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) starting at age 20 years to evaluate for diabetes mellitus 2

Evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, hypertension, long QT interval, and arterial stenoses

Evaluation for cataracts

Except as noted

If normal, OGTT should be repeated every five years.
According to current guidelines (AASLD [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines [European Association for Study of Liver 2012]), routine monitoring should include the following examinations:

At least twice annually: serum copper and ceruloplasmin, liver biochemistries, international normalized ratio, complete blood count, urinalysis, and physical examination including neurologic assessment

Note: Patients receiving chelation therapy require a complete blood count and urinalysis regularly, no matter how long they have been on treatment

At least once annually: 24-hour urinary excretion of copper

Note: Measurements are recommended more frequently if there are questions on compliance or if dosage of medications is adjusted.
The hearing loss in WS1 is typically non-progressive. Hence, repeat audiogram would usually not be necessary.
Monitor for endocrine abnormalities:

Hypogonadism at age 12-14 years

Diabetes mellitus in the teens and later

Hypothyroidism in the teens and later

Neurologic manifestations should be monitored by experts in rehabilitative medicine, speech, and swallowing.

Dystonia may require monitoring by a neurologist.

Monitor hearing annually.
Adrenal function should be reevaluated periodically in males with X-ALD whose initial evaluation revealed normal adrenal cortical function [Dubey et al 2005].

Males with X-ALD should undergo brain MRI every six months through childhood and then yearly to monitor for the development of cerebral disease [Peters et al 2004] because MRI abnormalities occur well in advance of clinical disease [Loes et al 2003] and the evidence clearly shows that HSCT has the best outcome when performed on an asymptomatic individual [Shapiro et al 2000, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2007].
Appropriate surveillance includes:

Regular follow-up of ophthalmologic abnormalities

Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor kyphoscoliosis or joint problems and assess linear growth and any leg length discrepancy

Ongoing developmental assessments

Ongoing follow-up with dermatologist

Routine monitoring of any existing cardiac and/or renal abnormalities

Regular hearing evaluations
The first dental visit should occur by age one year to monitor tooth and maxillary/mandibular development and for anticipatory guidance for parents. The developing dentition should be evaluated every six to 12 months to monitor existing treatments and to provide continued interventions as needed.
No formal surveillance guidelines exist; the following are general considerations:

Blood should be monitored by EBV-PCR for evidence of EBV infection if symptoms of infection or HLH develop.

Blood counts, hepatic profiles, coagulation studies, and inflammatory markers (ferritin, soluble IL2R) should be monitored as needed based on clinical status for early evidence of HLH.

IgG levels should also be monitored as needed based on clinical phenotype.
Children younger than age 16 years with ocular albinism should have an annual ophthalmologic examination (including assessment of refractive error and the need for filter glasses) and psychosocial and educational support.

In adults, ophthalmologic examinations should be undertaken when needed, typically every two to three years.
Because of the associated increased incidence of aortic or carotid dissection in PVNH, affected individuals should be screened by echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. There is insufficient data at present to provide definitive guidelines. However, given that such complications have occurred in early adulthood, it is reasonable to perform evaluation initially in late adolescence, with follow up as needed. Cardiology evaluation of those who have connective tissue findings and classic PVNH would be prudent.
After successful bone marrow transplantation, routine evaluation of affected boys every six to 12 months is appropriate to monitor donor cell engraftment, growth, immune and lung function, and gastrointestinal and dermatologic issues.
Presymptomatic males known to have the pathogenic variant may need yearly clinical evaluations after age 30 years to identify the onset of symptoms in order to institute appropriate therapy as early as possible.

Once an individual is symptomatic, biannual follow-ups are recommended in order to adjust medications to assure best management of dystonia and/or parkinsonism.

Periodic swallowing evaluation, especially in those with subjective dysphagia, is appropriate.
Regular follow up, especially during childhood, is necessary to evaluate for development of vision, refractive errors, strabismus, and/or ambylopia.
At least once a year:

A complete blood count with differential, chemistries, and quantitative serum immunoglobulins to monitor gammaglobulin substitution therapy

Chest x-rays or CTs and sinus films

Note: Chronic lung disease can develop in the absence of an acute pulmonary infection [Quartier et al 1999].

If the patient is stable, the serum IgG does not need to be evaluated with every infusion of gammaglobulin.
Monitor and treat pulmonary complications:

Annual pulmonary function tests for those older than age seven years

Follow-up of pulmonary infiltrates with a high-resolution chest CT scan, as they may represent lymphoid aggregates

Bronchoscopic evaluations as indicated

Perform annual endoscopic evaluation.

At routine visits, monitor for the following:

Chronic neutropenia

Chronic diarrhea and resulting malnutrition. If present, screen for ova and parasites.

Liver disease with biochemical liver function tests, especially in individuals with documented history of cryptosporidiosis

Lymphomas and GI cancers by history of new symptoms that could be suggestive of malignancy

Autoimmune disorders with history, physical examination, and CBC

Neurologic complications with neurologic examinations and brain MRI, as indicated
Growth should be followed regularly in infancy and childhood and plotted on age-appropriate growth charts. (Syndrome-specific growth charts are not available.)

Developmental progress should be monitored throughout infancy and childhood.
See Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. A physician should examine the skin of an affected individual at frequent intervals (every ~3-12 months, depending on the severity of skin disease).

Affected individuals or their parents should be educated to look for abnormal pigmented lesions or the appearance of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. Individuals should be examined frequently by a family member who has been instructed in recognition of cutaneous neoplasms.

Eyes should be examined regularly for signs of UV exposure and damage.

Neurologic. Routine neurologic examination is indicated because of progressive neurologic abnormalities that are present in a minority of individuals with XP and may not be detected in young children.

Hearing. Periodic audiograms. Serial audiograms at regular intervals may also be useful for assessing the presence or absence of progressive neurologic degeneration, especially in those with a history of acute burning on minimal sun exposure [Totonchy et al 2013].
The following routine monitoring is recommended:

Assessment of developmental progress and cognitive abilities

Screening for behavioral and psychiatric problems

Audiology evaluation

Ophthalmologic evaluation
Monitoring during testosterone replacement therapy should include the following:

Evaluation of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size.

Measurement of serum testosterone concentration at three-month intervals (prior to the next injection) to evaluate nadir testosterone concentrations. Concentrations lower than 200 ng/dL or higher than 500 ng/dL may require adjustment of total dose or frequency.

In adults, digital rectal examination and measurement of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) prior to treatment and three, six, and 12 months after initiation of therapy to evaluate for the presence of an overt prostate cancer, which would be a contraindication to the treatment. Such testing should then be performed annually.

For individuals on testosterone replacement therapy, evaluation of hematocrit at three, six, and 12 months, then annually because of risk of increased hematocrit with subsequent risk of hypoxia and sleep apnea

Lipid profile and liver function tests, as testosterone may alter lipid profile and liver function

Bone mineral determination by bone densitometry (DEXA) once a year, if osteopenia has been diagnosed

Ongoing psychosocial support
Following a successful HSCT, the following should be routinely monitored:

Growth

Psychomotor development

Complete blood counts

Liver and renal function

Immune status

Donor and recipient chimerism

Development of post-transplant complications, particularly chronic graft-versus-host disease, decreased bone density, pulmonary and cardiac function, and gonadal function

Individuals with milder findings or those who have not undergone HSCT also need to be monitored for worsening of immune function with periodic assessment of clinical status and functional lymphocyte responsiveness.
