Some affected individuals, including those who have had bone marrow transplantation (BMT), may require symptomatic treatment. The overall aim is to prevent complications and to optimize quality of life.

Medical measures

Early use of antibiotics for bacterial infections. A clinical consequence of the immunodeficiency is that bacterial and viral infections must be treated with vigilance.

Hearing aids as early as possible for individuals with sensorineural hearing loss to improve hearing and enhance speech development and social functioning

Insertion

of PE (pressure-equalizing) tubes to reduce the conductive/mechanical component of hearing loss from fluid in the middle ear

Glasses (spectacles) to correct refractive error to improve vision. Although lens replacement for cataract is a standard procedure in alpha-mannosidosis, corneal transplantation can be difficult; postoperative complications include astigmatism (which may be correctable with repeat surgery, laser treatment, or optical devices).

Physiotherapy including hydrotherapy to avoid strain on the joints

Use of a wheelchair if necessary

Treatment of osteoporosis or osteopenia identified on bone densitometry with palmidronate (Aredia®) monthly or zoledronic acid (Aclasta®) once a year

Orthopedic intervention if necessary. Special shoes may help with ankle and foot support.

Ventriculocaval shunt for communicating hydrocephalusNote: Ventriculoperitoneal shunts may cause ascites because of the reduced absorptive capacity of the peritoneal cavity [Malm, personal communication]. Therefore, ventriculocaval shunts are preferred.

Educational opportunities/social considerations

Use of sign language in individuals with significant hearing loss

Early educational intervention for development of social skills

Speech therapy to improve speech

Special education to maximize learning

Planning housing for possible future wheelchair use
Hb Bart syndrome was previously considered a universally fatal condition, however, its prognosis is shifting because of prenatal diagnosis, intrauterine blood transfusions, improved transfusion strategies, and (rarely) curative hematopoietic stem cell transplant [Pecker et al 2017]. Although the Thalassemia International Guidelines recommend a transfusion strategy similar to β-thalassemia for these individuals; however, no reports on optimal transfusion management exist [Amid et al 2016]. Because few children with Hb Bart syndrome survive, clinical trials to assess these treatment approaches are lacking.

The advances in intrauterine and postnatal therapy have resulted in ethical dilemmas for the family and health care provider.

HbH disease. Most individuals with HbH disease are clinically well and survive without any treatment.

Occasional red blood cell transfusions may be needed if the hemoglobin level suddenly drops because of hemolytic or aplastic crises.

Chronic red blood cell transfusions should be considered in selected individuals only. Clear indications for red blood cell transfusions are severe anemia affecting cardiac function and massive erythroid expansion, resulting in severe bone changes and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Note: These events are quite rare in HbH disease.

Iron chelation therapy may be needed in individuals with iron loading caused by regular blood transfusion, inappropriate iron therapy, or abnormal iron absorption.

Splenectomy should be performed only in individuals with massive splenomegaly or hypersplenism; the associated risks for severe, life-threatening sepsis and venous thrombosis should be considered.

Other complications, such as gallstones and leg ulcers, require appropriate medical or surgical treatment.
Cortisol deficiency

Regular hydrocortisone replacement therapy is indicated if baseline serum cortisol concentrations are low.

Stress-dose steroids should be provided perioperatively and during times of physiologic stress in individuals in whom cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (cosyntropin test) is below normal [Krone et al 2012].

Genital abnormalities

Hypospadias and cryptorchidism may be corrected with surgery.

When clitoromegaly is severe, surgical reduction and plastic reconstruction of the clitoris may be considered.

Vaginal reconstruction may be performed in females with vaginal hypoplasia.

Dihydrotestosterone treatment has been successful in some males with micropenis [Fukami et al 2005].

Testosterone replacement has been initiated in males in whom testosterone levels remained relatively low after onset of puberty [Hershkovitz et al 2008, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Similarly, females with absent pubertal development may require estrogen replacement therapy.

Ovarian cysts. Treatment with estradiol appeared to successfully reduce the size of ovarian cysts in females with PORD [Fukami et al 2009, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Ovarian cysts in females can be a significant problem as they tend to be large and prone to spontaneous rupture; cases of girls treated with GnRH agonists and potent steroids have been reported [Idkowiak et al 2011].

Craniosynostosis. Treatment for craniosynostosis is similar to that for other syndromes associated with premature fusion of cranial sutures. Although surgical correction can be performed at any age, it is generally believed that earlier surgical correction results in better cognitive outcome.

Airway management is often a primary concern in individuals with ABS as a result of choanal stenosis or atresia, small chest, narrow trachea, and/or shortening of the larynx.

Endotracheal intubation is often required in the first minutes after delivery.

Nasal stints or tracheotomy may be required.

Tracheostomy may be necessary until age three to five years when the pharyngeal encroachment can be corrected.

Hydrocephalus. If present, hydrocephalus may be treated by surgical placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.

Joint contractures and elbow synostosis. Physical and occupational therapy can help individuals with contractures and elbow synostosis develop fine and gross motor skills.
During the first few years of life, most children with HMSN/ACC are able to achieve walking independently, but require walking aids such as canes or walkers.

Early developmental/educational intervention is appropriate for cognitive delays.

Depending on its degree of severity, scoliosis usually requires surgical correction.

Low-dose neuroleptics may be useful for psychiatric manifestations. Referral for psychiatric evaluation is appropriate.
Dark or special filter glasses or red-tinted contact lenses reduce photophobia and may improve visual acuity.

Low vision aids include high-powered magnifiers for reading.

Children with achromatopsia should have preferential seating in the front of the class to benefit maximally from their magnifying devices.

Extensive information about learning and occupational aids is available from the Achromatopsia Network (www.achromat.org).
Provide palliative care for viable newborns.
Recommendations for management of children with achondroplasia were outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics [Trotter et al 2005]. The recommendations of the committee are meant to supplement guidelines available for treating the child with average stature. A recent review [Pauli 2010] updates the information available in Trotter et al [2005].

The recommendations include (but are not limited to) the following:

Short stature

A number of studies have assessed growth hormone (GH) therapy as a possible treatment for the short stature of achondroplasia [Seino et al 2000, Kanaka-Gantenbein 2001, Kanazawa et al 2003].

In general, these and other series show initial acceleration of growth, but with lessening effect over time.

Only modest effects on adult stature seem to accrue.

Extended limb lengthening using various techniques remains an option for some. Increases in height of up to 12-14 inches may be obtained [Peretti et al 1995, Ganel & Horoszowski 1996, Yasui et al 1997, Aldegheri & Dall’Oca 2001].

Although some have advocated performing these procedures as early as ages six to eight years, many pediatricians, clinical geneticists, and ethicists have advocated postponing such surgery until the young person is able to participate in making an informed decision.

At least in North America, only a tiny proportion of affected individuals elect to undergo extended limb lengthening. The Medical Advisory Board of Little People of America has published a statement regarding use of extended limb lengthening.

Obesity. Measures to avoid obesity should start in early childhood.

Standard weight and weight-by-height grids specific for achondroplasia [Hunter et al 1996, Hoover-Fong et al 2007] should be used to monitor progress.

Note that the body mass index has not been standardized for individuals with achondroplasia and will yield misleading results; thus, body mass index should not be used in this population until normal ranges are established.

Hydrocephalus

If increased intracranial pressure arises, referral to a neurosurgeon is needed.

Because of the presumed mechanism giving rise to hydrocephalus in this population, probably ventriculoperitoneal shunting, rather than third ventriculostomy, is appropriate.

Craniocervical junction constriction

The best predictors of need for suboccipital decompression include:

Lower-limb hyperreflexia or clonus

Central hypopnea demonstrated by polysomnography

Reduced foramen magnum size, determined by CT examination of the craniocervical junction and by comparison with the norms for children with achondroplasia [Pauli et al 1995].

If there is clear indication of symptomatic compression, urgent referral to a pediatric neurosurgeon for decompression surgery should be initiated [Bagley et al 2006].

Obstructive sleep apnea

Treatment may include the following:

Adenotonsillectomy

Weight reduction

Continuous positive airway pressure

Tracheostomy for extreme cases

Improvement in disturbed sleep and some improvement in neurologic function can result from these interventions [Waters et al 1995].

In rare instances in which the obstruction is severe enough to require tracheostomy, surgical intervention to advance the midface has been used to alleviate upper airway obstruction [Elwood et al 2003].

Middle ear dysfunction

Routine management of frequent middle-ear infections, persistent middle-ear fluid, and consequent hearing loss should be undertaken as needed.

Speech evaluation by age two years should be undertaken if any concerns arise on screening.

Varus deformity

Criteria for surgical intervention have been published previously [Kopits 1980, Pauli 2010].

Presence of progressive, symptomatic bowing should prompt referral to an orthopedist. Various interventions may be elected (e.g. valgus-producing and derotational osteotomies, guided growth using 8-plates).

Kyphosis. A protocol to help prevent the development of a fixed, angular kyphosis is available [Pauli et al 1997]:

In children in whom spontaneous remission does not arise after trunk strength increases and the child begins to walk, bracing is usually sufficient to prevent persistence of the thoracolumbar kyphosis.

If a severe kyphosis persists, spinal surgery may be necessary to prevent neurologic complications [Ain & Browne 2004, Ain & Shirley 2004].

Spinal stenosis

If severe signs and/or symptoms of spinal stenosis arise, urgent surgical referral is appropriate.

Extended and wide laminectomies [Pyeritz et al 1987, Lonstein 1988], need to be done as soon as possible [Carlisle et al 2011].

Socialization

Because of the highly visible nature of the short stature associated with achondroplasia, affected persons and their families may encounter difficulties in socialization and school adjustment.

Support groups (see Resources), such as the Little People of America, Inc (LPA), can assist families with these issues through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs.

Information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children with short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting is available through a national newsletter, seminars, and workshops.
Note: Individual case reports indicate the effectiveness of treatment in patients with aceruloplasminemia; however, no large series of symptomatic patients treated with iron chelators and zinc is available and there is no universally accepted treatment regimen. A systematic review/analysis of studies designed to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of desferrioxamine, deferiprone, deferasirox, and zinc as monotherapy for the initial treatment of various clinical presentations of aceruloplasminemia is needed.

Desferrioxamine. Treatment with iron chelating agents (i.e., desferrioxamine) can be considered for symptomatic individuals whose blood hemoglobin concentration is higher than 9 g/dL. Treatment can decrease serum ferritin concentration as well as brain and liver iron stores, and can prevent progression of the neurologic signs/symptoms [Miyajima et al 1997].

Intravenous infusions of 500 mg of desferrioxamine (desferoxamine mesylate) dissolved in 100 mL of isotonic saline solution are given over one hour. Desferrioxamine is infused twice a week for six to ten months.

In the Miyajima et al [1997] study, head MRI evaluations were performed before and after treatment to evaluate the effect of treatment on iron storage in the brain. Serum concentrations of iron, ferritin, copper, hemoglobin, and hemoglobin A1c, as well as C-peptide immunoreactivity, were measured before and after treatment. Lipid peroxidation in plasma samples also was measured by the thiobarbituric acid method. T2-weighted MRI showed an increase in the signal intensity of the basal ganglia. Serum ferritin concentration was markedly reduced and hepatic iron concentration was decreased, whereas serum iron concentration was elevated and anemia and DM were ameliorated.

In the Mariani et al [2004] report, the brain MRI did not change after more than one year of desferoxamine treatment, whereas excess iron in the liver was removed.

Pan et al [2011] reported an affected individual age 52 years who was treated with desferrioxamine (500 mg) by intravenous infusion in a 5% glucose solution once a week for four years. After four years of treatment, brain MRI evaluation demonstrated improvement in low-intensity areas in the basal ganglia, suggesting that iron chelation can reduce abnormal iron deposition in the central nervous system.

Deferasirox. Iron chelation therapy with deferasirox, an oral iron chelating agent, led to a mild improvement in clinical symptoms, including cognitive performance, gait, and balance, in an individual with aceruloplasminemia who had no response to both deferoxamine and fresh-frozen plasma therapy [Skidmore et al 2008]. Oral administration of deferasirox may prevent tissue damage, particularly to the liver and pancreas [Finkenstedt et al 2010].

Deferiprone. This iron chelator has a lower molecular weight and more lipophilic properties. Deferiprone therapy had no beneficial effects in a patient in a previous report [Mariani et al 2004]; however, it has been shown to protect against retinal degeneration and neurodegeneration and to increase the life span if initiated early in mice exhibiting knockout for ceruloplasmin and hephaestin [Hadziahmetovic et al 2011].

Fresh-frozen human plasma. After the intravenous administration of fresh-frozen human plasma (FFP) containing ceruloplasmin, serum iron content increases for several hours because of ferroxidase activity of ceruloplasmin. Iron content in the liver decreases more with the combined intravenous administration of FFP and desferrioxamine than with FFP administration alone. Neurologic signs/symptoms can improve following repetitive FFP treatment [Yonekawa et al 1999].

Antioxidants such as vitamin E may be used along with a chelator or oral administration of zinc to prevent tissue damage, particularly to the liver and pancreas [Kuhn et al 2007].
Management of individuals with ATS requires the coordinated input of a neurologist familiar with the treatment of periodic paralysis and a cardiologist familiar with the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. To date, no randomized clinical therapeutic trials have been conducted on ATS.

Management of attacks of episodic weakness depends on the associated serum potassium concentration:

If the serum potassium concentration is low (<3.0 mmol/L), administration of oral potassium (20-30 mEq/L) every 15-30 minutes (not to exceed 200 mEq in a 12-hour period) until the serum concentration normalizes often shortens the attack. As dysphagia is almost never a problem during attacks of paralysis, oral potassium replacement is the safest route. If intravenous potassium replacement is needed, a 5% mannitol solution instead of a saline or glucose solution (both of which may exacerbate weakness) is recommended. Close monitoring of serum potassium concentrations and ECG is necessary during potassium replacement therapy in an emergency setting to avoid secondary hyperkalemia.

Whether a relative drop in serum potassium within the normal range causes episodic paralysis is not clear. If such cases are suspected, affected individuals can work with their physician to devise an individual potassium replacement regimen, with a goal of maintaining serum potassium levels in the high range of normal.

Attacks of weakness when serum potassium concentration is high usually resolve within 60 minutes. Episodes may be shortened by ingesting carbohydrates or continuing mild exercise. Intravenous calcium gluconate is rarely necessary for management in an individual seen in an emergency setting.

Vasovagal syncope in individuals with ATS mandates a careful cardiology assessment [Airey et al 2009].
Children with an ACTG2-related disorder require multidisciplinary management with specialists in pediatric gastroenterology, nutrition, urology, surgery, clinical genetics, and occupational therapy, among others. Adults with an ACTG2-related disorder require similar multidisciplinary care.

Treatment for ACTG2-related disorders remains supportive.

Urologic manifestations. Management of bladder dysfunction by an urologist is recommended.

A clear link has been established between fetal urinary tract dilation such as megacystis and long-term impairment of renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012]. Patients are frequently dependent on bladder management with diversion, catheterization, and/or voiding schedules. In addition, clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.

In a review of 14 patients with visceral myopathy evaluated prior to the discovery of ACTG2, Ghavamian et al [1997] noted that clean intermittent catheterization decreased the frequency of urinary tract infection and observed that surgical approaches (construction of a catheterizable channel or a vesicostomy) were also therapeutic options.

In a review of 39 children with CIPO reported before the discovery of ACTG2,

Lapointe et al [2002] identified megacystis in 26 and hydronephrosis in 14. They noted that urologic intervention to ensure adequate bladder emptying was important to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections and to preserve long-term renal function. Urologic treatment (at some point in their care) included voiding with abdominal pressure (14 children), intermittent catheterization (10), and antibiotic prophylaxis (17).

Gastrointestinal manifestations. Management by a gastroenterologist and nutritionist familiar with intestinal motility disorders is recommended. Patients are frequently dependent on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) (see review by Gabbard & Lacy [2013]).

Complications of long-term TPN can be progressive and include irreversible cholestasis, hepatic dysfunction, central line infections, and thromboembolic events. For this reason, individuals with an intestinal disorder that requires long-term TPN (like those seen in ACTG2-related disorders) have undergone multi-visceral transplantation including liver and intestine. In the series of Gosemann & Puri [2011] in which 12 individuals underwent such multivisceral transplants, TPN could be discontinued in the majority; however, bladder catheterization was still required.

Isolated intestinal transplantation has also been reported in one individual with MMIHS [Huang et al 2013a].

Of note, use of pro-kinetic agents such as 5HT4 agonists has resulted in anecdotal evidence of improvement in bowel function [Lehtonen et al 2012, Wangler et al 2014], as well as failure to improve in bowel function in MMIHS [Hiradfar et al 2013] and some cases of molecularly confirmed ACTG2-related MMIHS [Wangler et al 2014].
The following are appropriate:

Treatment of infections with specific antibiotic, antifungal, and antiviral agents

Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jiroveci

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)
Cutaneous/Cranial

Consultation with a pediatric dermatologist or plastic surgeon provides individualized management. The goals of non-operative therapy are to prevent infection and promote healing.

Wounds without calvarial involvement. The most preferred dressing currently is a silver-coated, low-adherent primary wound dressing (e.g., Acticoat®), plus a barrier of a flexible polyamide net coated with soft silicone (e.g., Mepitel®) if there is any bone defect. Plastic wrap (e.g., Saran®) can be used to prevent desiccation. Once the wound begins to granulate, the frequency of dressing changes can be decreased. Non-infected, partial thickness skin wounds may be adequately dressed with a hydrocolloid (e.g., DuoDerm®).

Other less preferred, less costly dressings are:

Sterile saline soaked gauze / compresses (wet-to-wet), which should be changed every four hours. Although this labor-intensive option is effective, it is not frequently used anymore.

Silver sulfadiazine dressings changed twice daily work well in older children, but these cannot be used in infants younger than age two months (corrected for prematurity) because of the risk of accompanying electrolyte disturbance.

Wounds with calvarial defects: acute care. As soon as possible a plastic surgeon should be consulted for any large and/or deep lesion and imaging performed (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis, Neurologic). Operative management of large lesions involving the calvarium requires involvement of a neurosurgeon.

It is critically important to avoid drying of the wound and eschar separation, which can lead to catastrophic, terminal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus or from a dilated vein.

One option is a dermal regeneration plate (a porous matrix of bovine tendon collagen and glycosaminoglycan) and a semipermeable silicone layer (which provides a framework for cell migration) which is applied in the operating room to a meticulously debrided wound and then monitored for infection [Khashab et al 2009].

In one child with a CSF leak, a biocellulose membrane provided a barrier and supported eventual healing [Frantz et al 2015].

It has been suggested that debridement over the midline be avoided (if possible) to decrease the risk of fatal hemorrhage from the sagittal sinus [Udayakumaran et al 2013].

A surgical procedure may be necessary for more severe defects (e.g., large areas of aplasia cutis congenita on the scalp or skull abnormalities) or wounds complicated by hemorrhage, infection, or CSF leakage.

Although some infants have received skin grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Cohen et al 2014], including allogenic grafts [Swartz et al 1999, Udayakumaran et al 2013], difficulties in infants can include limited donor sites and possible interference with growth of the calvarium as well as the usual risks of graft loss and donor-site morbidity. A reason for the high complication rate specific to AOS may be the presence of an anomalous vascular supply.

Use of abdominal muscle fascia to cover exposed dura has been reported [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012].

Wounds with calvarial defects: late calvarial reconstruction. Although many skull defects (especially small ones) show spontaneous closure over a period of months, some remain at least partially open and require reconstruction by a neurosurgeon. As some lesions can also involve the dura, it is important to consider the role of the dura in promoting osteogenesis.

Cranioplasty, if needed, is usually considered around age three to four years [Beekmans & Wiebe 2001]. Because cranioplasty requires good quality skin coverage over the bone graft, scalp reconstruction must be done at the same time or earlier.

Bone grafting in the neonatal period using unaffected skull, with coverage of the sampled site with vascularized peri-osteum, has been reported [Steinbok 2000].

Use of a split rib graft with a latissimus dorsi muscle flap has also been reported.

After healing is complete, scar revision with tissue expansion for cosmesis can be discussed. When the defect is severe the hair-bearing scalp may not be able to completely restore hair to the entire scalp even with tissue expansion.

Limb

Limb malformations may warrant consultation with specialists in orthopedics, plastic surgery, and/or rehabilitation medicine. X-rays of limbs are often performed immediately after birth but are most informative, in terms of delineating the extent of involvement, after age one year.

Many AOS limb anomalies are not severe enough to require surgical or prosthetic intervention.

Occupational therapy and/or physical therapy is used as needed to assist with limb functioning, such as to improve walking and running stability in those with abnormal toes.

Analysis in a gait laboratory may help identify those who would benefit from prosthetic rehabilitation.

Distraction lengthening is problematic at the phalangeal level because of limited covering soft tissue, skeletal stock, and vascularity, but could be an option for metacarpals or the forearm bones in certain circumstances [Sivakumar & Smith 2015].

‘On-top’ plasty is another, quite complex, surgical strategy to achieve prehension when necessary; a digital tip can be transposed onto a proximal phalanx and neurovascular pedicle.

Cardiovascular

Many congenital heart malformations and certain vascular malformations can be ameliorated with a range of standard surgical procedures.

Treatment of pulmonary hypertension with a variety of standard therapies is often found to be ineffective.

Neurologic

If developmental delays or disabilities are suspected, a full assessment with recommendations for supportive therapies should be obtained.

Routine pediatric care should include periodic neurologic examination for signs of spasticity, particularly if neonatal brain imaging showed evidence of periventricular calcifications.

Early physiotherapy can maximize motor function and range of motion.

The risk for epilepsy is increased, particularly when neuroimaging and/or neurologic examination are abnormal. Management of seizures is per routine.

Ocular

Early prophylactic laser photocoagulation may help preserve vision of those with retinal vasculopathy [Peralta-Calvo et al 2012]. Such treatment can decrease the progression from ischemia to neovascularization, gliosis, and retinal detachment.

Retinal detachments should be treated promptly with appropriate interventions, such as bilateral lensectomies, pars plana vitrectomies, or silicone oil tamponade.
In children, the main objective is to prevent amblyopia by early correction of refractive errors. Patching is necessary when correction of the refractive error is insufficient in restoring vision.

Lensectomy should be considered in individuals with cataracts, those in whom patching does not result in improvement, those in whom the lens edge is in the middle of the pupil, and those with large degrees of astigmatism [Anteby et al 2003, Wu-Chen et al 2005].

Following lens removal, improvement of visual acuity has been observed even in individuals older than age seven years [Speedwell & Russell-Eggitt 1995].

Treatment with lensectomy must be weighed against the problems of aphakia correction in children (particularly in individuals with unilateral involvement), loss of accommodation, and the risk for secondary glaucoma and retinal detachment. All surgical procedures should therefore be planned individually by an experienced ophthalmic surgeon.

Sphincterotomy (widening of the pupil by incision of the iris at the pupillary margin) can benefit individuals with small and highly displaced pupils.

Increased intraocular pressure can in most cases be controlled by topical anti-glaucomatous medication.

It is not clear if pathogenic variants in ADAMTSL4 increase the risk for retinal detachment. However, after lensectomy or cataract surgery, retinal detachment may occur. If typical signs (e.g., floaters, lightning, a diminished visual field) appear, evaluation by an ophthalmologist should be sought as soon as possible. Treatment of retinal detachment is by standard techniques using vitrectomy and scleral buckling if necessary. It is important to examine the fellow eye for retinal degeneration.
Medication has been variably effective in suppressing debilitating symptoms. Treatment trials should be determined by the individual’s physician, taking into account potential risk/benefit, other medical conditions, allergies, and potential drug-drug interactions. Response to medication is difficult to evaluate in an individual because some patients have long periods (weeks) of remission of the dyskinesia.

Acetazolamide, which induces a mild alkalosis, has been shown previously to improve the dyskinesia [Chen et al 2015]. In one individual 15 mg/kg/day completely alleviated episodes of dyskinesia for an extended, but non-sustained, period of time [Fernandez et al 2001].

Propanolol, which has suppressed dyskinesia in other disorders (including essential tremor, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, and episodic ataxia type 1), has had variable success in ADCY5-related dyskinesia.

Levetiracetam, an anti-convulsant, helped decrease the severity of adventitious movements in one patient [T Bird, personal observation; J Friedman, personal observation].

Tetrabenazine, which has been used as a symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, resulted in subjective symptom improvement in two patients [Mencacci et al 2015; FM Hisama, personal observation].

Benzodiazepines, which have been used in symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, have been associated with variable improvement in ADCY5-related dyskinesia [J Friedman, personal observation].

Trihexylphenidyl, an antimuscarinic compound used in treating Parkinson disease, was observed to decrease the intensity and frequency of episodes of dyskinesia in one patient, when paired with tetrabenazine [Mencacci et al 2015].

Of note, little to no improvement was observed after administration of primidone, chlordiazepoxide, amitriptyline, trifluoperazine, trihexylphenidyl, vitamin C, coenzyme Q10, carbamazepine, and valproic acid.

Stress management. The only exacerbating factor that is observed consistently across affected individuals is the presence of anxiety and exposure to typical life stressors. Further investigation is needed to determine whether stress management techniques or limitation of stressful activities may reduce the number and frequency of movements.
In about 70% of individuals with ADNFLE, carbamazepine is associated with remission of seizures, often with relatively low doses. However, individuals with ADNFLE associated with the CHRNA4 pathogenic variant p.Ser284Leu respond only partially to carbamazepine and are more responsive to zonisamide [Provini et al 1999, Ito et al 2000, Combi et al 2004].

Exposure to quinidine significantly reduces gain of function for KCNT1 pathogenic variants implicated in ADNFLE and EIMFS [Milligan et al 2014]. Clinical treatment with quinidine was reported in a child with EIMFS [Bearden et al 2014], and correlated with a marked reduction in seizure frequency. In the future, it may be also possible to treat KCNT1-related ADNFLE with quinidine.

Resistance to AEDs occurs in about 30% of affected individuals. Intrafamilial variation in pharmaco-responsiveness occurs; therefore, all appropriate AEDs should be tried.

Vagal nerve stimulation may be considered for individuals with resistance to AEDs [Carreño et al 2010].
Treatment is symptomatic; no specific therapy is available. Routine medical care by a pediatrician or primary care physician is recommended:

Speech, occupational, and physical therapy

Specialized learning programs depending on individual needs

Treatment of any neuropsychiatric features including sleep disorders, behavioral problems, and/or seizures

Nutritional support if necessary

Routine treatment of cardiac and ophthalmologic findings
A multidisciplinary approach is recommended including regular evaluations with specialists in clinical genetics, dermatology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, audiology, dentistry and prosthodontics, plastic surgery, gastroenterology, and psychiatry.

Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum. These strands of tissue between the upper and lower eyelids are often small and autolyse shortly after birth; larger ones may require surgical separation by an ophthalmologist.

Ectodermal defects

Wigs can be used, if desired, for the sparse hair and alopecia.

There are no known therapies for the nail or skin pigment changes.

Dentures should be considered in early childhood and the possibility of dental implants should be considered in the teens or early adult years.

Sweating is not severely impaired and does not require special care.

Skin erosions. The skin erosions are difficult to treat and prone to excessive ineffective granulation response; they are at increased risk for secondary infection and are not responsive to most standard wound care regimens or antibiotic therapy [Julapalli et al 2009]. Skin erosions should be treated with gentle wound care and periodic, dilute bleach soaks (Dakins solution) to prevent secondary infection.

Occlusive dressings should not be used as they tend to stimulate granulation tissue.

Secondary infections should be treated with topical or oral antibiotics or antifungal agents when appropriate. Empiric treatment (i.e., use of antibiotic without culture-proven infection) is not recommended.

Cleft lip/palate. Clefting should be addressed as soon as developmentally possible. Typical feeding issues associated with clefting are seen and include: poor suck, difficulty coordinating feeding and breathing, and excessive air intake. A nurse, nutritionist, pediatrician, speech therapist, or other specialist familiar with the management of feeding issues in children with cleft lip/palate should be consulted. Early referral to a craniofacial surgeon for planning for surgical cleft repair is indicated.

Other

Weight should be followed closely with assessment for signs of failure to thrive. If optimization of oral caloric intake fails to improve growth, gastrostomy tube placement may be considered.

Myringotomy is indicated as needed for conductive hearing loss resulting from chronic otitis media.

Significant breast asymmetry in women may be corrected through plastic surgery.

Psychological impact of the phenotypic features of the disorder on patient and family should also be considered and referrals made to psychiatry or psychology as appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Chest physiotherapy and vigorous treatment of respiratory complications

Attention to diet and method of feeding to assure adequate caloric intake

Management of seizures using standard protocols
Adrenal Insufficiency

Acute episodes. Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency are usually treated in an intensive care unit with close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Correction of hyperkalemia may be needed. Individuals are treated by the IV administration of saline, glucose, and hydrocortisone (e.g., Solu-Cortef®). If the serum concentration of electrolytes does not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of Solu-Cortef® is increased. Adequate sodium must be provided.

Chronic treatment. Once the initial acute episode has been treated, affected individuals are started on replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, and oral supplements of sodium chloride (NaCl) in younger children.

Steroid doses need to be adjusted to allow normal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

Maintenance hormone treatment is best managed in growing children by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Treatment during stress. Steroid dosage must be increased during periods of stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgery, trauma); glucose and sodium may be needed.

Local hospitals should provide parents with a plan for emergency treatment and instruction regarding when extra oral or injected hydrocortisone is needed. Parents should have access to rapid medical advice; guidelines for hospital admission should be clear.

Children should carry appropriate documentation indicating that they are steroid deficient. Death from acute adrenal insufficiency in individuals known to have X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita may still occur if steroid replacement therapy is not adequate, particularly during times of stress.

Steroid replacement therapy is monitored clinically and hormonally by an endocrinologist. ACTH levels should normalize when replacement therapy is adequate. A sudden rise in ACTH despite steroid treatment has revealed the presence of a pituitary adenoma in one case [De Menis et al 2005].

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

If there is evidence of HH, treatment with increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty may be necessary and should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.
A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of infantile spasms and medically refractory epilepsy is essential for long-term management of seizures.

Individuals with Aicardi syndrome usually require multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for adequate seizure control. Improved outcome with vigabatrin [Chau et al 2004] and vagus nerve stimulators has been reported; however, these treatments do not work for all [Van den Veyver & Sutton, unpublished observation].

Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy should begin at diagnosis to ensure the best functionality and developmental outcome possible. An individualized therapy plan should be developed and implemented by the therapists and caregivers.

Resection of large choroid plexus papillomas has been reported for management of hydrocephalus [Taggard & Menezes 2000]. Improvement of seizures was also noted in the individual reported. Whether this improvement was related to resolution of the hydrocephalus or whether the choroid plexus papillomas may have been epileptogenic is not clear.
Acute Neurovisceral Attack

Immediate treatment of an acute neurovisceral attack does not require confirmation of the specific type of acute porphyria.

Clinical assessment should include a full neurologic evaluation.

In persons known to have AIP consider other causes of abdominal pain in addition to porphyria.

Investigations should include:

Full blood count (FBC);

Measurement of serum/plasma concentrations of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes;

Serum and urine osmolality;

Urine sodium concentration if hyponatremic;

Other blood tests as indicated by the patient’s condition and possible cause of the attack, e.g., CRP, blood cultures, CK, magnesium.

MRI should be considered if CNS symptoms are present.

General measures

Review all medications and discontinue any that can exacerbate acute porphyria [Elder & Hift 2001]. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Restore energy balance using an enteral route if possible. When required, intravenous fluid should contain a minimum of 5% dextrose; however, hypotonic dextrose-water solutions should be avoided because of the risk of hyponatremia.

Treat intercurrent infections and other diseases promptly.

Supportive treatment

Pain relief. Effective analgesia should be provided as soon as possible, usually in the form of parenteral opiates (morphine, diamorphine, and fentanyl are safe). Very large quantities may be required in a severe acute attack. Consider patient-controlled analgesia and support from a pain team.

Nausea and vomiting. Prochloperazine, promazine or ondansetron are considered safe.

Hypertension. Beta blockers are considered safe.

Convulsions can be terminated with intravenous diazepam, clonazepam, or magnesium sulphate.

Fluid balance and electrolytes. Dextrose saline is preferred. Severe hyponatremia should be treated with intravenous saline rather than fluid restriction [Hift & Meissner 2005].

Specific treatment

For mild acute neurovisceral attacks, a high carbohydrate intake, preferably oral and together with other supportive measures (see Acute Neurovisceral Attack), may be used for up to 48 hours. If improvement is unsatisfactory or if additional and progressive neurologic features present, intravenous administration of hemin preparations is recommended.

Intravenous human hemin is the most effective treatment for acute neurovisceral attacks. Intravenous administration of hemin preparations may be life-saving when employed early when neuronal damage is still reversible, and may help to avoid paresis or prevent its progression.

The recommended dose for hemin is 3-4 mg/kg IV, given once daily for four days. Treatment may be extended, depending on the clinical course.

Panhematin™ (Ovation Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL) is approved for treatment of acute attacks in the US. This product is supplied as a dried powder, which must be reconstituted with sterile water immediately before intravenous injection and administered over 10-15 minutes. Because the administration of Panhematin™ reconstituted with sterile water is associated with transient, mild coagulopathy, concurrent anticoagulant therapy should be avoided.

Heme arginate (Normosang Orphan Europe, Paris) is an arginine-stabilized form of human hemin available in most other countries, including Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South America. It is infused over at least 30 minutes. It has the same advantage as hemin in treating an acute neurovisceral attack, but has fewer reported side-effects [Hift & Meissner 2005, Puy et al 2010].

Note: (1) Phlebitis after intravenous injection can be minimized by reconstituting hematin in 20% human serum albumin solution and/or by using a large vein or a central catheter for infusion. Peripheral cannulas used to administer hematin should be replaced after each use. (2) An infusion set with an in-line filter is recommended to remove any undissolved particulate matter. (3) Rigorous flushing of venous catheters with boluses of saline totaling 100 mL is recommended.

Recurrent Acute Attacks

Recurrent acute attacks are best managed with support and advice from a porphyria specialist. See information and contact details of specialist porphyria centers at porphyria.eu.

Medical therapy aims to reduce the frequency and or severity of acute attacks by the following measures:

Ovulation suppression with gonadorelin analogues for patients with recurrent menstrual cycle-related acute neurovisceral attacks [Innala et al 2010]. Long acting analogues can be used to prevent ovulation and should be administered during the first few days of the menstrual cycle to minimize the early stimulation effect on hormone release which can trigger an attack. Side effects can be minimized by administering estrogen, preferably by patch. Gynecological review and bone density monitoring are recommended.

Prophylactic hemin infusion. The minimum effective infusion frequency should be employed, usually a weekly dose of hemin infused via an in-dwelling venous catheter. Problems include those associated with a venous access device (infection, blockage) and iron overload (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Other Treatments

Liver transplantation is curative and reported from several centers [Soonawalla et al 2004, Wahlin et al 2010, Dowman et al 2012]. Indications include repeated life-threatening acute attacks, failure of medical therapy, and poor quality of life [Seth et al 2007].

Combined liver and kidney transplantation, which has been successful, can be considered in those with AIP with repeated severe attacks and renal failure [Wahlin et al 2010]. Kidney transplantation has been performed for renal failure in persons with overt and latent AIP [Nunez et al 1987, Warholm & Wilczek 2003].

Cimetidine has been suggested as an alternative treatment [Rogers 1997]; however, evidence for clinical efficacy remains elusive. No recent formal study has been performed, but informal feedback from experienced clinicians at international porphyria meetings indicates that few patients have benefited from this treatment.

Other

Patients should be advised to register with an organization that provides warning jewelry in case of an accident (e.g., MedicAlert® or similar).

Patients should be advised about support available from national patient associations where available.

Good-quality information is now widely available from patient or professional organizations either in paper form or from the Internet; see Resources.

Advice on safe treatment of persons with porphyria in some specific clinical situations (e.g., epilepsy, HIV, malaria, tuberculosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) is available on the European Porphyria Network Web site and/or Porphyria South Africa Web site.
A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with ALGS is often beneficial because of the multisystem involvement. Evaluation by specialists in medical genetics, gastroenterology, nephrology, nutrition, cardiology, ophthalmology, liver transplantation, and child development may be indicated, depending on the age and specific difficulties of the individual [Kamath et al 2010a].

Pruritus is considered the most severe of any pediatric liver disease. Pruritis and xanthomas have been successfully treated with choloretic agents (ursodeoxycholic acid) and other medications (cholestyramine, rifampin, naltrexone). Partial internal biliary diversion (PIBD) and ileal exclusions for individuals with Alagille syndrome have also been reported; however, while these procedures have the potential to relieve the intractable symptoms of liver disease (such as pruritis) and improve quality of life for those with ALGS, they are not thought to prevent the progression of liver disease [Emerick & Whitington 2002, Mattei et al 2006, Dingemann et al 2012, Sheflin-Findling et al 2012].

Liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease has an 80.4% five-year survival rate, and results in improved liver function and some catch-up growth in 90% of affected individuals; however, the catch-up growth seen in post-transplanted individuals with Allagille syndrome is still less than that observed in individuals with other cholestatic liver diseases [Quiros-Tejeira et al 2000, Kasahara et al 2003, Pawlowska et al 2010]. In a recent study on survival following liver transplant in several disorders, Kamath et al showed that the one-year survival rate for individuals with ALGS was 87%, compared to a 96% one-year survival rate for the control group (individuals with biliary atresia). The lower success rate of liver transplantation in ALGS is probably most influenced by the severity of any coexisting cardiac disease, renal disease, or vascular involvement [Kamath et al 2012c]. Additionally, the effects of long-term immosuppressants on the evolution of the other organ systems involved, including vasculature, skeleton, and kidneys, remain largely unknown [Englert et al 2006, Kamath et al 2010b, Shneider 2012]. Note: Since ALGS frequently presents with neonatal jaundice and can mimic biliary atresia, infants with ALGS may undergo an intraoperative cholangiogram and a Kasai procedure. However, a study by Kaye et al [2010] demonstrated that the Kasai procedure does not benefit children with ALGS and may worsen the outcome [Kaye et al 2010].

Cardiac involvement is treated in a standard manner.

Renal anomalies are treated in a standard manner.

Vascular accidents should be treated in a standard manner.

Head injuries and neurologic symptoms should be evaluated aggressively.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities rarely need intervention.

Vertebral anomalies are rarely symptomatic.

Note: Elisofon et al [2010] showed that health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in children with Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is impaired and that cardiac catheterization or surgery, mental health diagnoses, and poor sleep are associated with lower scores in children with ALGS [Elisofon et al 2010]. While surgeries and mental health diagnoses may be out of the control of physicians and care-givers, poor sleep in children with ALGS is often a result of severe pruritus, which can be improved with choloretic agents as discussed above.
No specific therapy is currently available for Alexander disease.

Management is supportive and includes attention to general care, nutritional requirements, antibiotic treatment for intercurrent infection, and antiepileptic drugs (AED) for seizure control.

Learning disabilities and other cognitive impairments are addressed as in individuals who do not have Alexander disease.

Physical and occupational therapy are indicated when assessment reveals the need for adaptive measures to maximize strength and motor capabilities.
Children who develop neuroblastic tumors (neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastoma, or ganglioneuroma) should be evaluated and treated by a pediatric oncologist at a pediatric cancer center.

Neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma. The treatment for individuals with a neuroblastic tumor who have a germline ALK activating pathogenic variant is the same standard risk-stratified therapy used to treat all neuroblastic tumors. Clinical trials are ongoing to study the efficacy of ALK-targeted therapy in the setting of relapsed and refractory neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma (see Therapies Under Investigation).

The management guidelines for neuroblastoma or ganglioneuroblastoma are complex [Irwin & Park 2015]

Depending on the age of the affected individual, stage of the tumor, and biologic characteristics of the tumor, treatment may involve observation or surgical resection.

Tumors with risk for metastatic spread or those that have already metastasized require chemotherapy and sometimes radiation therapy, stem cell transplantation, and immunotherapy.

Ganglioneuromas are typically removed by surgical resection and require no further therapy.
Joint pain is substantial in individuals with alkaptonuria, and close attention to pain control is necessary. Optimal pain management should be tailored to the individual with close follow up and long-term management.

Physical and occupational therapy are important to promote optimal muscle strength and flexibility.

Knee, hip, and shoulder replacement surgeries are options for managing significant arthritis. In general, the goal of joint replacement is pain relief rather than increased range of motion. Joint replacement in individuals with alkaptonuria is associated with prosthetic survival comparable to that found in individuals with osteoarthritis [Spencer et al 2004].

Aortic stenosis may necessitate valve replacement.

Treatment of prostate stones and renal stones may include surgical intervention.
Treatment is limited to symptom management and supportive care.

Alpers-Huttenlocher Syndrome

Family education is critical. It is important to address the quality of life/intensity of treatment issues frequently and when major changes occur in disease status. Once the family has started the process of accepting the diagnosis, it is important to involve the family with options for supportive care that can be offered as the illness progresses. These will include (but are not limited to) the use of a gastrostomy feeding tube and the different levels of artificial ventilation that could include less invasive treatments such as CPAP or BiPAP, assisted nasal ventilation, and/or intubation, and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator. Involvement of palliative care services can assist the care team in these discussions, as well as in practical aspects of implementation. Although rehabilitative services are a necessary part of the treatment and care plan for these children, and rehabilitation units are often where parents of children with new gastrostomy tubes and ventilator support learn to care for their children, the global perspective of care should be palliative even if death is not imminent.

Supportive therapies. Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy is indicated to maintain neurologic function for as long as possible and to insure comfort when deterioration begins.

Gastrointestinal. A consult with a gastroenterologist regarding feeding or nutritional issues, or evidence of liver involvement may be appropriate. Surgical placement of a gastric feeding tube when appropriate can maintain nutritional status and/or prevent aspiration of oral feeding.

Hepatic. Standard treatment for liver failure may include small frequent meals or continuous feeding to compensate for defective gluconeogenesis, reduction in dietary protein to a minimum, use of non-absorbable sugars to create an osmotic diarrhea, and use of conjugating agents to treat hyperammonemia.

Because levocarnitine may have some benefit in the setting of liver failure and because of its low toxicity, some recommend its use from the time of diagnosis.

Respiratory. Tracheostomy placement and artificial ventilation may be performed, as appropriate.

Assessment of nocturnal ventilatory function can be performed for evidence of central and/or obstructive apnea using polysomnography with measurement of pCO2 and monitoring by pulse oximetry. Treatment with CPAP or BiPAP as indicated is appropriate.

Seizures. Seizure control is a goal of treatment; however, refractory epilepsy, especially epilepsia partialis continua (EPC), may be impossible to control with any treatment. In individuals with EPC, the use of high-dose anticonvulsants may control the clinical seizures, but the associated obtundation with subsequent risk of aspiration and ventilatory failure may outweigh the benefit.

Although anticonvulsant monotherapy is preferred, treatment with more than one medication often becomes necessary as the child’s seizures worsen and as multiple types of seizures occur. If high-dose anticonvulsant therapy is not effective in improving the quality of life by reducing the seizure burden, reducing the number and/or dose of medications may improve quality of life by reducing medication side-effects.

There is no evidence that newer anticonvulsants such as felbamate, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, or levetiracetam offer a better therapeutic benefit over the older medications (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone); however, the newer medications tend to be less sedating, may require less processing by the liver, and have fewer drug-drug interactions. Intravenous magnesium, used most often to treat seizures in eclampsia, has shown efficacy in one report where affected individuals with status epilepicus were refractory to other typical anticonvulsants [Visser et al 2011].

One unpublished pathway for management of seizures is to begin with lamotrigine monotherapy, and when this is no longer effective for adequate control of seizures, add lacosamide. Adding clobazam may also help when these medications are no longer effective [RP Saneto, personal communication]. With the exception of valproate (see Note), other standard anticonvulsants are reasonable to use, although medications that are heavily metabolized by the liver, such as phenytoins or the barbiturates, should be reserved until other medications fail.

Note: Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Because other anticonvulsants have also been implicated in accelerating liver deterioration, it is reasonable to monitor liver enzymes every two to four weeks after introducing any new anticonvulsant [Bicknese et al1992].

Movement disorder. In addition to electroencephalographic seizures, myoclonus and other non-epileptic movement disorders occur as part of AHS and can be as disabling as seizures. These movements should not be confused with seizures, and video EEG is often the only way to differentiate a seizure from a non-epileptic movement disorder. The use of benzodiazepines often reduces the severity of these abnormal movements and also assists in seizure management and reduction of spasticity.

Chorea and athetosis [Hakonen et al 2005] may cause pain, and treatment with muscle relaxants and pain medications, including narcotics, would be advised. Some movement disorders can be treated with dopaminergic medication such as levodopa-carbidopa or tetrabenazine: a trial of either of these medications can be considered.

In most cases, not all seizures and/or non-epileptic movements can be suppressed with medication, and a balance between the adverse effects of the medication(s) and the disability created by the seizures or movements must be accepted by both the family and physician. Often a modest reduction in seizure control is offset by an improved level of alertness, although the benefit may not be lasting.

Other Phenotypes

Management is supportive and involves conventional approaches such as physiotherapy, speech therapy, and seizure management.

Gastrostomy may be required to provide adequate nutrition.

Surgery for ptosis may provide symptomatic relief for some.
Lung Disease

Patients with obstructive lung disease should receive standard therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which may include bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, pulmonary rehabilitation, supplemental oxygen, and vaccinations (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal).

Specific therapy for AATD-related lung disease, called augmentation therapy, is the periodic intravenous infusion of pooled human serum alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT). Concordant observational studies show that AAT augmentation therapy can slow the rate of FEV1 decline among individuals with AATD-related emphysema [Seersholm et al 1997, AADRSG 1998, Wencker et al 1998, Tonelli et al 2009].

Two placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials [Dirksen et al 1999, Dirksen et al 2009] have shown trends toward preservation of lung density as determined by chest CT in treated individuals vs. controls.

Results from a third placebo-controlled randomized, clinical trial are pending; however, preliminary findings are consistent with slowing of progression of emphysema [Chapman et al 2013].

Guidelines available from the American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society [2003] and from the Canadian Thoracic Society [Marciniuk et al 2012]:

Recommend intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with established emphysema. Of note, the greatest benefit evident is observed in individuals with moderate degrees of airflow obstruction (e.g., FEV1 35%-60% predicted).

Do not recommend prophylactic treatment with intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with severe AATD but no demonstrable emphysema.

In addition, the Canadian Thoracic Society guidelines specify that AAT augmentation therapy should be offered to individuals with AATD and evidence of emphysema only when they have stopped smoking and have demonstrated accelerated loss of lung function despite optimal therapy for COPD.

AATD-related lung disease can be modified in asymptomatic individuals by lifestyle changes, including avoidance of smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. It is suspected that regular exercise and good nutrition help maintain lung health.

Approximately 8% of lung transplants in the US are performed in individuals with COPD related to AATD. Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for individuals with end-stage lung disease (i.e., FEV1 <30%) and severe functional impairment despite optimal therapy [Seersholm et al 1994, Trulock 1998]. Some evidence suggests that among comparably affected individuals with AATD, those who receive a lung transplant survive longer (median survival of 11 years in transplant recipients compared to 5 years in those who do not receive a transplant) [Tanash et al 2011].

Note: Though effective in specific subsets of patients with AAT-replete COPD [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003], lung volume reduction surgery confers smaller and shorter-lived improvements in lung function in patients with AATD, and so is not generally recommended [Stoller et al 2007].

Liver Disease

Vitamin E therapy improves liver function in infants with the PI*MZ genotype and in children with cholestasis [Sokol et al 1986, Pittschieler 1991], and could be predicted to help prevent oxidative damage to the lungs. Nonetheless, firm evidence that antioxidant therapy (like Vitamin E) is beneficial in AATD is lacking.

Liver transplantation, the definitive surgical treatment for advanced liver disease, can restore serum AAT levels to normal because a liver from a donor with a PI*MM genotype produces qualitatively and quantitatively normal AAT [Francavilla et al 2000]. Serial lung function measurements following liver transplantation have been studied in a small number of patients to date (N = 17) with a highly variable course following liver transplant [Carey et al 2013]. Overall, 65% of patients experienced a decline in FEV1 post-liver transplant with the mean decline being modest over an average of 49.2 months post-liver transplant and not achieving statistical significance.

The risk for childhood-onset liver disease in infants with the PI*ZZ genotype who are breast-fed during the first month of life was reported to be reduced; however, breast-feeding does not confer absolute protection against the development of severe liver disease [Sveger 1985].

Other

Panniculitis. The often painful nodular lesions of panniculitis may resolve spontaneously or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy [Yesudian et al 2004]; however, when panniculitis is refractory to conventional treatment, it has been shown (anecdotally) to respond to intravenous AAT augmentation therapy in doses higher than the conventional dose of 60 mg/kg [Stoller & Piliang 2008]. Of note, it is presumed that the panniculitis improves because AAT augmentation therapy restores the proteolytic screen in the skin, thereby lessening inflammation.
Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013]. These recommendations encourage early detection of microalbuminuria and proteinuria through regular surveillance and early intervention aimed at suppressing proteinuria using angiotensin antagonists (click here for full text).

Renal. Hypertensive individuals should receive appropriate management.

Controlled clinical trials of therapy for Alport nephropathy have not been conducted. However, a retrospective analysis of a registry population suggested that early treatment with angiotensin blockade delays the onset of ESRD in human Alport syndrome [Gross et al 2012]. The angiotensin receptor blocker losartan has been shown to reduce proteinuria in children with Alport syndrome [Webb et al 2013]. Furthermore, angiotensin blockade has been shown to delay progression to ESRD in transgenic mice with ARAS [Gross et al 2003, Gross et al 2004]. Therefore, affected individuals are frequently treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers once proteinuria appears. This form of therapy is rarely associated with significant adverse effects. It is unknown whether the losartan therapy reduces the risk for aortic dilation in XLAS (as is being investigated for Marfan syndrome).

Renal transplantation is typically successful in individuals with Alport syndrome [Kashtan et al 1995, Byrne et al 2002]. Anti-GBM nephritis involving the renal allograft is a dramatic, but rare, complication occurring in an estimated 3% of males with Alport syndrome who have undergone transplantation [Kashtan 1999, Byrne et al 2002].

Prior to renal transplantation, males with XLAS should have a cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation [Kashtan et al 2010].

Special considerations apply to the selection of potential living related kidney donors for individuals with XLAS. The following discussion considers potential donors on the basis of gender and the presence or absence of hematuria:

Male relative without hematuria. The optimal living related donor is a male who has a normal urinalysis and is therefore unaffected.

Male relative with hematuria. A related male with hematuria probably has Alport syndrome, and cannot be a kidney donor.

Female relative without hematuria. Female relatives who have normal urinalyses are probably unaffected, although approximately 5%-10% of females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant are asymptomatic. It is rare for asymptomatic females whose children are also asymptomatic to be heterozygous. Asymptomatic females can probably donate a kidney safely, but should be informed of their risk of having affected male children to whom they will not be able to donate a kidney. Genetic status can be confirmed or excluded by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known.

Female relative with hematuria (i.e., heterozygous female). Females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant should only be considered as potential kidney donors if no asymptomatic living donors are available.

The presence of proteinuria or sensorineural deafness is an absolute contraindication to kidney donation as these are risk factors for progression to ESRD.

Heterozygous females younger than age 40 years should not be used as donors, even in the absence of proteinuria or deafness.

Heterozygous females age 40 years or older who have normal renal function, blood pressure, and hearing and no proteinuria can be considered as donors because the risk of late progression to ESRD appears to be low in such individuals. However, the donor should be informed of the risk (albeit low) of late progression to ESRD.

Cochlear. Hearing aids should be prescribed when appropriate.

Ocular. The ocular manifestations of Alport syndrome rarely require specific ophthalmologic intervention.

Some individuals develop cataracts that interfere with vision; these should be extracted when necessary.

Diffuse leiomyomatosis. Symptomatic leiomyomas may require surgical intervention.
In the absence of curative treatment, current management is focused on the following:

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation, hypersplensim, and lymphomas

Management of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases [Madkaikar et al 2011, Rao & Oliveira 2011, Teachey 2012]

Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation and hypersplenism

Manifestations of lymphoproliferation require close clinical observation, as well as serial CT and PET scans every two to three years.

Biopsy is indicated whenever there is a clinical suspicion of lymphoma.

Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs do not decrease lymphadenopathy long term in individuals with ALPS, and are generally reserved for severe complications of lymphoproliferation (e.g., airway obstruction, significant hypersplenism associated with splenomegaly) and/or autoimmune manifestations.

Experience with sirolimus suggests that it is the preferred agent in treating lymphoproliferation in a more sustained manner, including for maintenance of remission after intital treatment followed by a period of discontinued use [Teachey et al 2009, Bride et al 2016]. However, sirolimus is not without side effects.

In severe cases, more potent (lympho-depleting) agents may be required to sufficiently control lymphoproliferative manifestations. Agents include cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin (ATG), and select monoclonal antibodies such as alemtuzumab (Campath®).

Treatment of lymphoma is according to conventional protocols. The presence of defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not appear to hinder the response to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation.

Treatment of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases

Autoimmune cytopenias are typically treated by immune suppression with corticosteroids as well as corticosteroid-sparing agents, if prolonged treatment of autoimmune cytopenias is required and/or in cases of refractory cytopenias.

Recent data from a multi-institutional study suggest that sirolimus should be considered as a first-line – corticosteroid-sparing – agent [Bride et al 2016]. Sirolimus requires monitoring for drug levels and toxic side effects.

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can be used in cases when a less immunosuppressive drug (e.g., compared with sirolimus) seems sufficient, as steroids are tapered. In addition, if drug level and toxic side effects cannot be adequately monitored, MMF could be used as a first-line agent.

Individuals with severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia may benefit from IVIG in combination with corticosteroids.

Rituximab has been used successfully in the treatment of refractory cytopenias in ALPS. However, because of its immune toxicity, its use is generally avoided until other immunosuppression therapies have failed [Rao et al 2009, Rao & Oliveira 2011].

Splenectomy is reserved as an option of last resort in the treatment of life-threatening refractory cytopenias and/or severe hypersplenia because of the high risk of recurrence of cytopenias and sepsis post splenectomy in those with ALPS [Rao & Oliveira 2011, Price et al 2014]. Given the known risks associated with splenectomy, patients requiring this last-resort approach should be considered for curative bone marrow transplantation.

Individuals with isolated chronic neutropenia may improve on low-dose G-CSF [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. In addition, use of a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist should be considered for isolated immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
For ALS-related treatment options refer to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Overview.

Psychosocial support and education are indicated to reduce caregiver stress and reduce the risk of caregiver burden.

Non-pharmacologic treatment options in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) include psychosocial support and education as well as environmental, behavioral, and physical interventions designed to minimize the occurrence and consequences of undesired behaviors. Caregiver and patient support groups are valuable.

Additional helpful interventions include physical, occupational and speech therapy, home safety evaluations, and the implementation of augmentative communication devices [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Physical, occupational, and speech therapy are very valuable in cases involving parkinsonism and/or lower/upper motor neuron signs.

Pharmacologic treatment should be considered when non-pharmacologic treatment options have failed or when behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (as in FTLD) are dangerous or too stressful. Options include:

SSRIs. Although the reported efficacy of SSRIs in treating FTLD is based on relatively small, often uncontrolled trials, the use of SSRIs is considered first line therapy in FTLD with behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Venlafaxine. When apathy is prominent, venlafaxine may be tried for its activating properties.

Bupropion is considered when parkinsonism is present because of its dopaminergic tone [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Atypical antipsychotics may be considered in patients with severe behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (agitation, aggressiveness, psychosis) that are refractory to SSRIs. Often, atypical antipsychotics are necessary only as a temporizing measure, and can be tapered as patients become more apathetic (and thus less agitated and disinhibited) with disease progression [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].
Treatment is palliative and many individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team including: a neurologist, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and genetic counselor.

Data suggest that individuals under the care of such a team may have a better prognosis [van den Berg et al 2004, Andersen et al 2005]. The factors influencing survival include: age, vital capacity, fatigue, body strength, spasticity, household income, and depression [Paillisse et al 2005], most of which can be managed by the appropriate specialist in the multidisciplinary team.

Riluzole is the only currently FDA-approved drug for the treatment of ALS. Its mechanism of action is thought to be glutamate inhibition. Clinical trials have shown marginal slowing of disease progression in some but not all individuals, [Riviere et al 1998]. Riluzole is associated with elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase levels in 10% to 15% of treated individuals; in rare cases it may cause bone marrow depression [Bensimon & Doble 2004].

Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning.

Pseudobulbar affect can be managed with antidepressants such as Nuedexta® (dextromethophan and quinidine).

Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management, a prognostic factor for survival, has become a focus in the clinical setting.

Medications such as baclofen and benzodiazepines can help relieve spasticity and muscle cramps; however, weakness and lethargy are common side effects. Individualized moderate-intensity endurance-type exercises for the trunk and limbs may help to reduce spasticity [Ashworth et al 2004].

Low-tech (e.g., alphabet board) and high-tech (i.e., computer-assisted) devices can aid speech and communication. The recent development of the eye movement-controlled on-screen keyboard may enable communication for individuals without any remaining limb function.

Assistive devices, such as walkers or wheelchairs, can aid mobility; and others, such as bathroom installments, hospital bed, and Hoyer lift, can aid in activities of daily living at home.

Ventilatory assistance may include use of bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP), which has played an increasing role in preserving and prolonging quality of life in persons with ALS. In 1999, the American Academy of Neurology published norms recommending the initiation of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) in individuals with a theoretic forced vital capacity (FVC) less than 50% of predicted [Miller et al 1999]. Studies show that mean survival significantly increases when NIV is initiated prior to the onset of bulbar symptoms [Farrero et al 2005]. Therefore, evaluation by a pulmonologist should be undertaken before reduction of the forced vital capacity below 50%.

Although tracheostomy and ventilatory support can extend life span, affected individuals often decline these interventions [Albert et al 1999].

The tremendous psychological and social impact of ALS on both affected individuals and caregivers needs to be continually addressed [Goldstein et al 1998]. Hospice care, typically instituted once FVC is less than 30%, contributes to the individual’s comfort in the terminal stages.
No therapy exists to prevent the progressive organ involvement. However, monitoring for developing problems and early intervention is essential.

Rod-cone dystrophy

Early on when photodysphoria is significant, the use of red-orange tinted prescription lenses may reduce symptoms.

Early educational planning should be based on the certainty of blindness. Instruction in the use of Braille, mobility training, adaptive living skills, and computing skills (including voice recognition and transcription software), and the use of large print reading materials while vision is still present are crucial.

Obesity. A healthful, reduced calorie diet and regular exercise, such as walking, hiking, biking, and swimming with adaptations for the blind, are recommended to control weight gain.

Progressive sensorineural hearing loss

Myringotomy has been helpful in individuals with recurrent otitis media (‘glue ear’).

Hearing can be maximized with bilateral digital hearing aids.

Cochlear implantation has benefitted some patients [Florentzson et al 2010].

Cardiomyopathy. Angiotensinogen-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diuretics, digoxin, and possibly beta-blockers should be used in the treatment of cardiac failure. Cardiac transplantation has been successful in isolated cases [Goerler et al 2007].

Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes should be treated as in the general population unless heart failure and/or liver dysfunction are present. The diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin resistance, but some individuals respond to a low-sugar, low-fat diet; exercise; and metformin. Glitazones are added to further reduce insulin resistance but must be avoided in the presence of active or treated heart failure. These treatments should be discontinued when the serum creatinine concentration exceeds 200 µmol/L or if cardiomyopathy is evident. Incretin analogues given subcutaneously, as in nonsyndromic type 2 diabetes, are successful in two thirds of cases [Paisey et al 2008, Paisey 2009].

Hypertriglyceridemia

Nicotinic acid derivatives can be helpful in long-term reduction of severe hypertriglyceridemia (>20 mmol/l) especially if pancreatitis has occurred and diabetes is absent or well controlled [Paisey et al 2004, Paisey 2009]. Statins are unlikely to be effective but can be considered for long-term prevention of atherosclerosis in adults with low HDL, high LDL, and diabetes.

Pancreatitis should be treated as in the general population.

Endocrine

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and pituitary hormones should be assessed to determine if hormonal adjustments are necessary.

Male hypogonadism should be treated with testosterone according to local endocrine guidelines to preserve sexuality, muscle strength, and bone health.

Thyroxine therapy should be initiated and monitored if the individual is hypothyroid.

Urologic. Some individuals have required urinary diversion or self-catheterization to manage voiding difficulties [MacDermott 2001].

Renal disease

The use of enzyme ACE inhibitors may be considered if proteinuria is detected.

Successful renal transplantation has occurred in a growing number of individuals, but can be contraindicated in the presence of other complications including morbid obesity, uncontrolled diabetes, and cardiomyopathy.

Hepatic disease. Portal hypertension may be treated with beta-blockade and sclerotherapy of the esophageal veins. Banding should be done in order to prevent upper-GI hemorrhage from varices. Patients who fail to respond to medication and banding are candidates for a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) to decrease risk of variceal bleeding caused by portal hypertension. Patients with significant portal hypertension should be evaluated early for liver transplantation.

Pulmonary disease. General activity, including breathing exercises, can reduce chronic hypoxia and improve wellbeing. Coaching by an exercise expert may be necessary in order to achieve adequate spirometry results to determine the presence of obstructive airways disease.

Other

If skeletal abnormalities are present, referral to an orthopedist is appropriate.

Reflux esophagitis, skin manifestations, orthopedic abnormalities, and neurologic manifestations should be treated as in the general population.

Education intervention, as indicated by evaluation and IEP (individual education plan) with the expectation of total blindness and hearing loss.

Prevention of Primary Complications

The progression to diabetes mellitus and the severity of hyperglycemia can in some cases be mitigated by lifestyle changes and avoidance of severe obesity.
The mainstay of treatment is supportive and each symptom is managed on an individual basis [Clare 2002]. In general, affected individuals eventually require assisted living arrangements or nursing home care.

Although the exact biochemical basis of Alzheimer disease is not well understood, it is known that deficiencies of the brain cholinergic system and of other neurotransmitters are present. Agents that increase cholinergic activity, such as tacrine cholinesterase inhibitors, are approved for treatment and show modest but variable benefit. Aricept® (donepezil), Exelon® (rivastigmine), and Reminyl® (galatamine) are such drugs [Rogers et al 1998, Farlow et al 2000, Raskind et al 2000, Feldman et al 2001, Mohs et al 2001, Seltzer et al 2004].

Memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, has also been approved for use in AD [Reisberg et al 2003].

Medical and behavioral management of depression, aggression, sleep disturbance, seizures, and hallucinations is required. Depression and seizures should be treated with appropriate medications.

Physical and occupational therapy can be helpful to manage problems with gait and activities of daily living.
The mainstay of treatment for Alzheimer disease (AD) is necessarily supportive and each symptom is managed on an individual basis [Bird & Miller 2008]. In general, affected individuals eventually require assisted living arrangements or care in a nursing home.

Although the exact biochemical basis of AD is not well understood, it is known that deficiencies of the brain cholinergic system and of other neurotransmitters are present. Drugs that increase cholinergic activity by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase produce a modest but useful behavioral or cognitive benefit in a minority of affected individuals. The first such drug was tacrine; however, this agent is also hepatotoxic. Newer such drugs with similar pharmacologic action, such as donepezil (Aricept®) [Feldman et al 2004, Seltzer et al 2004, Petersen et al 2005], rivastigmine (Exelon®) [Feldman et al 2007], and galantamine [Raskind et al 2000, Tariot et al 2000, Mega et al 2005, Reisberg et al 2006, Atri et al 2008], are not hepatotoxic.

Memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, has shown some effectiveness in the treatment of moderate to severe AD [Reisberg et al 2003, Tariot et al 2004].

Antidepressant medication may improve associated depression.

Agitation is especially difficult to control [Teri et al 2000, Mintzer et al 2006]
This disorder is fatal within the first year of life in children of the Old Order Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. No intervention — including mitochondrial vitamin treatment — has shown promise for treatment or amelioration in this population. However, most experience with this disorder is based on the Old Order Amish; therefore, most clinical experience is based on a single allele. It is now known that this same allele can manifest in a more mild form [Siu et al 2010]. In this case, it was shown that a ketogenic diet improved the acidosis.

Seizures have occurred in some affected infants; the few children who were treated responded well to phenobarbital.

Physical therapy may be considered if the affected child develops contractures or other secondary neurologic manifestations.

Early intervention to stimulate and comfort the infant may be considered.

Support and respite for the family may be needed during the stressful terminal irritability phase of the disease, which can last for several weeks.
Neurologic manifestations. Symptomatic pharmacologic and psychosocial support is the mainstay of care for the neurologic manifestations. Response to treatment is variable and may deteriorate over time, necessitating rehabilitative management.

Valproic acid, the first drug of choice, diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures.

Clonazepam may be used as add-on therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures.

Levetiracetam appearss to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures, and is recommended in women of child bearing age.

Note: Lamotrigine is not effective in controlling the myoclonus, and may aggravate myoclonus in some patients [Guerrini et al 1998].

Renal manifestations. Renal insufficiency requires dialysis but response to treatment is poor, and renal transplantation is often necessary.
A number of clinicians have sought to establish a consensus statement on management of DSD including AIS [Hughes & Deeb 2006]. A number of publications have subsequently discussed best management of these disorders. See Diamond & Beh [2008] (full text), Douglas et al [2010] (full text), Pasterski et al [2010] (full text), Wiesemann et al [2010] (full text), and Hughes et al [2012] (full text).

Assignment of sex of rearing. The issue of sex assignment in infancy when the child is being evaluated for ambiguous genitalia is paramount. It requires informed decision making by parents and healthcare personnel and should be resolved as early as possible, after a multidisciplinary evaluation has been completed.

Even in CAIS this may not always be easy. Cheikhelard et al [2008] evaluated 29 individuals with CAIS; it was recommended that gonads be retained at least until the completion of spontaneous puberty and the possibility of virilization be evaluated before management decisions are made.

Psychological counseling and use of support groups can be of benefit [Cull & Simmonds 2010, Hughes et al 2012].

Gender identity has become a topic of increasing importance due to the possibility of changes in sex assignment over time [Kolesinska et al 2014].

Issues of sexual orientation regardless of gender phenotype have also become increasingly important to explore and discuss [Brunner et al 2016].

CAIS

A critical consideration of any surgical intervention is the nature and timing of such intervention; thus, surgeons need to be involved with the affected individuals and pediatrician in any such decisions [Purves et al 2008, Munoz & Swan 2010]. Vidal et al [2010] reviewed the evolution of surgical techniques for ‘feminization’ and ‘masculinization’ and their possible outcomes.

A common practice is to remove the testes after puberty when feminization of the affected individual is complete, since feminization occurs partly by testicular estrogen and partly by peripheral conversion of androgen to estrogen.

The rationale for postpubertal gonadectomy is that testicular malignancy, which develops at the usual rate for cryptorchid testes, seldom occurs before puberty [Hannema et al 2006]. Prepubertal gonadectomy is now only considered if inguinal testes are physically or esthetically uncomfortable, and if inguinal herniorrhaphy is necessary. In this event, estrogen replacement therapy is necessary to initiate puberty, maintain feminization, and avoid osteoporosis.

However, the issue of gonadectomy is controversial. Some have argued that the true risk for malignant transformation of the gonads is small and have suggested postpubertal gonad biopsy as opposed to removal [Hughes et al 2006, Parisi et al 2007, Patel et al 2016], which would allow affected individuals to retain a natural source of androgen production and avoid exogenous hormone replacement.

In one study of 48 individuals diagnosed with either CAIS or PAIS, gonadoblastomas were observed in 9/30 (30%) of individuals with CAIS and 3/18 (16%) of individuals with PAIS, suggesting that the risk of gonadal malignancy may be greater than previously reported; the authors suggest earlier rather than later prophylactic gonadectomy [Liu et al 2014]. Another study found the frequency of gonadal tumor in individuals with CAIS was 13/48 (27%) and in those with PAIS was 2/21 (9%), with similar conclusions regarding the time of gonadectomy [Jiang et al 2016].

Vaginal dilatation to augment vaginal length and to avoid dyspareunia is typically the treatment of choice for those with short vaginal length. If this method fails, new treatments of blind vagina have been proposed, including autologous buccal mucosal graft vaginoplasty and enhanced balloon vaginoplasty [Zhao et al 2009, El Saman et al 2011]. Recent studies that examined the long-term outcomes of vaginoplasty with autologous buccal micromucosa indicated a high degree of satisfaction [Li et al 2014]. In addition, a study reported that peritoneal vaginoplasty appeared to be superior to ileal vaginoplasty [Huang et al 2014]. However, surgical reconstruction frequently requires maintenance vaginal dilatation to decrease the likelihood of future stricture.

The question of how much and when to disclose the diagnosis of CAIS to an affected individual has not been resolved uniformly; however, it has become obvious that explanation of the diagnosis in an empathic setting is much preferable to systematic concealment or self-discovery of the diagnosis in an environment devoid of support from family, professionals, and other affected individuals [Conn et al 2005].

PAIS with Predominantly Female Genitalia (Incomplete AIS)

The issues are similar to those discussed under CAIS, except prepubertal gonadectomy helps avoid the emotional discomfort of increasing clitoromegaly at the time of puberty.

In instances in which the diagnosis of PAIS is difficult to establish because of the presence of somatic mosaicism, a change of sex assignment can result in concomitant problems [Köhler et al 2005].

PAIS with Ambiguous Genitalia or Predominantly Male Genitalia

The assignment of sex in an infant with ambiguous genitalia is a complex process that requires timely assessment by a multidisciplinary team in consultation with the family and should be resolved as early as possible. Aside from purely anatomic and surgical considerations, the choice of a male sex-of-rearing demands a therapeutic trial with pharmacologic doses of androgen to try to predict potential androgen responsiveness at puberty. Furthermore, appreciable phallic growth in response to administered androgen facilitates reconstructive surgery.

In instances in which maximum information is being gathered on an infant with no family history of AIS before sex is assigned, sequence analysis of AR may be considered; however, the lower probability of detecting an AR variant in individuals with the PAIS phenotype and the poor positive predictive value of any given variant regarding AIS phenotype need to be considered when making decisions about sex assignment.

It has also been reported that the length of the AR exon 1 CAG repeat can influence the efficacy of testosterone treatments: individuals with shorter repeat lengths are more likely to respond to hormonal treatments [Zitzmann 2009]. However, the efficacy of CAG repeat length as a possible marker to assess hormonal treatment must await further studies.

Based on experience with a small number of individuals, the role of long-term androgen pharmacotherapy in individuals with PAIS who are raised as males remains unclear. Response to androgen treatment may be substantial in individuals with certain missense variants in the DNA-binding domain of the androgen receptor [Weidemann et al 1998], and a recent study confirmed the difficulty of accurately predicting the efficacy of androgen treatment [Becker et al 2016]. Thus, considerable caution should be exercised with regard to androgen treatment [Werner et al 2010], in particular because special hormonal profiles to androgen insensitivity have often not been acknowledged in replacement strategies. It has been proposed that an external masculinization score in neonates could be a reasonable predictor of virilization at puberty in individuals with PAIS who have been assigned a male sex of rearing [Hughes et al 2012].

Gynecomastia that develops in puberty eventually requires reduction mammoplasty. It has been reported that tamoxifen has been used for treating pubertal gynecomastia in two sibs with PAIS [Saito et al 2014].

Those individuals with PAIS who are raised as females and who have gonadectomy after puberty may need combined estrogen and androgen replacement therapy, the latter to maintain libido.

MAIS

Men with MAIS often require reduction mammoplasty for treatment of gynecomastia.

A trial of androgen pharmacotherapy is recommended to attempt to improve virilization [Loy & Yong 2001].
Feeding problems in newborns may require special nipples and other strategies to manage weak or uncoordinated sucking.

Gastroesophageal reflux can be associated with poor weight gain and emesis; the customary medical treatment (i.e., upright positioning, motility drugs) is usually effective; sometimes fundoplication as required.

Many antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have been used to treat seizures in individuals with AS; no one drug has proven superior. Medications used for minor motor seizures (e.g., valproic acid, clonazepam, topiramate, lamotrigine, ethosuximide) are more commonly prescribed than medications for major motor seizures (e.g., diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital) [Thibert et al 2009]. Carbamezapine, although not contraindicated, is less frequently used than other common anticonvulsants. Single medication use is preferred, but seizure breakthrough is common. A few individuals with AS have infrequent seizures and are not on AEDs. Some with uncontrollable seizures have benefited from a ketogenic or low glycemic diet [Thibert et al 2012].

Hypermotoric behaviors are typically resistant to behavioral therapies; accommodation by the family and provision of a safe environment are important.

Most children with AS do not receive drug therapy for hyperactivity, although some may benefit from the use of stimulant medications such as methylphenidate (Ritalin®).

Behavioral modification is effective in treating undesirable behaviors that are socially disruptive or self-injurious.

A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.

Unstable or nonambulatory children may benefit from physical therapy. Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor and oral-motor control. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required, especially for extremely ataxic children.

Speech therapy is essential and should focus on nonverbal methods of communication. Augmentative communication aids such as picture cards or communication boards should be used at the earliest appropriate time. Attempts to teach signing should begin as soon as the child is sufficiently attentive.

Individualization and flexibility in the school are important educational strategies.

Special physical provisions in the classroom, along with teacher aides or assistants, may be needed for effective class integration. Children with AS with excessive hypermotoric behaviors need an accommodating classroom space.

Many families construct safe but confining bedrooms to accommodate disruptive nighttime wakefulness. Administration of 0.3 mg melatonin one hour before sleep may be helpful in some, but should not be given in the middle of the night if the child awakens.

Strabismus may require surgical correction.

Constipation often requires regular use of laxatives such as high fiber or lubricating agents.

Orthopedic problems, particularly subluxed or pronated ankles or tight Achilles tendons, can be corrected by orthotic bracing or surgery.

Thoraco-lumbar jackets may be needed for scoliosis, and individuals with severe curvature may benefit from surgical rod stabilization.
Aniridia. Simple measures are often the most important:

Regular eye examinations and correction of refractive errors. Refractive errors range from high myopia through emmetropia to high hypermetropia. Spectacle correction of refractive errors is usually recommended as use of contact lenses can be difficult in the presence of keratopathy and reduced tear production.

Tinted or photochromic lenses to reduce light sensitivity associated with the large pupillary aperture. Colored, tinted or artificial pupil contact lenses may reduce light sensitivity or restore a more normal appearance to the eye but, as above, may be difficult to wear because of a poor ocular surface and tear film.

Occlusion therapy for anisometropic amblyopia or strabismic amblyopia in childhood

Optical low-vision aids and other devices such as closed-circuit television systems to help adults and children of school age

Advice and help with schooling

Social support

Note: Corrective surgery for strabismus can be undertaken but is usually only for cosmetic rather than visual purposes.

Lens. Cataract extraction can significantly improve visual acuity in those with severe lens opacities. It should be remembered that in aniridia visual improvement after surgery is limited by foveal hypoplasia; thus, mild to moderate lens opacities may not require surgery:

Children rarely require surgery (lens aspiration or lensectomy).

In adults, phacoemulsification can be successful.

Note: (1) A significant number of individuals with aniridia have poor zonular stability, which increases the risk for intraoperative complications and influences the choice of surgical technique and options for IOL implantation [Schneider et al 2003]. (2) The use of various types of black diaphragm aniridic IOLs may reduce glare or light sensitivity but may be associated with a higher rate of surgical complications [Reinhard et al 2000, Menezo et al 2005, Pozdeyeva et al 2005].

Intraocular pressure

Glaucoma is usually initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication.

Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy:

Trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites (e.g., 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin C) is often used but is associated with a higher risk of treatment failure than that seen in patients with primary glaucoma who undergo the same treatment.

Drainage tube surgery (with or without antimetabolites) or cyclodiode laser treatment may be necessary in refractory cases, although this treatment is increasingly being undertaken as a primary procedure [Khaw 2002, Kirwan et al 2002, Arroyave et al 2003, Lee et al 2010].

Note: (1) Glaucoma presenting in infancy is more difficult to treat. Medical treatment is generally ineffective and surgery is required. Goniotomy and trabeculotomy have a low success rate, but trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites is often successful [Nelson et al 1984, Okada et al 2000, Khaw 2002]. (2) While goniosurgery has been suggested as a preventive measure, glaucoma never develops in a significant proportion of those with aniridia [Swanner et al 2004].

Cornea

Ocular surface disease can be treated medically using lubricants, mucolytics, and punctal occlusion. Note: Drops without preservatives are often required to avoid preservative-related ocular surface toxicity.

When corneal opacification causes significant visual reduction, penetrating keratoplasty (PK) may be considered; however, in the presence of the significant limbal stem cell deficiency observed in aniridia, PK alone has a poor prognosis [Tiller et al 2003].

Limbal stem cell transplantation alone, preceding or concurrent with keratoplasty may be undertaken, but requires an allograft as both eyes are usually affected. This may take the form of a cultured stem cell sheet or a limbal tissue transplant [Lee et al 2008, Pauklin et al 2010]. However, this therapy is associated with a high risk of failure and lifelong systemic immunosuppression may be required to prevent rejection. Whether the use of cultured oral mucous membrane cells may have a beneficial role is as yet uncertain.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Surgical intervention is recommended at the first sign of aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005].

Wilms tumor. See Wilms Tumor Overview.
The need for orthoses or other assistive devices varies individually. Most patients remain ambulatory without assistance for decades.

No definitive treatments for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies exist. Management is tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. Management to prolong survival and improve quality of life includes weight control to avoid obesity, physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures, and use of mechanical aids to help ambulation and mobility.

Hyperextension of the knee can be treated by splinting [Hicks et al 2011].
Provide palliative care for the viable newborn.
Physical therapy may be helpful, particularly for disabilities resulting from peripheral neuropathy.

A wheelchair is usually necessary for mobility by age 15-20 years.

Educational support should be provided to compensate for difficulties in speaking (dysarthria), in reading (oculomotor apraxia), and in writing (upper-limb ataxia and weakness).
Physical therapy may be helpful, particularly for disabilities resulting from peripheral neuropathy.

A wheelchair is usually necessary for mobility by age 30 years.

Educational support (e.g., use of a computer with speech recognition and special keyboard for typing) should be provided to compensate for difficulties in reading (caused by oculomotor apraxia) and in writing (caused by upper-limb ataxia).
Optimally, care is provided by a team that includes specialists in physical medicine rehabilitation, urology, and behavioral neurology or psychology (i.e., behavioralists) who can provide the following:

Gait safety devices including canes and wheel chairs

Consideration of antispasmodic bladder medications and in-and-out bladder catheterization vs indwelling bladder catheter depending on urologic findings

Behavioral modification and cognitive aids as needed
There are no formal management guidelines for APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorders.

Given the limited number of reports of individuals with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder and the clinical variability among affected individuals, it is unknown which individuals with the APOE p.Leu167del variant will develop hyperlipidemia, splenomegaly, and/or severe thrombocytopenia. However, the authors postulate that untreated hyperlipidemia may worsen the phenotype.

Hyperlipidemia. Discussion of the management of hyperlipidemia is beyond the scope of this article. For more in-depth discussion on management, see the 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults [Stone et al 2014] (full text). It should be noted that using risk prediction models in genetic dyslipidemia may markedly underestimate an individual’s risk of developing ASCVD.

Treatment for individuals with documented ASCVD or at high risk of developing ASCVD begins with lifestyle changes (adherence to a heart-healthy diet, exercise, tobacco avoidance, maintenance of a healthy weight). Medical therapy may include a statin (generally the mainstay of therapy to reduce ASCVD risk), a fibrate, high-dose fish oil, and/or niacin. If present, diabetes mellitus should be well controlled, as uncontrolled diabetes can worsen hypertriglyceridemia.

In patients with fasting triglyceride levels:

>500 mg/dL, the first goal of treatment should be to lower triglyceride levels to prevent pancreatitis.

>1000 mg/dL, elimination of fat from the diet is essential.

<500-1000 mg/dL, the focus may shift to the avoidance of high glycemic carbohydrates. Additionally, if identified, excessive intake of sucrose- or fructose-containing food and beverages should be limited.

Although caloric restriction with the goal of weight loss can also be helpful in lowering triglyceride levels, it should not be the primary focus in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Splenomegaly. Although no interventions are known to prevent disease progression, it has been suggested that treatment of dyslipidemia may prevent development of splenomegaly [Okorodudu et al 2013].

Splenectomy should be avoided as it may worsen hyperlipidemia. Patients who underwent splenectomy were reported to have markedly worsened hypertriglyceridemia after splenectomy [Nguyen et al 2000, Faivre et al 2005, Rahalkar et al 2008, Okorodudu et al 2013].

Liver function abnormalities and thrombocytopenia should be managed by specialists in gastroenterology and hematology, respectively.

Liver function abnormalities. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Persistent nausea

Vomiting

Abdominal pain

Yellow discoloration of the skin

Thrombocytopenia. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Bruising

Bleeding

Any new petechial rash
Allopurinol. Treatment with the XDH inhibitor allopurinol is effective and generally well-tolerated in individuals with APRT deficiency. Allopurinol 5-10 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 800 mg), either once daily or in two divided doses, minimizes DHA crystalluria, stone formation, crystal deposition in the kidney, and the development of kidney failure [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Treatment with allopurinol can even dissolve DHA kidney stones and improve kidney function in individuals with advanced CKD [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Allopurinol treatment is monitored by clinical evaluation and urine microscopy; the absence of urinary DHA crystals is indicative of adequate therapy.

Febuxostat. The recently introduced XDH inhibitor febuxostat provides an alternative treatment option for affected individuals allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol [Becker et al 2005]. The complete disappearance of urinary DHA crystals was recently described in an indvidual with APRT deficiency treated with febuxostat in the daily dose of 80 mg [Arnadóttir 2014]. Furthermore, the authors of this review have noted a significant reduction or even disappearance of DHA crystalluria in several adult individuals with APRT deficiency treated with a daily febuxostat dose of 80 mg [unpublished observations].

Low purine diet and ample fluid intake provide adjunctive benefits to pharmacologic therapy.

Surgical management of DHA kidney stones is the same as for the management of other types of stones, including extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy.

Treatment of ESRD

Dialysis. Of note, it is not known if individuals with APRT deficiency on dialysis benefit from allopurinol therapy. The allopurinol dose should not routinely be reduced in affected individuals who have impaired kidney function.

Kidney transplantation. All individuals with APRT deficiency undergoing kidney transplantation require treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat) for at least six weeks prior to transplant surgery, whenever possible. Affected individuals who have undergone kidney transplantation require lifelong therapy with allopurinol (or febuxostat) to prevent recurrent DHA crystal nephropathy in the transplanted organ.
The management of individuals with arginase deficiency should closely mirror that described in the Urea Cycle Disorders Overview, with one caveat: individuals with arginase deficiency are less prone to episodes of hyperammonemia and when present, hyperammonemia is more likely to respond to conservative management such as intravenous fluid administration. However, the individual who is comatose and encephalopathic is at high risk for severe brain damage and should be treated accordingly. Arginine supplementation is obviously contraindicated.

Infants should be managed by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a specialized center. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following:

Rapidly reducing plasma ammonia concentration. The best way to reduce plasma ammonia concentration quickly is by dialysis; the faster the flow rate of dialysate, the faster the clearance of ammonia from the plasma. The method employed depends on the affected individual's circumstances and available resources. Fastest is use of pump-driven dialysis, in which an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) pump is used to drive a hemodialysis (HD) machine. Other methods are “routine” hemodialysis, hemofiltration (both arteriovenous and venovenous), peritoneal dialysis, and continuous-drainage peritoneal dialysis. Dialysis can usually be discontinued when plasma ammonia concentration falls below 200 µmol/L. Affected individuals often experience a "rebound" hyperammonemia that may require further dialysis, although rarely is this level of intervention required in arginase deficiency.

Pharmacologic management to allow alternative pathway excretion of excess nitrogen. Blocking of ammonia production and the need for ureagenesis is accomplished by diminishing catabolism with adequate non-protein calories and with a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. A loading dose of the drugs is followed by maintenance administration, initially intravenously and later orally when the individual is stable. Intravenous forms of these medications are now approved by the FDA and are generally available.

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of calories supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, calories should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free oral formula, such as Mead Johnson 80056® or Ross Formula ProPhree®; however, complete restriction of protein should not exceed 24-48 hours, as depletion of essential amino acids may result in endogenous protein catabolism and nitrogen release. High parenteral glucose plus insulin can be used acutely to diminish endogenous protein catabolism. Individuals should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. In early treatment, feeding 1.0 to 1.5 g of protein/kg body weight with 50% as essential amino acids is advised, particularly for infants. Older children require and tolerate lower protein intake.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage. Cautionary measures are physiologic stabilization with intravenous fluids (10% dextrose with one-quarter normal saline) and cardiac pressors as necessary while avoiding overhydration and resulting cerebral edema, the duration of which correlates with poor neurologic outcome.

Older individuals are at risk for episodes of hyperammonemia and should continue to be managed by a specialist in metabolic disorders.

Seizures are easily treated by phenobarbital or carbamazepine.

Acute intercurrent illnesses should be treated promptly with special dietary intervention or hospitalization to minimize the effect of catabolism.
Treatment involves rapid control of hyperammonemia during metabolic decompensations and long-term management to help prevent episodes of hyperammonemia and long-term complications.

During acute hyperammonemic episodes severe enough to cause neurologic symptoms, treatment includes the following [Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001] (full text):

Discontinuing oral protein intake

Supplementing oral intake with intravenous lipids, glucose and intravenous insulin if needed (with close monitoring of blood glucose) to promote anabolism.

Intravenous nitrogen scavenging therapy. A loading dose of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate in 25 to 35 mL/kg of 10% dextrose solution given intravenously over a 90-minute period is recommended. This is followed by a sustained intravenous infusion of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate over a 24-hour period. When available, plasma concentrations of ammonia scavenging drugs should be monitored to avoid toxicity. In the absence of drug levels, a serum anion gap of greater than 15 mEq/L and an anion gap that has risen more than 6 mEq/L could indicate drug accumulation and increased risk for toxicity.

Ammonia levels usually normalize with therapy; however failure to decrease ammonia levels with medical therapy mandates prompt institution of hemodialysis.

Hemodialysis is the preferred method for rapid reduction of ammonia in patients who do not respond to nitrogen scavenging therapy. Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis (CAVHD) or continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) with flow rates greater than 40 to 60 mL/min is optimal. Some centers use extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with hemodialysis. Although this combination of techniques provides very high flow rates (170-200 mL/min) and rapidly reduces ammonia levels, morbidity is greater because of the need for surgical vascular access. Nitrogen scavenging therapy needs to be continued during hemodialysis. It is the authors’ policy to continue nitrogen scavenging therapy for 12-24 hours after the patient has been stabilized and is able to accept enteral feeds and medications [Author, personal observation].
Curative therapy is not available.

Physical therapy and use of oral medications such as baclofen to control spasticity in the early phase of the disease may prevent tendon shortening and joint contractures. These measures may help to postpone major functional disabilities until severe muscle weakness or cerebellar ataxia occur.

Urinary urgency and incontinence may be controlled with low doses of amitryptiline or oxybutynin.

During school years, speech therapy and psychological support may help enhance academic performance.
Individuals with ATS benefit from a coordinated approach of multidisciplinary specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. If feasible, individuals with ATS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Cardiovascular. In managing the cardiovascular features of ATS the following should be kept in mind:

Clinical history studies are limited.

Vascular disease is widespread and requires repeated imaging of the complete arterial tree from head to pelvis by MRA or CTA.

It is currently not known whether arterial dissections or thrombosis is the main cause of ischemic events.

As is common practice in the treatment of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, hemodynamic stress on the arterial wall can be reduced through use of beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and angiotensin II receptor 1 (ATIIR1) antagonists such as losartan, when titrated to effect. While ATIIR1 antagonists may have an additional beneficial effect by attenuating TGFβ signaling in the arterial wall, the role of TGFβ signaling in ATS is unclear (see Molecular Genetic Pathogenesis). Importantly, the efficacy of these treatments has not been established in ATS and caution is warranted when using blood pressure-lowering medications in the presence of arterial stenosis (anatomic or functional due to severe tortuosity) – especially renal artery stenosis, as these medications may confer a risk for renal failure.

Aneurysms and focal stenoses are amenable to surgical intervention.

For aortic root aneurysms, a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation can be used. No data are available on the aortic diameter at which intervention is appropriate; thus, decision making should also include assessment of the family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit.

For focal stenoses of the aorta and aortic branches, surgery, catheterization, or a hybrid of the two (transcatheter-surgical procedure) may be used [Santoro et al 2008, Vicchio et al 2008].

Pulmonary artery stenosis resulting in pulmonary hypertension may be treated by catheterization and/or surgery.

Skeletal. Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist. Surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

At the patient’s discretion, orthotics may be used for severe pes planus.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of ATS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is essential, and evaluation of keratoconus is necessary.

Other

Hernias may recur after surgical repair. A supporting mesh can be used in the surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Careful postoperative evaluation of (surgical) wounds is necessary as wound healing may be delayed. Note that stitches should avoid traction and should remain in place for approximately ten days.

Emphysema is treated symptomatically. Of note, positive pressure ventilation may cause emphysematous changes to progress.

Individuals with ATS can and should remain active with aerobic activities (e.g., swimming) performed in moderation.
Intellectual disability. An individualized educational support program tailored to the patient’s needs and based on assessment of cognitive abilities should be provided.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management. Cochlear implantation in the two affected Australian males was associated with improved communication skills.

Optic atrophy. No treatment is available.

Ataxia. See Hereditary Ataxias, Management.
Affected individuals should be monitored by a cardiologist who is knowledgeable about ARVC. Management of individuals with ARVC is complicated by its variable course and the limited specificity of clinical findings to predict arrhythmia risk. Management should be individualized and based on the specific results of detailed clinical and genetic investigation.

Management is focused on prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Beta blockers are considered first line therapy. Although their efficacy has not been shown in a randomized, prospective clinical trial, beta blockers are recommended [Yancy et al 2013, Corrado et al 2015].

Amiodarone may also be effective [Corrado et al 2015].

The mainstay of arrhythmia prevention relies on device insertion and management. Risk-benefit analysis for device insertion and management should be balanced against clinical risk stratification for arrhythmias.

Education regarding sudden death risk to affected adults and parents of affected children is an important aspect of management.

Physical exercise ‒ specifically regular, intense exercise ‒ is thought to promote ARVC and its associated arrhythmias. Therefore, those with fully diagnosed ARVC are usually recommended to reduce or eliminate prolonged exercise and participation in competitive sports [James et al 2013]. Supporting this idea that intense exercise hastens the onset of ARVC, Ruwald et al [2015] reported that a history of participation in competitive sports was associated with an earlier age of onset. These findings support the notion that intense exercise can induce ARVC even in the absence of an identifiable genetic predisposition.

Heart transplantation is considered when ARVC has progressed to right or left ventricular heart failure. Severe diffuse biventricular involvement simulating dilated cardiomyopathy and requiring heart transplantation appears to be rare.
Neurologic. Supportive therapy can minimize drooling, choreoathetosis, myoclonus/tremor, and ataxia. However, individual responses to specific medications (e.g., amantadine and 4-aminopyridine) and to treatments used for myoclonus vary [Perlman et al 2012, Nissenkorn et al 2013, Shaikh et al 2013, van Egmond et al 2015]. Thus, it is recommended that treatment options be discussed with an experienced neurologist.

Early and continued physical therapy can minimize the risk for contractures (which appear in almost all individuals with time and often lead to other problems such as pressure sores and pain) and scoliosis (which can, for example, be the consequence of prolonged sitting in a wheelchair – particularly the tendency to lean on the same elbow).

Although steroids are reported to temporarily improve the neurologic symptoms of A-T in children, the symptoms reappear within days of their discontinuation [Gatti 1985, Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. (See also Therapies Under Investigation.)

Immunodeficiency. IVIG replacement therapy should be considered for individuals with frequent and severe infections and very low IgG levels [Nowak-Wegrzyn et al 2004].

Pulmonary. The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which can contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in persons with A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text).

Cancer. Because cells from individuals with A-T are 30% more sensitive to ionizing radiation than cells from controls, conventional doses of ionizing radiation are potentially lethal in individuals with A-T. Thus, the use of radiotherapy and some radiomimetic chemotherapeutic agents should be administered carefully and monitored closely [Schütte et al 2016].

Doses of some chemotherapeutic agents are often reduced by 25%-50% and longer recovery periods between treatments are considered to allow for the slower DNA repair that occurs in A-T [Schütte et al 2016].
Management of ataxias is usually directed at providing assistance for coordination problems through established methods of rehabilitation medicine and occupational and physical therapy.

Canes, walkers, and wheelchairs are useful for gait ataxia.

Special devices are available to assist with handwriting, buttoning, and use of eating utensils.

Speech therapy may benefit persons with dysarthria. Computer devices are available to assist persons with severe speech deficits.
The treatment of choice for AVED is lifelong high-dose oral vitamin E supplementation. Some symptoms (e.g., ataxia and intellectual deterioration) can be reversed if treatment is initiated early in the disease process [Schuelke et al 1999]. In older individuals, disease progression can be stopped, but deficits in proprioception and gait unsteadiness generally remain [Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004, El Euch-Fayache et al 2014]. With treatment, plasma vitamin E concentrations can become normal.

In presymptomatic individuals, the manifestations of AVED can be prevented if vitamin E supplementation is initiated early [El Euch-Fayache et al 2014].

No large-scale therapeutic studies have been performed to determine optimal vitamin E dosage and to evaluate outcomes.

The reported vitamin E dose ranges from 800 mg to 1500 mg (or 40 mg/kg body weight in children) [Burck et al 1981, Harding et al 1985, Amiel et al 1995, Cavalier et al 1998, Schuelke et al 1999, Schuelke et al 2000b, Gabsi et al 2001, Mariotti et al 2004].

One of the following vitamin E preparations is used:

The chemically manufactured racemic form, all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate

The naturally occurring form, RRR-α-tocopherol

It is currently unknown whether affected individuals should be treated with all-rac-α-tocopherol acetate or with RRR-α-tocopherol. It is known that alpha-TTP (αTPP) stereoselectively binds and transports 2R-α-tocopherols [Weiser et al 1996, Hosomi et al 1997, Leonard et al 2002]. For some TTPA pathogenic variants, this stereoselective binding capacity is lost and affected individuals cannot discriminate between RRR- and SRR-α-tocopherol [Traber et al 1993, Cavalier et al 1998]. In this instance, affected individuals would also be able to incorporate non-2R-α-tocopherol stereoisomers into their bodies if they were supplemented with all-rac-α-tocopherol. Since potential adverse effects of the synthetic stereoisomers have not been studied in detail, it seems appropriate to treat with RRR-α-tocopherol, despite the higher cost.
Comprehensive reviews of the management of thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia have been published by Thalassemia International Federation [Taher et al 2013, Cappellini et al 2014] and are available at the TIF web site.

Thalassemia major. Regular transfusions correct the anemia, suppress erythropoiesis, and inhibit increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron. Before starting the transfusions, it is absolutely necessary to carry out hepatitis B vaccination and perform extensive red blood cell antigen typing, including Rh, Kell, Kidd, and Duffy and serum immunoglobulin determination — the latter of which detects individuals with IgA deficiency who need special (repeatedly washed) blood unit preparation before each transfusion. The transfusion regimen is designed to obtain a pre-transfusion Hb concentration of 95-100 g/L. Transfusions are usually given every two to three weeks.

Thalassemia intermedia. Treatment of individuals with thalassemia intermedia is symptomatic and based on splenectomy and folic acid supplementation. Treatment of extramedullary erythropoietic masses is based on radiotherapy, transfusions, or, in selected cases, hydroxyurea (with a protocol similar to that used for sickle cell disease). Hydroxyurea also increases globin gamma chains and may have other undefined affects. Individuals with thalassemia intermedia may develop iron overload from increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron or from occasional transfusions; chelation therapy with deferasirox has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in persons age ten years or older with a liver iron concentration ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight or serum ferritin ≥800 ng/mL (thresholds after which the risk of serious iron-related morbidity is increased) [Taher et al 2012].

Bone marrow transplantation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) from an HLA-identical sib represents an alternative to traditional transfusion and chelation therapy. If BMT is successful, iron overload may be reduced by repeated phlebotomy, thus eliminating the need for iron chelation.

The outcome of BMT is related to the pretransplantation clinical conditions, specifically the presence of hepatomegaly, extent of liver fibrosis, and magnitude of iron accumulation. In children who lack the above risk factors, disease-free survival is over 90%. Adults with beta-thalassemia are at a higher risk for transplant-related toxicity due to an advanced phase of the disease and have a cure rate of 65% with current treatment protocol [Isgrò et al 2010].

Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) of variable severity may occur in 5%-8% of individuals.

BMT from unrelated donors has been carried out on a limited number of individuals with β-thalassemia. Provided that selection of the donor is based on stringent criteria of HLA compatibility and that individuals have limited iron overload, results are comparable to those obtained when the donor is a compatible sib [La Nasa et al 2005, Gaziev et al 2013].

Affected individuals without matched donors could also benefit from haploidentical mother-to-child transplantation, the results of which appear encouraging [Sodani et al 2011].

Cord blood transplantation. Cord blood transplantation from a related donor offers a good probability of a successful cure and is associated with a low risk for graft versus host disease (GVHD) [Pinto & Roberts 2008]. For couples who have already had a child with thalassemia and who undertake prenatal diagnosis in a subsequent pregnancy, prenatal identification of HLA compatibility between the affected child and an unaffected fetus allows collection of placental blood at delivery and the option of cord blood transplantation to cure the affected child [Orofino et al 2003]. Alternatively, in case of an affected fetus and a previous unaffected child, the couple may decide to continue the pregnancy and pursue BMT later, using the unaffected child as the donor.

Unrelated cord blood transplantation has been explored as an alternative option for affected individuals without a suitable HLA matched unrelated adult donor. However, this strategy may be limited by less than adequate cell dose and higher rates of primary graft failure. One potential strategy may be the use of two cord blood units in order to achieve the desired cell dose, as has been done in individuals with malignancy. However, this approach may be associated with a higher rate of acute GVHD, which may add to the burden of morbidity and mortality for this population.

For these reasons, unrelated cord blood transplantation appears to be a suboptimal strategy for individuals with thalassemia [Ruggeri et al 2011]. However, others have found the outcome of this approach to be more favorable. Jaing et al [2012] reported an overall survival of 88% and a thalassemia-free survival of 74% in 35 individuals with β-thalassemia.
The treatments for BAP1-TPDS tumors are those used in standard practice.

Uveal melanoma. Because of the increased aggressiveness of BAP1-related uveal melanoma, all uveal melanomas should be managed as the more aggressive tumors (ie., those determined to be class 2 by expression profiling and those with monosomy 3) [Njauw et al 2012].

Malignant mesothelioma. MMe is highly refractory to conventional therapies including aggressive surgical intervention and multimodality strategies; thus, a cure is unlikely.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is treated in the usual manner.
There is no specific treatment of BWCFF syndrome. Symptomatic management involves the following.

Ptosis may require surgical treatment.

Coloboma and/or microphthalmia may lead to poor vision and require routine care for these findings.

Hearing loss may require routine care including hearing aids.

Epilepsy is treated using standard protocols.

Developmental delay requires specific support (speech therapy, physical therapy) adapted to the severity of the disability.

Malformations of the heart, urinary tract, and oral clefts are treated using standard procedures.
Management of heart failure. There is no specific treatment for cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmia in Barth syndrome. Standard heart failure (HF) medications are used to improve symptoms, effect reverse remodeling of the ventricle, and improve ventricular function as measured by ejection fraction (EF).

These medications include ACE-inhibitors, beta blockers, and digoxin for typical outpatient management, and intravenous inotropes, including milrinone for in-patient management of acute decompensation.

Therapy received by 22 individuals in the French cohort [Rigaud et al 2013] included: 16/22 beta blockers, 9/22 beta blockers, 11/22 digoxin, 17/22 diuretics, 5/22 anticoagulants, and 5/22 aspirin.

Although no studies are available to evaluate the effectiveness of medical therapy in males with Barth syndrome, when medications are stopped a decline in heart function is often observed. However, this can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from the natural fluctuations of the clinical phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description, Heart failure).

Aspirin should be considered for prevention of clot formation (and thus reduction in the risk for stroke) in males with severe cardiac dysfunction and/or marked LVNC. Suggested aspirin dose is 5 mg/kg daily for children and 81 to 325 mg daily for adults.

The potential role of prophylactic antiarrhythmic medication or implantable cardiac defibrillator for primary arrhythmia prevention has not been clarified.

Cardiac transplantation has been successful when heart failure is severe and intractable [Mangat et al 2007, Roberts et al 2012]; however, given the natural history of improving ventricular function after infancy, cardiac transplantation should be carefully considered.

Management of neutropenia. The treatment of neutropenia in children with Barth syndrome varies, including regular administration of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), administration of G-CSF during times of high risk only (e.g., surgery or infection), prophylactic antibiotics, and other preventive treatment strategies.

Early on, it was suggested that the administration of G-CSF during times of suspected or known bacterial infection may be effective in reducing the incidence of severe infections [Cox et al 1995]. The usual starting dose of G-CSF is 2-3 μg/kg/dose with a frequency of administration ranging from twice a week to every other day [Clarke et al 2013].

In 83 patients, 42 of whom had been treated with G-CSF, the median dose was 2.78 ± 0.78 (SEM) μg/kg/dose (range: 0.45-12.8 μg/kg/dose) [Dale et al 2013]. On average, G-CSF was begun at age 5.8 years, with an average exposure of 7.3 years; none developed acute myeloid leukemia, and treatment responses to G-CSF were maintained long-term.

Of note, although neutropenia appears to improve with G-CSF treatment, in the French cohort in which six affected males were actively treated with G-CSF, two developed a severe infection, including one episode of septic shock [Rigaud et al 2013].

Nutrition. Uncooked cornstarch given prior to bedtime has been recommended as a means of avoiding muscle protein loss overnight. Specific dosing according to age and weight can be obtained from the Barth Syndrome Foundation [Avery 2006].

Educational support in school. The excessive fatigue that boys with Barth syndrome experience and the characteristic cognitive phenotype (see Clinical Characteristics, Clinical Description) warrant educational support during the early school-age years [Mazzocco et al 2007] with particular attention to mathematics [Raches & Mazzocco 2012].

Physical therapy. The goal should be attainment of development milestones and functional outcomes while at the same time monitoring cardiovascular status [Jarvis et al 2001].
No therapy exists for the progressive visual loss, but early evaluation by a low-vision specialist facilitates introduction of low vision aids and mobility training. Educational planning should take the prospect of future blindness into consideration.

To manage obesity, multiple strategies are advocated, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies. Education and dietary measures to control weight gain must be initiated at an early age. No formal trials of drug therapy (appetite suppressants or lipase inhibitors) have been reported; however, such therapy may be attempted providing the individual does not have contraindications to specific drug use (i.e., renal or hepatic dysfunction).

Complications of obesity, such as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes mellitus, should be treated as in the general population.

Cognitive disability should be addressed through early intervention and special education, as indicated by evaluation. It is advisable to assess individual needs with respect to education, as many adults are capable of attaining independent living skills.

Speech therapy should be offered at the first sign of speech delay and/or impairment.

Renal transplantation has been successful, although the immunosuppressants used following transplantation can compound the weight problem.

Surgical correction of hydrocolpos, vaginal atresia, or hypospadias may be warranted.

As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and sex hormone levels should be monitored to determine if hormone replacement therapy is indicated.

It is important to offer contraceptive advice to all affected females rather than assume likely infertility.

The earliest and most common intervention for polydactyly is removal of the accessory digit. Indicators are functional interference and poorly fitting footwear. Most children have their accessory digits removed within the first two years.

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities is the same as for the general population.

Dental extractions are appropriate as required for dental crowding.

Prompt treatment for acute and chronic otitis media should be considered. Insertion of grommets is commonplace.
Manifestations should be treated by specialists (e.g., oral surgeon, dermatologist, plastic surgeon, pediatrician, clinical geneticist) experienced with the condition.

Keratocysts usually require surgical excision.

Early treatment of BCCs is essential to prevent long-term cosmetic problems, particularly on the face. The priorities are to ensure complete eradication of aggressive BCCs, and to preserve normal tissue to prevent disfigurement. Surgical excision is supplemented by a number of other possible treatments including cryotherapy and laser treatment for early lesions and photodynamic therapy. Photodynamic therapy is particularly suitable for thin lesions of <2 mm on ultrasound [Basset-Seguin et al 2014]. Surgical treatment using Mohs' microsurgery [Mohs et al 1980] appears particularly effective.

Systemic treatment with retinoids (e.g., etretinate) is possible but often not well tolerated.

Treatment of individuals with severe BCC manifestations and/or advanced lesions with sonic hedgehog inhibitors such as vismodegib is now possible. Although side effects are common and quite severe there is a high resolution of advanced lesions and reduction in new BCCs [Sekulic et al 2012]. Sonic hedgehog inhibitors may be particularly helpful with lesions around the eyes [Ozgur et al 2015].

Cardiac fibromas may be asymptomatic and can be monitored by a pediatric cardiologist.

If ovarian fibromas require surgical treatment, preservation of ovarian tissue is recommended, although it involves a risk of recurrence [Seracchioli et al 2001].
Bethlem myopathy

Physiotherapy and possibly orthopedic management of contractures are useful to maintain mobility. Contractures may be dynamic and may require stretching and splinting.

Symptoms of nocturnal hypoventilation respond well to noninvasive respiratory support such as mask ventilation [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Approximately two thirds of individuals over age 50 years need supportive aids for outdoor mobility [Jöbsis et al 1999].

Ullrich CMD

Children require active physiotherapy management as soon as the diagnosis is established to promote mobility and independence. Early mobilization in standing frames is important to achieve upright posture and protect against the development of scoliosis and other contractures.

Contractures tend to be aggressive and may require surgery.

Feeding difficulties may manifest as failure to thrive or excessive time taken to finish eating a meal. Consultation with a nutrition specialist may be required to boost calorie intake; for serious problems, feeding by gastrostomy may be the best solution to promote a normal weight gain.

Respiratory support with nocturnal ventilation usually becomes necessary in the first or second decade and can be effective in reducing symptoms, promoting quality of life, and allowing normal schooling [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Scoliosis frequently develops in the first or second decade and requires active management including surgery.
KCNQ2-BFNE. Seizures in individuals with BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam and topiramate, are often used (off-label and despite limited data) in neonates with refractory seizures [Tulloch et al 2012]. Refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ2-related BFNE.

KCNQ2-NEE. Children with KCNQ2-related neonatal epileptic encephalopathy generally present with tonic seizures accompanied by motor and autonomic features, similar to seizures in KCNQ2-BFNE. However, individuals with KCNQ2-NEE clearly differ from those with KCNQ2-BFNE as to seizure response. Although seizure response to any of the AEDs has been described in isolated patients, many patients at onset show multiple daily seizures resistant to multiple common old- and new-generation AEDs, alone or in combination. Seizures then tend to gradually decrease by age nine months to four years [Weckhuysen et al 2012].

A favorable response to drugs acting on voltage-gated sodium channels has been suggested in several studies [Kato et al 2013, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Numis et al 2014, Pisano et al 2015]. It has been suggested that early effective treatment reduces cognitive disability [Pisano et al 2015]; however, it remains a matter of debate whether early control of seizures translates to better neuropsychological outcome.

VGB or ACTH therapy can be tried for treatment of infantile spasms that can occur during the course of the disease [Dedek et al 2003, Borgatti et al 2004, Serino et al 2013].

Management should further focus on the optimization of the patient’s functional and communication skills. A multidisciplinary team approach including physiotherapists, speech therapists, and behavioral therapists is best suited to addressing the individual’s needs. Augmentative communication techniques can be valuable for many patients.
The following are appropriate:

Pharmacologic treatment to improve anxiety, depression, and obsessive-compulsive behaviors

To alleviate dystonia and other associated involuntary movements, pharmacologic therapies as typically used in neurologic practice for the treatment of movement disorders

For urinary urgency or incontinence, oxybutynin or other anticholinergic medications

Antiepileptic treatment for seizures

Symptomatic treatment for headaches
Appropriate treatment includes the following:

ICU care during acute encephalopathic episode, including treatment of seizures and increased intracranial pressure

Biotin and thiamine therapy. Biotin is given as 5-10 mg /kg and thiamine as 300-900 mg orally. (Note: In one report 20mg/kg/day in a neonate was used.)

Symptoms typically resolve within days. (Note: SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transport and some patients respond only to thiamine.)

Biotin and thiamine need to be given lifelong.

During acute decompensation thiamine may be increased to double the regular dose and given intravenously.

In the acute stage empiric treatment with antimicrobial/antiviral agents. Recommended until infectious causes of the acute/subacute encephalopathy are ruled out.

Fever control. Paramount as fever downregulates SLC19A3 and may exacerbate the disease.

Antiepileptic drugs for effective control of seizures

Symptomatic treatment of dystonia, including administration of L-dopa

Rehabilitation, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy

Educational programs adapted to individual needs

Education of the family regarding the importance of lifelong compliance with medical therapy
When craniosynostosis is bilateral, surgery is usually performed before age six months.

Pollicization of the index finger to restore a functional grasp has had satisfactory results in a number of persons with absence of the thumb [Foucher et al 2005]. However, many children with aplasia of the thumb can use their first and second digits for grasping without pollicization.
In general, fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas are benign lesions for which no treatment is required; however, affected individuals may seek treatment for such lesions for cosmetic purposes, particularly when multiple cutaneous lesions are located on the face. Treatment of fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas is difficult, as they tend to be numerous and recurring. Erbium-YAG or fractional CO2 laser ablation may result in substantial improvement, but relapse can occur [Gambichler et al 2000, Jacob & Dover 2001, Kahle et al 2001]. Shaving or other ablative methods have been used with variable results.

Treatment of pneumothorax is the same as in the general population.

Nephron-sparing surgery is the treatment of choice for renal tumors whenever possible, depending on the size and location of the tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Because of the bilateral, multifocal nature of BHDS-associated kidney cancer, a management approach involving observation of small tumors until they reach 3 cm in size is often recommended [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Therefore, renal tumors greater than 3.0 cm and/or rapidly growing tumors usually require partial nephrectomy. When surgical intervention is recommended, an attempt is made to remove all or most of the visible tumors. Although surgical management is not considered “curative” for BHDS-associated renal cell carcinoma (RCC), BHDS-associated renal tumors often are slow growing, and only infrequently are multiple surgical procedures required during a an affected individual’s lifetime to control the tumor burden and prevent the development of metastasis.
No treatment for BCD currently exists; affected individuals should be referred to services specific to those with vision impairment:

Low vision specialists can prescribe low vision aids/devices to help optimize remaining vision.

State services for the Blind or organizations/professionals trained to work with the visually impaired provide access to services related to employment, education, and counseling regarding the psychosocial adaptation to visual loss

Note: Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) is uncommon in BCD. Laser photocoagulation is not usually considered for CNV in inherited forms of retinal degeneration and has recently been superseded by the use of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy in a fashion similar to its use in age-related macular dystrophy.
Although newborn screening for biotinidase deficiency has resulted in almost complete ascertainment of children with biotinidase deficiency in the United States and in many other countries, occasionally a child who has not been screened or has been mistakenly thought to have normal biotinidase activity on newborn screening will present with clinical symptoms. These children may become metabolically compromised and require hydration, occasionally bicarbonate for acidosis, and procedures to ameliorate hyperammonemia. Once it is recognized that the child has a multiple carboxylase deficiency, administration of biotin – or a multivitamin “cocktail” containing biotin – can rapidly resolve the metabolic derangement and improve many of the clinical symptoms within hours to days.

Compliance with biotin therapy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) improves symptoms in symptomatic individuals.

Some features such as optic atrophy, hearing loss, or developmental delay may not be reversible; they should be addressed with ophthalmologic evaluations and intervention, hearing aids or cochlear implants, and appropriate interventions for developmental deficits.
Psychosocial. Family and teachers are encouraged to relate to persons with BSyn appropriately for their chronologic age rather than the younger age suggested by their unusually small size.

Growth. Growth hormone administration to children with BSyn has not increased growth rate or adult height in most persons, but some have experienced improved linear growth. Use of growth hormone has been approached cautiously in this population, because of the theoretic increase in their risk to develop tumors as a result of their treatment. Supplemental feeding results in increased fat deposition but not in improved linear growth.

Diabetes mellitus. Treatment of diabetes mellitus in BSyn is the same as in other persons.

Cancer. The hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to both DNA-damaging chemicals and ionizing radiation ordinarily necessitates modification of standard cancer treatment regimens, which usually includes a reduction of both dosages and durations. Absence of information as to the ideal dosages makes such treatment particularly challenging to the physician; nevertheless, the fact that the cancers themselves often appear unusually responsive to the treatment justifies the special effort.

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Too few persons with BSyn have had BMT to permit conclusions as to its value (which in theory could be great). The required ablative therapy prior to BMT often may require modification of standard protocols because of the hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to DNA-damaging agents.
Milunsky et al [2011] provided management guidelines.

In general, children with BOFS and multiple anomalies should be followed in a setting in which multispecialty care can be provided by a team including, for example, craniofacial specialists, plastic surgeons, otolaryngologists, and speech therapists [adapted from Milunsky et al 2011] (full text; see Table III).

Ideally, multispecialty evaluations and surgery should be performed within a craniofacial clinic. Surgical treatment should be done only by a pediatric plastic surgeon experienced in treating cleft lip. Lesser forms of cleft lip (formerly known as “pseudocleft”) may need surgical correction [Lin et al 2009]. In addition to the nasal tip flattening or asymmetry that may be associated with cleft lip, a characteristic full, flat nasal tip may need a corrective procedure. In addition affected individuals may need reconstruction of malformed protruding pinnae. If diagnosed in early infancy, auricular molding may be indicated.

When branchial or supra-auricular skin defects are small, linear, or superficial, they may heal spontaneously. The larger skin defects should be treated like a moist “wound” by a plastic surgeon, but generally do not need surgical intervention. They should not be cauterized. Most larger skin defects require surgical excision. Importantly, a sinus tract must be dissected by an experienced pediatric plastic surgeon. Exploration for a thymic remnant may be necessary, which should be sent for histopathologic examination.

Obstruction from nasolacrimal duct stenosis or atresia must be relieved and monitored for restenosis. Severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia may be managed by inserting a conformer into the eye socket to encourage its growth.

Hearing loss is treated routinely (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

The teeth should be monitored for size and number, caries, and malocclusion.

Sensory, psychologic, and developmental challenges should be treated with supportive therapies. Currently, data are insufficient to make recommendations that more severely affected individuals require more psychologic support.
Recommended treatment:

Second branchial arch anomalies. Excise branchial cleft cysts/fistulae.

Otologic anomalies

Fit with appropriate aural habilitation as indicated.

Enroll in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired.

Consider canaloplasty to correct an atretic canal; however, in individuals with BOR/BOS, associated middle ear anomalies (e.g., a facial nerve overriding the oval window) can preclude a successful result. Evaluate the status of the middle ear preoperatively by obtaining thin-cut CT images of the temporal bones in both the axial and coronal planes.

Renal anomalies

Treat urologic and renal abnormalities in the standard manner.

If renal anomalies (e.g., vesicoureteral reflux) are present, medical and surgical treatment may prevent progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

If ESRD develops, consider renal transplantation.
Seizures. As seizure severity and complexity varies widely, management should be tailored to the individual.

Some children with BPAN may have no evidence of seizures or experience only rare febrile events and require no ongoing pharmacologic intervention. Others have severe, refractory epilepsy with multiple seizure types warranting the involvement of specialists in pediatric epilepsy and consideration of multiple therapeutic modalities, including antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), ketogenic diet, and/or vagus nerve stimulation.

Short-term treatment with ACTH, prednisolone, or vigabatrin should be considered early in the care of a child with epileptic spasms, based on the guidelines in the US consensus report from the International League Against Epilepsy [Pellock et al 2010].

Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Global Developmental Disability/Intellectual Disability

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an individualized education program (IEP) should be developed by the local public school district based on each individuals’ level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

For all ages. In the United States, individuals are protected under IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) and should receive free and appropriate public education in the least restricted environment.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Developmental pediatricians can also provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

Consideration of private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs is recommended. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation.

In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction. Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers)

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox® anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., writing, feeding, grooming, and dressing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the indvidual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Parkinsonism. Involvement of a neurologist specializing in movement disorders may be helpful once parkinsonism emerges in adolescents/adults.

In the treatment of parkinsonism, dystonia, and spasticity the usual pharmacologic agents can be considered with the caveat that these therapies could exacerbate the cognitive deficits that also occur in this age group.

Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism with dopaminergic medications usually has an initial striking benefit in males and females with improved motor function, affect, appetite, and interest in activities, followed by equally consistent disabling motor fluctuations (“on-off” phenomena) and dyskinesias [Hayflick et al 2013, Hogarth 2015].

As cognitive deficits progress in those with advanced disease, carbidopa/levodopa formulations may carry a lower risk of adverse neuropsychiatric effects than dopamine agonists. Amantadine may be helpful for dyskinesias, but also carries a risk (especially in higher doses) of adverse psychiatric effects such as hallucinations and agitation.

Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity can include (if indicated) clonazepam or other benzodiazepines, oral baclofen, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen. Trihexyphenydyl may also be useful for dystonia but may worsen cognitive dysfunction in advanced stages of the disease.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Other Features

Disordered sleep. Pharmacologic treatment of sleep abnormalities with melatonin, chloral hydrate, or benzodiazepines may be indicated.

Ophthalmologic findings. Eye findings are treated in a routine manner.

Other

Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed

A gastric feeding tube to help maintain adequate weight (which becomes more difficult with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia, if indicated

Monitoring for complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease with institution of pharmacologic management if indicated. There are no data on the efficacy of fundoplication in BPAN.

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Regular pulmonary hygiene to manage risk for pulmonary complications; tracheostomy as indicated when secretions are difficult to manage
Management requires the input of specialists including a clinical geneticist, pediatric ophthalmologist, oculoplastic surgeon, (pediatric or adult) endocrinologist, reproductive endocrinologist, and gynecologist.

Eyelid surgery. Timing of eyelid surgery is controversial; it involves weighing the balance of early surgery to prevent deprivation amblyopia and late surgery to allow for more reliable ptosis measurements, the latter of which provides a better surgical outcome. Furthermore, ptosis surgery is hampered by the dysplastic structure of the eyelids [Beckingsale et al 2003].

The surgical management is traditionally performed in two stages and involves a medial canthoplasty for correction of the blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus at ages three to five years, followed about a year later by ptosis correction, which usually requires a brow suspension procedure.

Many surgical techniques have been described for medial canthoplasty and none of the existing methods is free from criticism. If the epicanthal folds are small, a Y-V canthoplasty is traditionally used; if the epicanthal folds are severe, a double Z-plasty is used. An alternate technique for medial canthoplasty has been described recently using the skin redraping method, which has a simple flap design, less scarring, and the effective repair of epicanthus inversus and telecanthus [Sa et al 2012].

To correct telecanthus, the medial canthal tendon is usually shortened or fused with a transnasal wire.

Ptosis correction is particularly important as it can address the disfigurement as well as functional concerns. Frontal muscle flap suspension is mostly used for severe ptosis in adults; however, it remains controversial. A major concern is that the frontal muscle development may be restrained by surgery. Decock et al [2011b] reported that super-maximal resection and frontalis suspension is the preferred method as it leads to a good cosmetic outcome as well as to an improved muscle function.

Alternatively, a one-stage procedure in which medial canthoplasty and ptosis correction are performed simultaneously has been described [Wu et al 2008]. Two recent retrospective, interventional studies including 21 patients demonstrated that one-stage correction using a standard combination of surgical techniques is safe and efficient [Sebastiá et al 2011, Liu et al 2014].

Recent insights into the causes of the abnormal lower eyelid positioning allow a more targeted surgical reconstruction that produces a more natural appearance [Decock et al 2011a]. Ten individuals with molecularly proven BPES were noted to have a laterally displaced inferior punctum (i.e., in the lower eyelid) due to temporal displacement of the entire lower eyelid. Addition of a simple surgical step corrected the position of the lower eyelid and its abnormal downward concavity (the temporal ectropion), and the lateral displacement of the inferior punctum. This approach eliminates the epicanthus inversus fold without the need for double Z-plasty [Decock et al 2011b].

Ovarian insufficiency. Management of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) needs to address the two following major medical issues that are applicable to primary ovarian insufficiency in general and not specific for BPES (no data specific to BPES are available):

Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the International Menopause Society recommend estrogen replacement therapy for women with primary ovarian insufficiency (amenorrhea and a menopausal serum FSH concentration). Although no data from randomized trials guide the use of hormonal therapy in women with BPES and POI, a reasonable regimen would be 100 μg of transdermal estradiol and 10 mg of oral medroxyprogesterone acetate daily for the first 12 days of each month. Women should keep a menstrual calendar and have a pregnancy test promptly in the case of late menses [Nelson 2009].A pelvic ultrasound examination and measurement of bone mineral density are indicated at the time of diagnosis of ovarian insufficiency. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency should be encouraged to maintain a lifestyle that optimizes bone and cardiovascular health, including engaging in regular weight-bearing exercise, maintaining an adequate intake of calcium (1200 mg daily) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU daily), eating a healthy diet to avoid obesity, and undergoing screening for cardiovascular risk factors, with treatment of any identified risk factors.

Infertility. No therapies have been shown to restore ovarian function and fertility. Some couples are averse to adoption and to reproductive technologies and are content not to become parents.For couples who decide to pursue parenthood actively, the options are adoption, foster parenthood, embryo donation, and egg donation. The rates of pregnancy with egg donation appear to be similar among older and younger women. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency who become pregnant as a result of oocyte donation may have an increased risk of delivering infants who are small for gestational age and of having pregnancy-induced hypertension and postpartum hemorrhage, but these findings are controversial [Nelson 2009].The issue of POI is emotionally charged and should be discussed with the patient with this in mind.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines suggest that women with a BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant could consider bilateral mastectomy as a primary surgical treatment of breast cancer because of their elevated rate of ipsilateral and contralateral breast cancer. See NCCN guidelines for the treatment of breast cancer and the treatment of other BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated malignancies (registration required).
Brugada syndrome is characterized by the presence of ST-segment elevation in leads V1 to V3. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are the only therapy currently known to be effective in persons with Brugada syndrome with syncope or cardiac arrest [Brugada et al 1999, Wilde et al 2002]. See Figure 3 for risk stratification and recommendations of ICD in individuals with Brugada syndrome.

Electrical storms respond well to infusion of isoproterenol (1-3 µg/min), the first line of therapy before other antiarrhythmics [Maury et al 2004].

It is important to:

Eliminate/treat agents/circumstances such as fever, cocaine use, electrolyte disturbances, and use of class I antiarrhythmic medications and other non-cardiac medications that can induce acute arrhythmias;

AND

Hospitalize the patient at least until the ECG pattern has normalized.

Controversy exists regarding the treatment of asymptomatic individuals. Recommendations vary [Benito et al 2009, Escárcega et al 2009, Nunn et al 2010] and include the following:

Observation until the first symptom develops (the first symptom can also be sudden cardiac death)

Placement of an ICD if the family history is positive for sudden cardiac death

Use of electrophysiologic study (EPS) to identify those most likely to experience arrhythmias and thus to benefit the most from placement of an ICD
Restriction of total fat intake between 20% and 30% of total dietary energy is often sufficient to maintain normal triglyceride serum concentration.

Fibric acid derivatives and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids derived from fish oils can be tried for the treatment of extreme hypertriglyceridemia.

Leptin treatment has proven successful in controlling both hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes mellitus [Garg et al 1999, Beltrand et al 2007, Ebihara et al 2007]. Despite the absence of well-controlled randomized studies that could provide a more thorough assessment of the possible adverse effects of leptin therapy, the United States Food and Drug Administration granted approval of leptin administration [Tsoukas et al 2015].

Management of diabetes mellitus does not differ from that of childhood-onset diabetes mellitus.

Special education is required for individuals with psychomotor retardation or intellectual disability.
Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation or surgical correction of choanal stenosis/atresia.

Defects of the lower eyelids that can result in corneal exposure require care by an ophthalmologist to reduce the risk of corneal scarring.

Treatment of hearing loss is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aids.

Treatment of craniofacial manifestations (e.g., cleft lip and/or palate, preauricular tags, prominent ears) is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, and speech/language therapy.

Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner.
Low vision aids provide benefit for those individuals with significant deterioration in visual acuity.

Stage 4c fundus lesions or choroidal neovascularization and hemorrhage can be managed by direct laser photocoagulation. Marano et al [2000] suggested a conservative approach in the treatment of choroidal neovascularization based on two individuals with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy whose visual acuity improved. No clinical trials comparing the efficacy of laser photocoagulation to conservative treatment have been conducted.

Anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents are the standard treatment for individuals with subfoveal choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Leu et al [2007] injected intravitreal bevacizumab in a 13 year-old with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy and CNV, hastening visual recovery and regression of the CNV. Intravitreal ranibizumab has also been used with success [Querques et al 2009]. There are no reports on the use of aflibercept. Long-term follow up of these affected individuals is unknown. There are currently no clinical trials to demonstrate the effectiveness of anti-VEGF agents on CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

Andrade et al [2003] performed photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin for CNV on one person with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. The CNV regressed and the subretinal hemorrhage resolved. The authors suggested that PDT may be an option for treatment of CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

Genetic counseling and occupational counseling should be offered.
The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia to reduce the risk of central nervous system complications. Because onset of hypoglycemia is occasionally delayed for several days, or even months, parents should be informed of the symptoms of hypoglycemia so that they can seek appropriate medical attention.

Abdominal wall repair for omphalocele soon after birth. Generally, this surgery is well tolerated.

Management of difficulties arising from macroglossia:

Anticipation of difficulties with endotracheal intubation [Kimura et al 2008]

Assessment of respiratory function, possibly including sleep study to address concern regarding potential sleep apnea

Management of feeding difficulties using specialized nipples such as the longer nipple recommended for babies with cleft palate or, rarely, short-term use of nasogastric tube feedings

Follow up by a craniofacial team including plastic surgeons, orthodontists, and speech pathologists familiar with the natural history of BWS. Tongue growth does slow over time and jaw growth can accelerate to accommodate the enlarged tongue. Some children benefit from tongue reduction surgery; however, surgical reduction typically affects tongue length but not thickness; residual cosmetic and speech issues may require further assessment/treatment [Tomlinson et al 2007].

Orthodontic intervention as needed in later childhood/adolescence

Assessment of speech difficulties

Management of cleft palate following standard protocols

Referral to a craniofacial surgeon if facial hemihyperplasia is significant

Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon if hemihyperplasia results in a significant difference in leg length. Surgery may be necessary during early puberty to close the growth plate of the longer leg in order to equalize the final leg lengths.

Treatment of neoplasias following standard pediatric oncology protocols

In some individuals with BWS, developmental anomalies of the renal tract are associated with increased calcium excretion and deposition (i.e., nephrocalcinosis). In individuals with evidence of calcium deposits on renal ultrasound examination, assessment for hypercalciuria and a CT scan of the kidneys may be helpful.

Referral to a pediatric nephrologist if urinary calcium is elevated and/or a structural renal anomaly is identified

Referral of children with structural GI tract abnormalities to the relevant specialist

Management of cardiac problems following standard protocols

Standard interventions such as infant stimulation programs, occupational and physical therapy, and individualized education programs for children with developmental delay
During acute episodes. Admit to the hospital children with insufficient intake or refusal to take anything orally and/or signs of metabolic decompensation such as encephalopathy. The following are recommended:

Always provide IV fluids (with glucose at maintenance doses) and extra calories via IV lipids; restrict protein intake if plasma ammonia is elevated.

Always monitor plasma ammonia, serum lactate, serum glucose, blood gases, electrolytes, and liver parameters.

Consider administration of carglumic acid (which – though not approved yet for this indication – enhances CPS1 activity and thus partially compensates for reduced HCO3- resulting from CA-VA deficiency). In the three children who were given carglumic acid during the acute phase, hyperammonemia and clinical symptoms resolved within 12 hours. Without carglumic acid, hyperammonemia persisted longer (i.e., an additional 1-2 days).

Other ammonia-lowering medications such as sodium benzoate would also be reasonable.

To prevent metabolic decompensation during any catabolic state (viral illness or fasting conditions)

Use a sick day formula (extra calories, with limited proteins and extra lipids).

Monitor plasma ammonia, serum glucose, blood gases, serum lactate, and plasma amino acids (frequency according to patient’s clinical state and physician’s expertise).
The following are appropriate:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation for motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia)

Ankle-foot orthotics in individuals with hypotonia and weakness of ankle dorsiflexors

Antiepileptic drugs for treatment of seizures and abnormalities of behavior and mood
There is no treatment of proven efficacy for CADASIL. Antiplatelet treatment is frequently used, but not proven effective in CADASIL.

Migraine should be treated symptomatically and prophylactically, depending on the frequency of manifestations. There is no evidence that triptans and ergot derivatives should be avoided, although some argue that vasoconstrictive medication should be used with prudence.

Co-occurrence of hypertension, diabetes, or hypercholesterolemia should be treated.

Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

Further discussion of medical management options for individuals with CADASIL was published by del Río-Espínola et al [2009].
Anti-inflammatory agents, antipyretics, and analgesics can be used in the short term to decrease swelling and fever and to relieve pain [Thometz & DiRaimondo 1996, Parnell & Parisi 2010].

Although immunoglobulins have also been tried [Berthier et al 1988], no definitive treatment guidelines exist.

No recommendations for the prevention of recurrence of hyperostosis currently exist.
Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency have been published [Speiser et al 2010] (full text).

It is imperative to make the diagnosis of 21-OHD CAH as quickly as possible in order to initiate therapy and arrest the effects of cortisol deficiency and mineralocorticoid deficiency, if present.

A multidisciplinary team of specialists in pediatric endocrinology, pediatric urology/surgery, clinical genetics, and psychology is essential for the diagnosis and management of the individual with ambiguous genitalia [Hughes et al 2006]. A pioneer project of CAH comprehensive care centers was implemented [Auchus et al 2010]. Two CAH comprehensive care centers which can provide multidisciplinary care from diagnosis through all stages of growth and development have been designated in the United States.

Classic 21-OHD CAH

Glucocorticoid replacement therapy. The goal of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is to replace deficient steroids, minimize adrenal sex hormone and glucocorticoid excess, prevent virilization, optimize growth, and promote fertility [Clayton et al 2002].

Hydrocortisone in tablet form is the treatment of choice in growing children. The use of oral hydrocortisone suspension is discouraged. Treatment for CAH principally involves glucocorticoid replacement therapy, usually in the form of hydrocortisone (10-15 mg/m2/24 hours) given orally in two or three daily divided doses [New et al 2013]. Glucocorticoid therapy for children involves balancing suppression of adrenal androgen secretion against iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in order to maintain a normal linear growth rate and normal bone maturation.

Note: Overtreatment with glucocorticosteroids can result in cushingoid features and should be avoided. It often occurs when serum concentration of 17-OHP is reduced to the physiologic range for age. An acceptable range for serum concentration of 17-OHP in the treated individual is higher (100-1,000 ng/dL) than normal, provided androgens are maintained in an appropriate range for gender and pubertal status.

During periods of stress (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, shock, major trauma), all individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require increased amounts of glucocorticoids. Typically, two to three times the normal dose is administered orally or by intramuscular injection when oral intake is not tolerated.

Affected individuals should carry medical information regarding emergency steroid dosing.

Individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require lifelong administration of glucocorticoids. After linear growth is complete, more potent glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone and dexamethasone) that tend to suppress growth in childhood can be used.

Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy. Treatment with 9α-fludrohydrocortisone (Florinef®) (0.05-0.2 mg/day orally) and sodium chloride (1-2 g/day added to formula or foods) is necessary in individuals with the salt-wasting form of 21-OHD CAH.

All individuals with the classic form should be treated with both 9α-fludrohydrocortisone and sodium chloride supplement in the newborn period and early infancy [Speiser et al 2010].

Sodium chloride supplementation may not be necessary after infancy; the amount of mineralocorticoid required daily may likewise decrease with age.

Feminizing genitoplasty. Per the 2006 joint LWPES/ESPE (Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society/European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology) consensus statement [Lee et al 2006] (full text):

“Surgery should only be considered in cases of severe virilization (Prader III-V) and be performed in conjunction, when appropriate, with repair of the common urogenital sinus. Because orgasmic function and erectile sensation may be disturbed by clitoral surgery, the surgical procedure should be anatomically based to preserve erectile function and the innervation of the clitoris. Emphasis is on functional outcome rather than a strictly cosmetic appearance. It is generally felt that surgery that is performed for cosmetic reasons in the first year of life relieves parental distress and improves attachment between the child and the parents; the systematic evidence for this belief is lacking.”

The Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines [Speiser et al 2010] (full text) state:

“[C]litoral and perineal reconstruction [should] be considered in infancy and performed by an experienced surgeon in a center with similarly experienced pediatric endocrinologists, mental health professionals, and social work services.”

Although there are no randomized controlled studies of either the best age or the best methods for feminizing surgery, the recommended procedures are neurovascular-sparing clitoroplasty and vaginoplasty using total or partial urogenital mobilization.

When necessary, vaginoplasty is usually performed in late adolescence because routine vaginal dilation is required to maintain a patent vagina.

Precocious puberty. The true precocious puberty that may occur in 21-OHD CAH can be treated with analogs of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH).

Testicular adrenal rest tumors. Response of testicular adrenal rest tumors to intensified glucocorticoid treatment may decrease the tumor size and improve testicular function [Bachelot et al 2008]. Testis-sparing surgery is considered in males who fail medical treatment, but the outcome has not been favorable, perhaps because of long-standing obstruction of the tubules [Claahsen-van der Grinten et al 2008]. Assistive reproductive technologies (ART) may also be considered to achieve fertility [Sugino et al 2006].

Transition from adolescence to adulthood. Improved care for individuals with 21-OHD CAH has resulted in a good prognosis and normal life expectancy. However, a prospective cross-sectional study of adults with 21-OHD CAH in the UK showed the following [Arlt et al 2010]:

Affected individuals were significantly shorter and had a higher body mass index.

Women with classic CAH had increased diastolic blood pressure.

Metabolic abnormalities were common among studied individuals, and included obesity (41%), hypercholesterolemia (46%), insulin resistance (29%), osteopenia (40%), and osteoporosis (7%). Subjective health status was significantly impaired and fertility compromised.

Transition of pediatric individuals to medical care in the adult setting is an important step to ensure optimal lifelong treatment, aiming to achieve good health with a normal life expectancy and quality of life [Reisch et al 2011].

Care for adults with CAH requires a multidisciplinary approach, including psychological support by specialists [Ogilvie et al 2006a].

Adrenalectomy. Bilateral adrenalectomy has been reported as a treatment of individuals with severe 21-OHD CAH who are homozygous for a null variant and who have a history of poor control with hormone replacement therapy [Van Wyk et al 1996, Meyers & Grua 2000]. It is thought that these individuals may be more successfully treated as individuals with Addison disease; however, compliance with the medication regimen postoperatively is exceedingly important. Thus, bilateral adrenalectomy can be considered only in selected individuals who have failed medical therapy; the risk for non-compliance must be considered before surgery [Speiser et al 2010].

Only small series of adults undergoing adrenalectomy have been reported (see review in Bachelot et al [2008]), the largest of which included five persons [Ogilvie et al 2006b]. The three main indications for adrenalectomy were: infertility, virilization, and obesity. Improvements in all three areas were noted in all reported individuals. More long-term data are needed to determine the outcome of those undergoing adrenalectomy, since the potential increase in ACTH postoperatively can worsen adrenal rest tissues.

Non-Classic 21-OHD CAH

Individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH do not always require treatment. Many are asymptomatic throughout their lives, or symptoms may develop during puberty, after puberty, or post partum.

The hyperandrogenic symptoms that require treatment include advanced bone age, early pubic hair, precocious puberty, tall stature, and early arrest of growth in children; infertility, cystic acne, and short stature in both adult males and females; hirsutism, frontal balding, polycystic ovaries, and irregular menstrual periods in females; and testicular adrenal rest tissue in males [New 2006].

In previously treated individuals, an option of discontinuing therapy when symptoms resolve should be offered [Speiser et al 2010].

Traditionally, individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH have been treated with lower amounts of glucocorticoid than those required for individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH.
In children with CD and cleft palate, care by a craniofacial team and surgical closure are recommended.

In individuals with a 46,XY karyotype and female genitalia, gonadectomy is recommended because of the increased risk of gonadoblastoma. (No data regarding the appropriate age for this procedure are available.)

Most survivors with CD require orthopedic care. Club feet require surgical correction. The hips should be checked for luxation.

Cervical fusion surgery is sometimes needed for cervical vertebral instability resulting from vertebral malformations.

Surgery is often required in childhood for progressive cervico-thoracic kyphoscoliosis that compromises lung function [Thomas et al 1997]. Bracing is usually not helpful.
Neonatal/infantile Canavan disease

Treatment is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious diseases, and protecting the airway.

Children benefit from physical therapy to minimize contractures and to maximize abilities and seating posture, from other therapies to enhance communication skills (especially in those with a more gradual clinical course), and from early intervention and special education programs.

Seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

A feeding gastrostomy may be required to maintain adequate intake and hydration in the presence of swallowing difficulties.

Diamox® seems to reduce intracranial pressure.

Botox® injections may be used to relieve spasticity.

Mild/juvenile Canavan disease. These individuals may require speech therapy or tutoring but require no special medical care.
Consider referral to a dermatologist for discussion of treatment options for hypertrichosis. Possible treatments may include shaving and, in teenagers and adults, use of depilatories or laser hair removal.

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) often requires surgical closure in infancy or early childhood. Of note, the PDA in Cantú syndrome is frequently described as being very large.

Pericardial effusion sometimes requires pericardiocentesis and ultimately pericardial stripping to prevent reaccumulation of the effusion.

Scoliosis may require bracing or surgical correction.

Standard management for peripheral edema, including compression stockings, is indicated.
Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

Gait disturbance from spasticity and pyramidal signs in the lower extremities may require walking aids or medication such as baclofen or tizanidine.

Personality change may require antipsychotic medication.

If spinal spondylosis is severe and patients show some neurologic deficit due to spinal compression, orthopedic treatment may be helpful to relieve symptoms.

A wig or hairpiece may be helpful for alopecia.
The following interventions are routine:

Cardiac myxoma. Open-heart surgery

Cutaneous and mammary myxoma. Surgical excision

Cushing syndrome. Bilateral adrenalectomy

Pituitary adenoma. Transsphenoidal surgery

Thyroid adenomas. Surgery if cancerous

LCCSCT. Orchiectomy usually required for boys with aggressively growing LCCSCT and gynecomastia to avoid premature epiphyseal fusion and induction of central precocious puberty. Tumors with lack of growth and mild gynecomastia can be treated medically with aromatase inhibitors.

PMS. Surgery to remove primary and/or metastatic lesions
No specific therapy is available.

Treatment is symptomatic and includes nutritional support, treatment of hearing loss, and use of physiotherapy.

Management of seizures in children with MICPCH is standard treatment and based on the specific seizure type and frequency.
Infertility. No available treatment can reverse the morphologic and/or motility defects observed in CATSPER-related asthenospermia or asthenoteratospermia (low motility with increased number of abnormal forms). For infertile males, one option is to bypass these morphologic and motility abnormalities using assisted reproductive technologies such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) [Smith et al 2013]. This approach has been used successfully in males with DIS [Zhang et al 2007].

Deafness. For males and females with DIS, treatment of hearing loss is best achieved by fitting hearing aids for amplification. For school-age children or adolescents, special educational assistance may also be warranted and, where possible, should be offered. (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview and Related Genetic Counseling Issues for other issues pertinent to the care of deaf and hard-of-hearing persons.)
No specific treatment is currently available for caveolinopathies.

Aggressive supportive care is essential to preserve muscle function, to maximize functional ability, and to treat complications, especially in cases with LGMD features. Management should include the following:

Weight control to avoid obesity

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998]
Prognosis is poor in patients with early-onset cblC who are undiagnosed and untreated [Rosenblatt et al 1997]. Institution of therapy during acute illness results in rapid improvement of clinical, biochemical, and hematologic manifestations in patients with early- and late-onset cblC [Bartholomew et al 1988, Rosenblatt et al 1997, Bodamer et al 2001, Tomaske et al 2001, Kind et al 2002, Van Hove et al 2002, Fowler et al 2008].

Parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) is the mainstay of therapy and should be instituted as soon as a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism is suspected. Infants are started with daily 1.0 mg intramuscular or subcutaneous injections. Patients with cblC are often highly responsive to this therapy.

Patients with elevated tHcy should also receive betaine (250 mg/kg/day) and folate or folinic acid.

Acute metabolic decompensation. Although less common in the disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism than in methylmalonic acidemia, severe acidotic/ketotic crises due to profound methylmalonic acidemia do occur. Such critically ill individuals should be managed in consultation with a metabolic specialist. MedicAlert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Treatment includes volume replacement with isotonic solutions containing high (10%-12.5%) glucose to reverse catabolism, correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate, and prompt reintroduction of feedings — preferably enterally, but parenterally if enteral route cannot be established.

Thromboembolic complications a cause of mortality in cblC are likely associated with increasing plasma concentrations of tHcy [Carrillo-Carrasco & Venditti 2012]. The proper management of thromboembolic complications, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic microangiopathy, should include initiation of OHCbl and betaine or an increase in their doses [Van Hove et al 2002, Sharma et al 2007].

Long-term management. The goals of long-term management include improving the metabolic derangement by lowering plasma tHcy and MMA concentrations and maintaining plasma methionine concentrations within the normal range. These are accomplished by:

Parenteral OHCbl. The most experience derives from the treatment of patients with cblC. Infants are usually started at a daily dose of 1.0 mg (~0.3 mg/kg/d) of OHCbl given IM or SQ. Parenteral OHCbl (not the cyanocobalamin form or oral form) is the only effective preparation. Placement of a SQ catheter that minimizes cutaneous punctures [Freehauf et al 2011] and pre-filled injections may increase compliance.

Weight-appropriate adjustment of the OHCbl dose is recommended and can be attained by the ability to concentrate OHCbl up to 30 mg/mL. Further titration of the dose may be empirically adjusted as needed for worsening clinical manifestations [Van Hove et al 2002] or for metabolic control of plasma tHcy, MMA, or methionine concentrations [Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2009].

Betaine. Oral betaine (starting at ~250 mg/kg/day) is recommended in patients with defective MeCbl production (cblC, cblD, cblE, cblF, cblG, and cblJ). Betaine augments the non-methionine synthase-dependent conversion of homocysteine to methionine (however, this is not uniformly accepted). Optimal dosing and monitoring have not been adequately established.

Folate and folinic acid. Folic acid and folinic acid can potentially augment remethylation and may help improve plasma tHcy and methionine concentrations. Folinic acid may be preferred as it crosses the blood brain barrier more efficiently than folic acid. The adult dose of folate is 1.0 mg by mouth per day, titratable down to 0.5 mg for maintenance. Doses for children and infants are available in the Harriet Lane Handbook [Tschudy & Arcara 2012] and other common reference texts.

Dietary management. Patients may be able to tolerate a normal diet: the use of a low-protein diet is under debate and needs further clinical studies to clarify the benefits of its use.

Most importantly, methionine restriction should be avoided, as hypomethioninemia can be detrimental [Ribes et al 1990, Rossi et al 2001, De Bie et al 2009].

Gastrostomy tube placement may be required in the present of feeding difficulties and failure to thrive.

Other therapeutic considerations that have not been fully validated:

Methionine supplementation. Hypomethioninemia is usually responsive to appropriate treatment with OHCbl and betaine. The need for exogenous methionine supplementation may be minimized by these strategies, as the efficacy of this therapy is uncertain [Smith et al 2006].

Pyridoxine. Vitamin B6 is a cofactor for cystathionine beta synthase and, therefore has been proposed as a means of maximizing the removal of homocysteine. Persons with disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism generally do not respond to pyridoxine unless they have a dietary deficiency.

Levocarnitine. Indicated for low plasma carnitine levels

Treatment of infantile spasms, seizures, congenital heart defects, and hydrocephalus is done in a routine manner.
Supportive therapy includes the following as needed:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation to improve motor function

Special education

Treatment of headache

Guidance for visual impairment

For males with infertility: consultation with a male infertility specialist
Classic CCA

Physical therapy for joint contractures helps increase joint mobility and ameliorate the effects of muscle hypoplasia (usually calf muscles). This type of therapy is best instituted in childhood. As affected individuals age, spontaneous improvement in camptodactyly is frequently observed.

Surgical release of contractures may be necessary.

The kyphoscoliosis tends to be progressive, requiring bracing and/or surgical correction. Consultation with an orthopedist is encouraged.

Aortic root dilation, if present, is managed in a standard manner.

Severe/lethal CCA. no general recommendations exist; findings need to be managed in a standard manner as they arise.
Dental. Early referral to a dental clinic familiar with CCD allows for timely planning of necessary procedures.

The dental problems that need to be addressed include the retention of deciduous dentition, the presence of supernumerary teeth, and the non-eruption of the permanent dentition.

The goal of treatment is to improve appearance and to provide a functioning masticatory mechanism. The goals may be achieved with prosthetic replacements, with or without prior extractions; by removal of the supernumerary teeth followed by surgical repositioning of the permanent teeth; and by a combination of surgical and orthodontic measures for actively erupting and aligning the impacted permanent teeth. For a detailed review, see Becker et al [1997a] and Becker et al [1997b], and Roberts et al [2013].

Generally, an aggressive approach to coordinate multiple oral surgeries for removal of primary dentition and exposure of permanent dentition is recommended, as watchful waiting for spontaneous eruption after initial delay is not effective.

Speech therapy may be required during periods of dental treatment.

Sinus and middle ear infections require aggressive and timely treatment; tympanostomy tubes should be considered when middle ear infections are recurrent [Visosky et al 2003].

Craniofacial. The fontanels close with time in the majority of individuals and cranial remodeling is usually not necessary.

If the cranial vault defect is significant, the head should be protected from blunt trauma; helmets may be advised for high-risk activities. In these cases, evaluation by a craniofacial surgeon and rehabilitation services are indicated.

Affected individuals may consider having correction of the depressed forehead or lengthening of the hypoplastic clavicles for cosmetic reasons. There have been reports of successful surgical interventions in a very small number of affected individuals [Kang et al 2009, Sewell et al 2013].

Skeletal. If bone density is below normal on DEXA, treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplementation should be considered. Preventive treatment for osteoporosis should be initiated at a young age since peak bone mineral density is achieved in the second and third decade.
The treatment of cataracts is surgical. The surgical removal of cataracts may be complicated by the micropupils and fibrotic pupillary margins necessitating alternative mechanical methods of dilatation [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

Patients need close follow up because of unusually exaggerated postoperative inflammatory reactions and strong unspecific foreign-body reaction to contact lenses and intraocular lenses (intraocular lenses are generally better tolerated) [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

The management of the peripheral neuropathy includes rehabilitation and corrective surgery for the secondary bone deformities.

Hormone replacement therapy may be considered in young females with secondary amenorrhea and increased risk of osteoporosis. Regular rehabilitation can prevent or postpone osteoporosis.

Growth hormone levels in CCFDN are in low normal range and somatotropin hormone substitution is not expected to have considerable effect.
Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect. Surgical removal of lesions associated with intractable seizures or focal deficits from recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect has traditionally been recommended [Heros & Heros 2000, Selman et al 2000, Folkersma & Mooij 2001]; however, a recent large prospective study in Scotland reported that surgical excision increased the overall risk of short-term neurologic disability, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, and new focal neurosurgical deficits [Moultrie et al 2014], calling this practice into question.

Neuropsychological testing may be considered prior to any neurosurgical procedure.

Microsurgical techniques rely on intraoperative examination for precise localization.

Even when a large number of lesions are present, a surgical approach may be justified.

Gamma knife surgery or radiosurgery, while effective, appears to increase the risk of recurrent hemorrhage and remains unproven [Wang et al 2010, Steiner et al 2010]. Very large single lesions can be difficult to ablate, especially in the brain stem. In these instances, radiosurgery may be an option [Monaco et al 2010].

In a group of individuals with symptomatic cavernous malformations studied in Japan, radiosurgery using varying doses of radiation for deep lesions was compared with conservative (nonsurgical) management. Doses less than 15 Gray (Gy) were associated with the lowest level of complications. Complications were also lower when the lesions were of smaller size, with overall hemorrhage rates reduced initially but reverting to a rate similar to that of the natural history after the first two years post-radiosurgery [Kida et al 2015].

A study that carefully reviewed post-radiosurgery changes in individuals with CCM or AVM found that more than 30% developed radiation necrosis [Blamek et al 2010].

Seizures. Standard treatment for focal seizures using antiepileptic medication with early evaluation for surgical resection is appropriate (see Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect).

Headaches. Standard treatment and management of headaches is indicated unless the headache is severe, prolonged, or progressive, or associated with new or worsening neurologic deficits. In this circumstance, urgent brain imaging could lead to surgical management.

Neurologic deficits. Rehabilitation is indicated for those with temporary or permanent neurologic deficits.
Since prognosis is mainly influenced by respiratory status and scoliosis, treatment geared towards these manifestations is essential.

Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms, but mainly consists of supportive measures and rehabilitation that address the following problems:

Hypotonia and weakness. Patients may benefit from physical therapy. Interventions may include stretching programs and mild to moderate low-impact exercise; activities should be balanced in such a way that exhaustion is avoided.

Scoliosis and joint contractures. Some patients may only require physical therapy, while others may need orthopedic surgery (e.g., scoliosis surgery, corrective surgery for congenital hip dislocation and foot deformities).

Respiratory. Patients with more severe symptoms may require respiratory support. Breathing exercises and chest physiotherapy for handling secretions may also be beneficial.

Feeding difficulties. Individuals may require diet supplementation and feeding by means of nasogastric/orogastric routes or gastrostomy.
The main focus of treatment has thus far been surgical correction of the abnormal joints. Presumably because of the basic defect present in CHST3-related skeletal dysplasia, surgical correction is often only partially successful and most patients have had multiple procedures by adulthood [Unger et al 2010].

Of note, physical therapy has not been demonstrated to be effective in this disorder.
Intramuscular or subcutaneous injections of interferon (IFN)-α2a or INF-α2b given two or three times a week increase hemoglobin and decrease iron overload in the majority of treated individuals [Lavabre-Bertrand et al 2004]. Peginterferon-α2b has also been given once a week. The mechanism behind this response is unknown. To date, only a limited number of individuals, including infants, have been treated.Treatment should be given by a physician who is experienced in interferon administration.

Successful allogenic bone marrow transplantation has been described in three children [Ayas et al 2002] and should be considered only in those transfusion-dependent persons who are resistant to IFN therapy.

Splenectomy is of unproved value; failure of this procedure to increase hemoglobin levels and also thromboembolic complications may follow splenectomy. Therefore, splenectomy should be cautiously considered in patients with CDA I, as is recommended for non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].
Failure to thrive. Infants and children can be nourished with any type of formula for maximal caloric intake. They can tolerate carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Early in life, children may do better on elemental formulas. Their feeding may be advanced based on their oral motor function. Some children require placement of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube for nutritional support until oral motor skills improve.

Oral motor dysfunction with persistent vomiting. Thickening of feeds, maintenance of an upright position after eating, and antacids can help children who experience gastroesophageal reflux and/or persistent vomiting. Consultation with a gastroenterologist and nutritionist is often necessary. Children with a gastrostomy tube should be encouraged to eat by mouth if the risk of aspiration is low. Continued speech therapy and oral motor therapy aid transition to oral feeds and encourage speech when the child is developmentally ready.

Developmental delay. Occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy should be instituted. As the developmental gap widens between children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their unaffected peers, parents need continued counseling and support.

"Infantile catastrophic phase." Very rarely, infants may have a complicated early course presenting with infection or seizure and hypoalbuminemia with third spacing that may progress to anasarca. Some children are responsive to aggressive albumin replacement with lasix, others may have a more refractory course. Symptomatic treatment in a pediatric tertiary care center is recommended. Parents should also be advised that some infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) never experience a hospital visit while others may require frequent hospitalizations.

Strabismus. Intervention by a pediatric ophthalmologist early in life is important to preserve vision through glasses, patching, or surgery.

Hypothyroidism. Thyroid function tests are frequently abnormal in children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). However, free thyroxine analyzed by equilibrium dialysis, the most accurate method, has been reported as normal in seven individuals with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Diagnosis of hypothyroidism and L-thyroxine supplementation should be reserved for those children and adults with elevated TSH and low free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis.

Stroke-like episodes. Supportive therapy includes hydration by IV if necessary and physical therapy during the recovery period.

Coagulopathy. Low levels of coagulation factors, both pro- and anti-coagulant, rarely cause clinical problems in daily activities but must be acknowledged if an individual with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) undergoes surgery. Consultation with a hematologist (to document the coagulation status and factor levels) and discussion with the surgeon are important. When necessary, infusion of fresh frozen plasma corrects the factor deficiency and clinical bleeding. The potential for imbalance of the level of both pro- and anti-coagulant factors may lead to either bleeding or thrombosis. Care givers, especially of older affected individuals, should be taught the signs of deep venous thrombosis.

Osteopenia. While present from infancy there does not appear to be a significant increased risk of fracture. Should fracture occur, management should follow standards of medical care.

Additional management issues of adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia)

Orthopedic issues—thorax shortening, scoliosis/kyphosis. Management involves appropriate orthopedic and physical medicine management, well-supported wheelchairs, appropriate transfer devices for the home, and physical therapy. Occasionally, surgical treatment of spinal curvature is warranted.

Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVT has been reported in two adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Rapid diagnosis and treatment of DVT are essential to minimize the risk of pulmonary emboli; sedentary affected adults and children are at increased risk for DVT.

Independent living issues. Young adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their parents need to address issues of independent living. Aggressive education throughout the school years in functional life skills and/or vocational training helps the transition when schooling is completed. Independence in self-care and the activities of daily living should be encouraged. Support and resources for parents of a disabled adult are an important part of management.
For all congenital disorders of N-linked glycosylation and most multiple-pathway disorders except MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib)

Failure to thrive. Infants and children can be fed any type of formula for maximal caloric intake. They can tolerate carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Early in life, children may do better on elemental formulas. Their feeding may be advanced based on their oral motor function. Some children require placement of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube for nutritional support until oral motor skills improve.

Oral motor dysfunction with persistent vomiting. Thickening of feeds, maintenance of an upright position after eating, and antacids can be helpful for children with gastroesophageal reflux and/or persistent vomiting. Consultation with a gastroenterologist and nutritionist is often necessary. Children with a gastrostomy tube should be encouraged to eat by mouth if the risk of aspiration is low. Continued speech and oral motor therapy aids transition to oral feeds and encourages speech when the child is developmentally ready.

Developmental delay. Occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy should be instituted. As the developmental gap widens between children with CDG and their unaffected peers, parents, educators, and therapists need continued counseling and support.

"Infantile catastrophic phase." Very rarely, infants may have a complicated early course presenting with infection, seizure, or hypoalbuminemia with third spacing that may progress to anasarca. Some children are responsive to aggressive albumin replacement with Lasix®; others may have a more refractory course. Symptomatic treatment in a pediatric tertiary care center is recommended. Parents should also be advised that some infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) never experience a hospital visit while others may require frequent hospitalizations.

Strabismus. Consultation with a pediatric ophthalmologist early in life is important so that potential eye abnormalities can be diagnosed and therapies that preserve vision (glasses, patching, or surgery) can be instituted as needed.

Hypothyroidism. Although children with CDG are usually chemically euthyroid [Martin & Freeze 2003], thyroid function tests are frequently abnormal. However, free thyroxine analyzed by equilibrium dialysis, the most accurate method, has been reported as normal in seven individuals with CDG. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism and L-thyroxine supplementation should be reserved for those children and adults with elevated TSH and low free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis.

Renal issues. Bilateral hyperechoic kidneys are often seen on ultrasound in children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Enlarged kidneys, renal cysts, and congenital nephrotic syndrome have been reported in individuals with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and other forms of CDG.

Baseline renal ultrasound should be performed on all affected children at the time of diagnosis [Grünewald 2009, Sinha et al 2009].

While proteinuria in affected children is extremely rare, routine urinalysis to evaluate for proteinuria is recommended after diagnosis. Follow-up urinalysis should be considered in the first three years of life or if clinical signs indicate.

Stroke-like episodes. Supportive therapy includes intravenous hydration, maintenance of normal blood glucose, and physical therapy during the recovery period.

Coagulopathy. Low levels of coagulation factors, both pro- and anticoagulant, rarely cause clinical problems in daily activities but must be addressed when an individual with CDG undergoes surgery. Consultation with a hematologist is recommended to document the pro- and anti- clotting factor levels and coagulation status. Discussion of the coagulation status and management issues with the surgeon is important. When necessary, infusion of fresh frozen plasma corrects the factor deficiency and clinical bleeding. The potential for imbalance of the level of both pro- and anticoagulant factors may lead to either bleeding or thrombosis. Care givers, especially of older affected individuals, should be taught the signs of deep venous thrombosis, which can occasionally be mistaken for injury from trauma in individuals with intellectual and communication disabilities.

Immunologic status. Most individuals affected with CDGs have functional immune systems; however, children with rare types of N-linked CDG have recurrent or unexpectedly severe infections and should be evaluated by an immunologist. Unless otherwise indicated, full pediatric vaccinations are recommended for affected children and adults.

Additional management issues of adults with CDG

Orthopedic issues — thorax shortening, scoliosis/kyphosis. Management involves appropriate orthopedic and physical medicine management, well-supported wheel chairs, appropriate transfer devices for the home, and physical therapy. Occasionally, surgical treatment of spinal curvature by an experienced team is warranted.

Independent living issues. Young adults with CDG and their parents need to address issues of independent living. Aggressive education in functional life skills and/or vocational training help the transition when schooling is completed. Independence in self-care and the activities of daily living should be encouraged. Support and resources for parents of a disabled adult are important aspects of management.

Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVT has been reported in several adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and MPI-CDG (CDG-Ib) and should be kept in mind in the management of all individuals with CDG. Rapid diagnosis and treatment of DVT are essential to minimize the risk of pulmonary emboli; sedentary affected adults and children are at increased risk for DVT.
Proper management of newborns with CDH must start in the delivery room; recently, therapy may start in the prenatal period.

Postnatal treatment. Emphasis must be on preventing secondary lung injury. Newborns should be intubated immediately in the delivery room to avoid bag-mask ventilation and inflation of bowel that has herniated into the chest. Care should be taken not to induce barotrauma from bag ventilation before the neonate can be transitioned to an appropriate ventilator. In the 1990s, it was recognized that minimizing aggressive ventilation by limiting ventilator settings and/or allowing the neonate to do some of the breathing work resulted in improved outcomes. It was also recognized that infants did not need to be rushed to surgery and benefited from stabilization of respiratory and cardiovascular status prior to diaphragmatic repair. Assuring end-organ perfusion and stability instead of perfect physiologic values or immediate anatomic correction is now the standard of care [Wung et al 1995, Boloker et al 2002, Mohseni-Bod & Bohn 2007].

Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) continues to be used frequently in some centers as a rescue therapy for neonates with critical cardiopulmonary deterioration, but has a limited or non-existent role in other centers. It is unclear whether ECMO improves survival in CDH; Muratore et al [2001] and Stege et al [2003] concluded that the introduction of ECMO did not significantly change mortality; centers that do not have ECMO report similar survival rates to those that use ECMO. However, population biases may play a role in the evaluation of these statistics. From 1995 to 2004, the survival rate of 3100 infants reported to the Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Study Group who received ECMO and survived CDH repair was 67% [Seetharamaiah et al 2009]. When ECMO does rescue an infant who would have otherwise died in the perinatal period, it is unclear whether those infants have a good long-term outcome. For these reasons, a randomized controlled trial of ECMO in neonates with CDH is needed [Harrington & Goldman 2005].

Treatment of pulmonary hypertension is a recent focus in the clinical management of CDH. Unfortunately, therapies that have been extremely successful in treating the usual persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) have not been widely successful in attenuating CDH-associated pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure. Since some patients respond to nitric oxide (NO) [Okuyama et al 2002], a trial of NO with a careful documentation of response with echocardiography prior to continuation is warranted. More recently, phosphodiesterase inhibitors have been used in some cases [Mohseni-Bod & Bohn 2007, Noori et al 2007].

Other therapies that have been introduced in the acute neonatal treatment phase for CDH but are controversial include the use of surfactant and perflubron [Fauza et al 2001, Hirschl et al 2003]. Unfortunately, the lack of large randomized controlled trials makes it difficult to determine which of these treatments may be beneficial. The presence of surfactant deficiency in those with CDH may depend on the sub-population, thus making it difficult to determine whether exogenous surfactant would be efficacious in large trials [Jani et al 2009, Janssen et al 2009].

Prenatal treatment. Treatment of severely affected infants has shifted to the prenatal period, as rescue of severe pulmonary hypoplasia is possible if done at the correct time. The discovery that laryngeal obstruction leads to lung distension from retained fluid prompted tracheal occlusion studies in animal models and in humans [Lipshutz et al 1997, Harrison et al 2003]. In one US randomized trial of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion, the treatment group experienced a high rate of pre-term delivery and did not have improved morbidity or mortality rates [Harrison et al 2003]. However, since that time, advances have been made in tracheal occlusion techniques and in predicting which fetuses would most likely die without any intervention. Currently, high-risk fetuses in Europe or in a few US centers may receive tracheal occlusion by fetal endoscopic balloon placement. The procedure is performed in the second trimester when the observed/expected lung area to head circumference ratios are equal to or less than 1.0. Generally, fetuses selected for this procedure have isolated CDH (as well as can be determined by prenatal imaging) without chromosome aberrations. Although the treatment remains controversial without a recent randomized clinical trial, survival rates in high-risk fetuses are increased when compared to historical controls [Deprest et al 2009, Jani et al 2009].
The following are appropriate:

Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux with consideration of fundoplication if GER is severe

Surgical correction of intestinal malrotation if present

Supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs if there is failure to thrive

Surgical intervention of arms/hands if limb defects hinder utilization or mobility

Ongoing physical, occupational, and speech therapies to optimize developmental outcomes; alternative communicative methods (e.g., sign language, picture exchange communication system [PECS]) to facilitate communication if verbal skills are inadequate to express wants and needs

Standard treatment for hearing loss

Aggressive treatment for nasolacrimal duct obstruction as massage therapy is often unsuccessful because of malformed ducts; standard treatment for refractive errors, strabismus, glaucoma, and ptosis

Standard interventions for cardiac defects

Appropriate treatment for seizures

Antibiotic prophylaxis and follow up for vesicoureteral reflux

Orchiopexy if cryptorchidism is present

Standard intervention for bicornuate uterus, if present
Management is supportive.

Respiratory difficulty can require frequent monitoring, nasal stents, and oxygen.

Severe maxillary hypoplasia or maxillary retrognathia may require reconstructive surgery in older individuals [Carach et al 2002].

Instability of the cervical spine may require a cervical collar or spinal fusion; cervical spine stenosis may require decompression.

Surveillance of the following is according to recommended pediatric practice, with closer follow-up recommended if abnormalities are identified:

Hearing

Growth

Development

Thoracic and lumbar spine (for scoliosis)
L-carnitine supplementation. The main treatment for CDSP is oral levocarnitine (L-carnitine) supplementation. Typically, a high dose (100-400 mg/kg/day, divided in 3 doses) is required. Individuals with CDSP respond well if oral L-carnitine supplementation is started before irreversible organ damage occurs. Metabolic decompensation and skeletal and cardiac muscle function improve with L-carnitine supplementations.

Oral L-carnitine supplementation in infants with CDSP identified through newborn screening results in slow normalization of the plasma carnitine concentration. The carnitine dose needs to be adjusted according to the plasma carnitine concentrations, which should be measured frequently.

L-carnitine supplementation has relatively few side effects:

High doses of oral L-carnitine can cause increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and intestinal discomfort.

Oral L-carnitine can be metabolized by intestinal bacteria to produce trimethylamine, which has a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for 7-10 days and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor [Longo et al 2006].

Note: (1) An unaffected infant born to a mother with CDSP can have low carnitine levels detected on newborn screening; in these infants oral L-carnitine supplementation is followed by a rise in plasma carnitine concentration within days or a few weeks [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. (2) Asymptomatic adults with CDSP have been reported; however, the limited literature and the lack of follow up make it unclear whether these individuals have potential health risks. Because some fatty acid oxidation defects such as medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency can remain asymptomatic until they results in sudden death or another acute presentation during stress, it is prudent to treat asymptomatic individuals with CDSP with L-carnitine supplementation to prevent the possibility of decompensation during intercurrent illness or stress [El-Hattab et al 2010].

Other

Hypoglycemic episodes are treated with intravenous dextrose infusion.

Cardiomyopathy requires management by specialists in cardiology.
Treatment includes the following:

Surgery for correcting craniosynostosis (usually in first year of life) [Sensenbrenner et al 1975, Levin et al 1977, Genitori et al 1992, Gilissen et al 2010, Bacino et al 2012, Hoffer et al 2013].

Correction of polydactyly (optional)

Orthopedic care as required (e.g., for hip dysplasia)

Growth hormone treatment to stimulate growth when standard criteria for this treatment are met [Wilson et al 2003]. Growth hormone should only be prescribed to children with severe growth retardation in whom the therapy is expected to be successful.

Dental care. Timely detection and intervention of structural tooth abnormalities and/or olgiodontia may limit aesthetic, functional, and psychological issues.

Standard treatment for renal and liver abnormalities. While liver transplantation is a treatment option in advanced stages, it has only been proposed once for an individual with CED [Zaffanello et al 2006].

For those with progressive visual impairment, low vision aids and appropriate educational programs

Mechanical ventilation as required in newborns to treat respiratory insufficiency due to pulmonary hypoplasia. Pneumonia should be treated with antibiotics. Patients susceptible to recurrent respiratory infections should be treated with long-term prophylaxis. Asthma can be treated with steroids.

Standard treatment for cardiac abnormalities

For those with developmental delay, speech therapy and physical therapy to improve motor skills and appropriate educational programs

Surgical intervention as required for inguinal/umbilical hernias [Fry et al 2009]
Management of CEBPA-associated familial AML does not differ from that of sporadic CEBPA-associated AML [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2009, Döhner et al 2010].

Treatment usually includes cytarabine/anthracycline-based induction and cytarabine-based consolidation chemotherapy with or without HSCT according to clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular risk. For younger individuals with AML (even those without a clear family history), there is now increasing awareness that germline variants should be investigated and excluded prior to consideration of HSCT using sib/related donors. Specific treatment strategies are based on characteristics of the individual, response to chemotherapy, treatment setting, and protocol (if the individual is enrolled in a clinical trial). Note: Whenever possible, persons with AML should be treated as part of a clinical trial protocol.

Relapses are treated with cytarabine-based salvage chemotherapy followed by allogeneic HSCT (if a suitable donor is available and if cure is the intent of treatment).
No consensus management guidelines have been developed to date.

Corticosteroids may relieve many of the symptoms of Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED). Several investigators report success with corticosteroid treatment in reducing pain and weakness; improving gait, exercise tolerance, and flexion contractures; and correcting anemia and hepatosplenomegaly [Lindstrom 1974, Baş et al 1999, Wallace et al 2004]. Unsuccessful steroid therapy was reported in one adult.

Individuals with severe symptoms can be treated with a bolus of prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg/day followed by rapid tapering to the lowest alternate-day dose tolerated. Less symptomatic individuals can be started on 0.5-1.0 mg/kg every other day. Some individuals may be able to discontinue steroid therapy during quiescent periods.

Higher-dose steroids may help with acute pain crises.

Note: Steroids may delay bone hyperostosis and prevent or delay the onset of skull involvement. Although histologic studies following steroid therapy showed increased bone resorption and secondary remodeling with increased osteoblastic activity and decreased lamellar bone deposition, several authors reported no regression of sclerosis on radiographic evaluation [Verbruggen et al 1985] or on scintigraphic evaluation [Baş et al 1999]. Lindstrom [1974] and Baş et al [1999] reported diminished sclerosis on radiographs following steroid therapy. Verbruggen et al [1985] and Inaoka et al [2001] reported reduced radioactivity on bone scintigraphy. Long-term follow-up studies should be conducted to evaluate the success of corticosteroid therapy in preventing anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, headaches, and cranial nerve impingement.

Calcitonin. Pain relief from intranasal calcitonin is reported in one patient [Trombetti et al 2012].

Losartan. Reduced bone pain and increased physical activity are reported in two patients treated with losartan [Ayyavoo et al 2014, Simsek-Kiper et al 2014]. Losartan has an anti-TGFβ effect and is being tested in individuals with Marfan syndrome.

Other analgesics and non-pharmacologic methods are frequently used for alleviation of pain.

Surgical treatment for persistent bone pain by intramedullary reaming was reported in a woman age 22 years diagnosed with Ribbing disease [Oztürkmen & Karamehmetoğlu 2011]. Pain in the tibia resolved completely following the surgery; at five-year follow-up, the individual remained pain free.

Craniectomy relieved increased intracranial pressure and headaches in two patients [Author, personal observation].

Hearing loss evaluation by an otolaryngologist should include a BAER and a CT with fine cuts through the inner ear. Reports of successful treatment of hearing loss in CED are rare. Surgical decompression of the internal auditory canals can improve hearing. However, the skull hyperostosis is progressive, and cranial nerve compression often recurs.

Corticosteroids may delay skull hyperostosis and cranial nerve impingement. Lindstrom [1974] reported no change in conductive hearing loss with steroid therapy. A woman age 30 years with a 75-dB neurosensory hearing loss on the right and a 65-dB neurosensory hearing loss of the left experienced some improvement in hearing with prednisone. Her hearing stabilized after decompression of the right internal auditory canal.

Bilateral myringotomy can improve conductive hearing loss resulting from serous otitis in individuals with CED.

A woman age 71 years with bilateral conductive hearing loss and patent internal auditory canals underwent a cochlear implantation, and speech detection improved from 75 dB to 45 dB [Friedland et al 2000]. General contraindications for cochlear implants include a narrowed internal auditory canal and absence of a functioning eighth nerve, both of which can be found in individuals with CED.

Carlson et al [2010] report six individuals with CED and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Three underwent internal auditory canal decompression with mixed results. Conservative management was used in the other three individuals with no worsening of symptoms (see also Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview).
Celiac disease. Ideally, the care of a newly diagnosed individual should be provided by a team including a gastroenterologist, primary care physician, and experienced nutritionist (see Figure 4). Local branches of national support groups can be helpful as additional resources [NIH Consensus Committee 2005] (see Figure 4).

The only treatment for individuals with celiac disease is strict adherence to a gluten-free diet that requires lifelong avoidance of wheat, rye, and barley:

Treatment with a gluten-free diet should be started only after the diagnosis has been established by intestinal biopsy.

A dietitian experienced in treating celiac disease should be involved.

In approximately 70% of affected individuals, symptoms improve within two weeks after starting a gluten-free diet.

For some patients, even a small amount of gluten (i.e., 100 mg) can damage the small intestine. Note that a slice of bread contains approximately 2.5 grams of gluten.

It can be difficult to adhere to the gluten-free diet, as gluten is found in many foods and other ingested products. Some hidden sources of gluten:

Non-starchy foods such as soy sauce and beer

Non-food items such as some medications, and cosmetics (e.g., lipstick)

Nutritional deficiencies and metabolic bone disease should be treated in the usual manner.

‘Unresponsive celiac disease’ refers celiac disease in patients who show no improvement on a gluten-free diet:

The most common reason for unresponsive celiac disease is the presence of small amounts of gluten in the diet. This gluten ingestion may be intentional, such as “cheating” at social events or using communion wafers, or unintentional, including ingestion of gluten in medications and gluten-containing foods in restaurants. Advice from a nutritionist experienced in management of the gluten-free diet is recommended to achieve the best results.

Assessment for lactose or fructose intolerance is important, as these conditions can be responsible for lack of response to the gluten-free diet [Green & Jabri 2003].

Assessment for alternative or additional diagnoses such as microscopic colitis, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, IBS, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and eating disorders is necessary in those in whom gluten contamination is not the explanation.

For individuals who are not responding to a gluten-free diet, identification of a celiac disease-susceptibility HLA haplotype can provide motivation to continue the diet, to examine the diet for hidden sources of gluten, to address the possibility of refractory sprue, or even to dismiss the previous diagnosis of celiac disease.

Refractory sprue or celiac disease. Individuals with persistent symptoms and intestinal inflammation despite adherence to a gluten-free diet may need to be treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., local-active budesonide) and immunosuppressants [Green & Jabri 2003, NIH Consensus Committee 2005].
Cutaneous photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment for this disease or specific treatment for the photosensitivity.

Currently the only effective treatment is prevention of blistering by avoidance of light exposure, including the long-wave ultraviolet sunlight that passes through window glass or light emitted by fluorescent sources:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective window films for cars and windows at home as well as at school/work to prevent exposure to UV light

Replacement of fluorescent lights with reddish incandescent bulbs or installation of filtering screens

Reflectant sunscreens containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Note, however, that these may be cosmetically unacceptable and, in any case, do not replace strict avoidance of sun/light exposure.

Skin trauma should be avoided.

Wound care is essential to prevent infection of opened blisters. Antiseptic and topical/oral antibiotic treatment may be indicated to avoid progression to osteomyelitis and bone resorption with subsequent mutilation.

Surgical intervention may be indicated for severe mutilation (repair of microstomia, correction of ectropion, reconstruction of the nose).

Laser hair removal can be used to treat facial hypertrichosis.

Note: (1) Beta-carotene has been tried in some individuals but without significant benefit. (2) Phototherapy with narrowband ultraviolet B radiation did not show any benefit.

Ocular manifestations

Avoidance of damage to the eyelids and cornea by wrap-around sun glasses

Topical antibiotics for corneal ulcers, scleritis, and blepharitis

Artificial tears and lubricants to help prevent dry eyes in those with ectropion

Corrective surgery of eyelids to help protect the cornea from injury in those with ectropion [Katugampola et al 2012a]

Bone manifestations. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with osteoporosis [Katugampola et al 2012a].

Hemolytic anemia

Consider blood transfusions when hemolysis is significant.

Chronic transfusions (every 2-4 weeks) with a target hematocrit greater than 35% can suppress erythropoiesis and decrease porphyrin production, which reduces porphyrin levels and photosensitivity [Piomelli et al 1986].

Note: In those who receive frequent transfusions, the body iron burden can be reduced with parenteral or oral chelators [Poh-Fitzpatrick et al 1988].

Iron deficiency induced by treatment with deferasirox improved photosensitivity and hemolysis in one patient [Egan at al 2015].

Note: Although oral charcoal and cholestyramine were thought to increase fecal loss of porphyrins, a clear clinical benefit has not been shown [Tishler & Winston 1990].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only cure for CEP and should be considered in children with severe cutaneous and hematologic involvement. Autologous as well as allogeneic stem cell transplants have been performed successfully [Thomas et al 1996, Tezcan et al 1998, Harada et al 2001, Shaw et al 2001, Dupuis-Girod et al 2005, Taibjee et al 2007, Faraci et al 2008]. The age of children with CEP receiving BMT ranges from younger than one year to 13 years [Katugampola et al 2012b]. Of note, although some of the first individuals with CEP to successfully undergo BMT in childhood should be in their 20s now [Thomas et al 1996, Zix-Kieffer et al 1996], no follow-up information is available and the long-term outcome in individuals with CEP post-BMT is unknown.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF)

Respiratory

Inhaled dornase alfa in all individuals age ≥6 years

Inhaled hypertonic saline in all individuals age ≥6 years

Azithromycin in individuals age ≥6 years with persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled tobramycin in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Inhaled aztreonam in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures

Ibuprofen in individuals age 6-17 years with FEV1 ≥60% predicted

Recommended sequence for inhaled medications:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

An aerosolized antibiotic

Ivacaftor for individuals age ≥2 years who are heterozygous for p.Gly551Asp and other specific pathogenic variants

Ivacaftor/lumacaftor combined therapy for individuals age ≥12 years who are homozygous for p.Phe508del

Lung or heart/lung transplantation; an option for some individuals with severe disease

Topical steroids, antibiotics, and/or surgical intervention if required for nasal/sinus symptoms

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Oral pancreatic enzyme replacement with meals

Nutritional therapy that may include breast milk, special infant formulas, supplemental feeding, salt supplementation, fat-soluble vitamin supplements, and zinc

Management of CF-related diabetes mellitus with endocrinology consultation and (if required) glucose monitoring and insulin therapy

Gastrointestinal. Meconium ileus and distal intestinal obstructive syndrome requires surgical evaluation and management.

Liver disease

Biliary sludging or frank obstruction, and associated hepatic inflammation, are treated with oral ursodiol.

Liver transplant indications include progressive hepatic dysfunction, intractable variceal bleeding, and hepatopulmonary and portopulmonary syndromes

Fertility. Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Congenital Absence of the Vas Deferens (CAVD)

Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

A variety of airway clearance techniques (ACTs) can mobilize airway secretions, minimize airway obstruction, and reduce airway infections. ACTs include manual chest percussion with postural drainage, hand-held devices (e.g., flutter valve, or Acapella®), and inflatable vest therapy devices that vibrate the chest wall. These treatments are most effective when used at least twice daily.

Dornase alfa and hypertonic saline help mobilize airway secretions in individuals age six years or older.

Airway clearance should be used in conjunction with inhaled medications given in a standard sequence:

Bronchodilator

Hypertonic saline

Dornase alfa

Airway clearance

Inhaled corticosteroids and/or long-acting beta agonist (for select individuals)

Aerosolized antibiotic

The rationale for this sequence is to open the airway, decrease sputum viscosity, promote expectoration of secretions, and then deliver anti-inflammatory treatments and/or antibiotics as widely and deeply as possible within the bronchial tree.

Aggressive antibiotic treatment at the time of initial isolation of P. aeruginosa from cultured airway secretions helps prevent chronic airway infection.

All routine immunizations should be given at the recommended times. Especially important are vaccines that protect against microorganisms associated with pulmonary manifestations, including pertussis, measles, varicella, Haemophilus influenzae type B, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Influenza vaccine should be administered annually in infants age six months and older. Note: (1) Because the influenza vaccine may not be fully protective, consider immunizing an affected individual’s entire family. (2) CF individuals with suspected influenza should receive anti-viral medications targeted toward influenza A and B.

Anti-RSV monoclonal antibody (Synagis®) should be considered for infants up to age 12 months for the duration of the local RSV season, particularly in individuals with ongoing pulmonary symptoms.

Physical activity, exercise, and conditioning help maintain bone health and improve airway clearance.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Pancreatic enzyme replacement and supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins

High-calorie, high-fat nutritional supplements

Consultation with a nutritionist specializing in CF

Extra salt and water for hydration and salt losses in hot dry climates

Surveillance – Cystic Fibrosis

Respiratory

Newborns are examined monthly by a CF care provider for the first six months of life and then bimonthly until age one year.

Individuals age one year and older should be examined quarterly by a CF care provider to monitor for subtle changes in physical examination that are not yet manifest as symptoms.

Culture respiratory tract secretions at least four times yearly. Some individuals may benefit from more frequent visits and respiratory tract surveillance cultures (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Pulmonary function studies, chest radiographic examination, and at least annual blood tests for electrolytes, fat soluble vitamin levels, and IgE levels are appropriate.

Bronchoscopy and chest CT examination are indicated for individuals with symptoms and signs of lung disease who fail to respond to intervention.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Weight gain and caloric intake are monitored monthly in newborns until age six months.

Fecal elastase may need to be repeated during the first year of life, particularly if infants have signs or symptoms of malabsorption or inadequate weight gain.

Measure oral glucose tolerance annually after age ten years during a period of stable health. Plasma glucose is measured fasting and two hours after an oral glucose load of 1.75 g/kg, or 75 g maximum.

Evaluate bone mineral density in adolescence.

Liver disease. Annual screening of liver function tests and liver ultrasound to monitor progression of liver disease is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid – Cystic Fibrosis

Avoid the following:

Respiratory irritants (e.g., smoke, dust)

Individuals with respiratory infections

Dehydration; add extra salt and water to diet in hot, dry climates because of perspiration-related salt losses (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).
Consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span have been published [Pierpont et al 2014].

CFC syndrome affects many organ systems and, therefore, the vast majority of individuals require ongoing care by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare providers. At present, phenotypic features caused by germline pathogenic variants in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, or KRAS are treated as in the general population.

Severe feeding issues during the first years of life require management by a pediatric gastroenterologist. Many children with CFC syndrome require nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding because of failure to thrive. Increasing caloric intake may be of benefit. Children with severe gastroesophageal reflux may require a Nissen fundoplication. Constipation affects the majority of individuals; increased fiber in the diet, under the direction of a pediatrician, may be beneficial.

Some individuals are growth hormone- and or thyroid hormone-deficient and may benefit from management by an endocrinologist. Individuals with a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy must be monitored closely while on growth hormone therapy.

Enrollment in early-intervention therapies to promote motor and intellectual development (e.g., occupational therapy, physical therapy, or speech therapy) is highly recommended.

Seizures are treated as in the general population. However, seizures may be refractory to single-agent therapy and may require polytherapy.

Recurrent otitis media may require placement of PE tubes.

Ocular abnormalities such as myopia or hyperopia are corrected with lenses as in the general population.

Cardiovascular management is dictated by the abnormality, with treatment similar to that in the general population: structural defects are managed surgically as needed; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is followed by serial echocardiograms, and cardiac arrhythmias are medically managed in an aggressive manner.

Xerosis and pruritus may be relieved by increasing the ambient humidity or using hydrating lotions. Hyperkeratoses are treated as in the general population.

Signs and symptoms of skin infection, especially in the presence of lymphedema, warrant thorough and immediate evaluation by a physician for the consideration of antibiotic treatment.

Musculoskeletal abnormalities, such as scoliosis or pectus deformity, are managed as in the general population.

Note: Specialized NF/Ras pathway genetics clinics are available in the US and United Kingdom.
Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings:

Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem.

Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment.

Lubrication of ocular surface (particularly cornea) may be required. In cases of severe exposure, a PROSE lens can be of significant benefit [Papakostas et al 2015].

Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery):

Correction of ptosis

Eye muscle surgery

To correct or improve a compensatory head posture

To improve alignment in primary gaze position

To improve ambulation and gross motor development in young children

Principles of surgical approach:

Orbital imaging is recommended before surgery to assess muscle size and position.

Extraocular muscles may be found at surgery to be attached in unexpected locations.

Resections or plications may be helpful in some cases to provide traction against large recessions during healing.

Surgery is likely to be technically difficult because of tightness of rectus muscles.

Recessions need to be larger – sometimes considerably larger – than indicated by standard tables, especially recessions of the inferior rectus muscles.

Dysinnervation causing esotropia in attempted upgaze may mask an underlying exotropia that will be unmasked after inferior rectus muscle weakening.

Inferior rectus muscle weakening may be enhanced by superior oblique weakening.

Profound weakening procedures (e.g., suturing muscle to orbital rim, rectus muscle myectomy) may be necessary.

Botulinum toxin may be helpful for residual misalignment in some cases.
It is recommended that care be provided by a multidisciplinary team coordinated by a clinician familiar with treatment of neuromuscular conditions [North & Goebel 2003, North 2004]. Teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, orthopedist, and clinical geneticist.

Hypotonia, weakness, and joint contractures may benefit from physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or orthopedic intervention. Interventions may include exercise and stretching programs, orthotics or splinting, serial casting, or walking supports/wheelchairs [North 2004]. Regular low-impact exercise, stretching, and submaximal strength training may be helpful. These activities should be balanced with sufficient rest time to avoid exhaustion [North 2004].

Respiratory issues may benefit from breathing exercises, chest physiotherapy for handling secretions, seating assessment, immunization against influenza and other respiratory infections, antibiotics for chest infections, tracheostomy, or ventilatory support [North 2004].

Feeding and swallowing difficulties may benefit from speech therapy, diet supplementation, and feeding by gavage or gastrostomy. Gastrostomy and fundoplication should be considered if feeding issues continue beyond a few months of age [North 2004].

Referral to an orthopedist for evaluation of scoliosis and joint contractures is recommended. If scoliosis is present, serial x-rays can be used to define and monitor the degree of curve. The need for bracing or corrective (spinal fusion) surgery is based on the progression of the curve, the effect on pulmonary function, and the likelihood that surgery could affect motor function [North 2004].

Foot deformities may benefit from physical therapy, splinting/casting, or corrective surgery by an orthopedic surgeon [North 2004].

Cardiac involvement should be monitored by a cardiologist and treated as necessary [North 2004].

Orthodontic evaluation and appropriate intervention may be necessary.
Serious infections may occur at any time in persons with CGD. Infections that are asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic may be identified at initial presentation. Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection. Imaging is important in detecting and understanding the severity of infections. CT or MRI should be followed closely until resolution of infections.

A definitive microbiologic diagnosis is essential to proper treatment of infections. Biopsies to identify the pathogen should be pursued prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy unless infections are life threatening. Often obtaining an appropriate sample for diagnosis requires fine needle aspiration or percutaneous drainage of an abscess.

Initially antibiotics and antifungals are often used empirically, with more selective use after the pathogen is identified. Newer azole drugs (voriconazole, posaconazole, isovuconazole) have expanded therapeutic options for fungal infections in CGD. Long courses of antimicrobials are often needed for adequate treatment. For example, those who do develop fungal infections on itraconazole prophylaxis develop them at an older age and may require longer duration of therapy.

The primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts. However, if invasive yeast infections occur, organism-specific antimicrobials are warranted.

Percutaneous drainage itself can be therapeutic, especially for liver or other intra-abdominal abscesses. Lymphadenitis and liver abscesses often require excisional surgery [Feld et al 2008]. Staphylococcal liver abscesses can be effectively treated without surgery using a combination of drainage of liquid pus (if present), intravenous antimicrobials, and moderate dose corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day tapered over 1-2 months) [Leiding et al 2012].

Colitis. Treatment of colitis in CGD can be difficult.

Corticosteroids are usually effective but have long-term complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, and increased risk of infection. The authors’ current practice is to initiate therapy for proven colitis with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day for one to two weeks followed by a slow taper to 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day over one to two months [Holland 2010].

Metronidazole to reduce bowel flora, salicylic acid derivatives, 6-mercaptopurine, and mesalamine are also useful in treatment of CGD colitis.

In CGD, the use of TNF-alpha inhibitors, specifically infliximab, a chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody to TNF alpha, is successful in closing fistulae but leads to increased frequency of severe infections with typical CGD pathogens or death. A report of infliximab in five persons with CGD found severe infections in all five and death in two. Of note, none of the five developed mycobacterial infections, as has been reported with use of infliximab in other conditions [Uzel et al 2010].

Successful bone marrow transplantation appears to cure CGD and the related colitis [Kang et al 2011].

Corticosteroid treatment of heightened inflammatory response. Simultaneous administration of antimicrobials and corticosteroids can help resolve the infections and extensive areas of inflammation that can occur with chronic colitis [Marciano et al 2004], granulomatous cystitis [Kontras et al 1971], pulmonary infections with Nocardia [Freeman et al 2011], and staphylococcal liver abscesses [Leiding et al 2012].

Successful treatment of mulch pneumonitis, the exuberant inflammatory response following inhalation of mulch or other organic matter, requires the simultaneous administration of antifungals and corticosteroids [Siddiqui et al 2007].

Aggressive treatment of the syndrome of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) in CGD with antimicrobials, IVIg, and steroids can lead to clinical improvement and remission [Parekh et al 2011]. Because the HLH-like syndrome in CGD represents a reaction to bacterial or fungal infection, these infections must be aggressively treated if patients receive immunosuppression for HLH. Although the merit of immunosuppression in the setting of infection-triggered HLH in CGD is unclear, treatment of the infection is essential.

Granulocyte infusions. The value of granulocyte infusions has not been evaluated in prospective controlled trials; however, multiple case reports suggest its utility in treating serious bacterial and fungal infections [von Planta et al 1997, Ozsahin et al 1998, Bielorai et al 2000, Ikincioğullari et al 2005]. The principle is that a small number of normal phagocytes complement the oxidative defect in CGD phagocytes by supplying diffusible hydrogen peroxide. Transfused granulocytes have been recovered from sites of infection and appear to have normal respiratory burst activity and to traffic normally.

Granulocyte infusions are generally well tolerated; however, adverse effects include fever, development of leukoagglutinins, and rarely, pulmonary leukostasis. Alloimmunization is a major concern, as many patients with histories of severe infections may also be considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Heim et al 2011]. The possibility of CMV transmission is also a cause for caution.

Males with X-Linked CGD

For males with X-linked CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome early consideration should be given to autologous blood banking (see also Establishing the Diagnosis, Special Consideration in a Male with Suspected CGD and Other Medical Issues). Persons with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome do not express the erythrocyte blood group Kell antigen (i.e., they are Kell negative). Should they require transfusion of blood products, Kell-positive blood products must be avoided in order to prevent a transfusion reaction. Kell-negative blood products are rarely available.
Botulinum toxin may be helpful in increasing the oro-facio-lingual dystonia that interferes with eating [Schneider et al 2006].

Assistance with feeding is often necessary to prevent aspiration [Aasly et al 1999].

With progression to mutism, evaluation for computer-assisted speech systems is appropriate [Aasly et al 1999].

Mechanical protective devices may be needed for complications such as teeth grinding, head banging, and repeated falls. Use of a mouth guard has been reported to reduce psychiatric symptoms [Fontenelle & Leite 2008].

Splints can be tried for foot drop. Since the equinovarus deformity has a dystonic component, local injections of botulinum toxin have been used.

Phenytoin, clobazam, valproate and levetiracetam are reported to be effective for seizure control.

Use of psychiatric medications such as antidepressant or antipsychotic medications is based on conventional approaches. Behavioral compulsions, particularly those resulting in self-harm, should be aggressively treated with antidepressant medications that target obsessive-compulsive symptoms.

Use of dopamine antagonists/depleters such as atypical neuroleptics or tetrabenazine as for chorea or Tourette syndrome should also be offered, although affected individuals should be carefully monitored for side effects of parkinsonism and depression [Borchardt et al 2000].

Deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus pars interna may improve chorea and dystonia [Miquel et al 2013].
The major focus for managing individuals with Char syndrome concerns the cardiovascular involvement. Management of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) after the immediate newborn period is determined by the degree of shunting from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Surgical ligation or ductal occlusion at catheterization are treatment options.

The most striking external aspects of Char syndrome, namely the dysmorphia and hand anomalies, require no special care early in life. The dysmorphic features do become important as affected individuals go through childhood and adolescence because of their stigmatizing effects. No data on the success of plastic surgical intervention for the facial features in Char syndrome are available.
Management of children with CHARGE syndrome requires coordinated multidisciplinary care:

Airway can be compromised from choanal atresia, TE fistula, aspiration pneumonias, tracheomalacia, or an aberrant subclavian vessel impinging on the trachea. Studies have shown that 15%-60% of individuals with CHARGE syndrome require tracheostomy [Roger et al 1999, White et al 2005].

Heart defects are managed as in any individual with a congenital heart defect.

Choanal atresia. Surgical correction by means of transnasal, transpalatal, or sublabial routes or airway bypass by tracheotomy or endotracheal intubation is usually necessary early in life. Multiple surgeries are often required to maintain the nasal airway.

Feeding/swallowing dysfunction. In infancy, feeding can be compromised by oral-motor and/or sensory deficits. A multidisciplinary approach to therapy with specialists in speech-language pathology, occupational therapy, and nutrition can help promote early oral exploration and prevent or minimize oral defensiveness. For children with a G-tube, oral stimulation needs to be maintained to reduce future oral sensitivity/aversion.

Gastroesophageal reflux can be significant enough to cause aspiration, often requiring Nissen fundoplication and G-tube insertion. Silent reflux should be considered in the evaluation of recurrent sinusitis.

Renal evaluation. Renal ultrasound examination is recommended in all children. Evaluation for urinary tract infection is recommended in cases of unexplained fever or irritability in children unable to communicate.

Endocrine evaluation. Early referral for endocrinology consultation is appropriate, especially if linear growth is falling from the normal curve in spite of adequate nutrition and normalized cardiac status. Some of these children may have growth hormone deficiency, which requires growth hormone replacement therapy.

Individuals with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be considered for hormone replacement therapy for induction of puberty and for general health reasons including prevention of osteoporosis.

Coloboma. Tinted glasses or a dark visor can be helpful for the photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas.

Parents, therapists, and teachers need to take into account visual field defects resulting from retinal coloboma and central visual defects resulting from optic nerve involvement and macular coloboma. For example, visual stimuli and sign language may need to be presented in child's lower visual field.

For eyes with visual potential, cycloplegic refraction and spectacle correction may be necessary, since substantive refractive errors of mildly or even moderately micro-ophthalmic eyes have been observed.

Retinal detachment, a potential complication of retinal coloboma, can result in total blindness; therefore, any change in vision status should be treated as a medical emergency.

Hearing loss. Hearing loss should be assumed until proven otherwise. Hearing aids and hearing habilitation (which may include sign language in addition to the auditory and speech training) should be started as soon as hearing loss is documented. Many children benefit from bone conduction aids or (especially at school) an FM system. Headbands can be used to help keep the hearing aids in place if the ear cartilage is floppy or if the tape that secures the aid to the scalp is ineffective.

PE tube placement for chronic serous otitis is common and often needs to continue until adolescence.

Cochlear implants have been successful in providing sound awareness and even speech recognition in the presence of cochlear abnormalities. Bauer et al [2002] reported successful completion of cochlear implantation and measurable benefit in five individuals with CHARGE syndrome. Of note, variations in the temporal bone anatomy can lead to technical challenges and risk to the facial nerve during implantation. In some individuals, an aberrant course of the facial nerve may be a contraindication for cochlear implant [Bauer et al 2002].

Communication. Establishing an appropriate system of communication is more difficult in the presence of both hearing loss and vision loss than in the presence of hearing loss alone. Depending on the degrees of hearing and vision loss, communication may start with touch cues, followed by object cues and proceeding to auditory/oral and/or sign language. Communication training initiated by age three years is critical to the eventual development of symbolic communication [Thelin & Fussner 2005].

Deaf-blind service referral. Children with CHARGE syndrome who have combined vision and hearing loss can be considered “deafblind,” an important designation used for qualifying for educational resources in many states. Of note, “deafblind” does not imply total hearing loss or total vision loss: most children with CHARGE syndrome have some residual vision and/or hearing but are still classified as “deafblind.”

Referral to deafblind education services (e.g., the Deafblind Project within the state of residence) should be made as early as possible after birth so that the parents and project personnel can begin to plan together. A growing body of evidence indicates that normal language development can occur if hearing habilitation is started prior to age six months for hearing-impaired children, whether or not they are visually impaired. Assistance of the Deafblind team to provide consultation to the early childhood education team is highly recommended since many educators and speech therapists have little or no experience with dual sensory loss.

Psychological/school evaluations should be performed by a team that includes specialists in deafblindness when dual sensory loss is present. If a deafblind specialist is not available when a psychologist does an evaluation, a vision educator can show the tester where to place materials and whether the lighting and contrast of the printed materials is adequate. A hearing educator can help place the child for optimal hearing and/or do sign language interpretation.

Dental procedures, when necessary, may be performed under general anesthesia.

Low muscle tone and poor balance predispose children to rapid exhaustion. Many children need adjustments to the classroom or therapy setting to allow for better truncal support. Frequent rest breaks may be needed. Many children can work for longer periods if allowed to do so in a supine position [Williams & Hartshorne 2005].

Unpublished data suggest that hippotherapy (horseback riding) can be a helpful adjunct to physical therapy to prevent scoliosis as it requires frequent shifts in truncal muscular control — as do karate and other programs that promote good balance. Myofacial release can improve posture and flexibility.

Sleep cycles are frequently disturbed even in those without significant visual impairments. Occasionally, sleep studies show obstructive apnea. If the cause is unknown, melatonin has been helpful for some children while others with severe visual impairment may need other medications to regulate sleep.

Chronic constipation usually does not respond to simple measures such as increased fluid intake. GI consultation is often indicated.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behavioral therapy combined with stress reduction is sometimes helpful alone, but treatment with medications can be a useful adjunct.

Pervasive developmental disorder. While the behaviors may mimic autism, there are differences [Hartshorne et al 2005a]. Sensory processing issues are likely implicated. Management by behavior therapy, stress reduction, and sometimes medication is indicated.

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. In many instances, establishing an appropriate method of communication and providing adequate stimulation for exploration in a safe environment are more helpful than medication.

Increased pain threshold may predispose children to behaviors that are incorrectly interpreted by others as aggressive. Understanding this is critical to devising appropriate interventional strategies.
General

Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement.

Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care-giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures.

Mitochondrial myopathy

Assistance with ambulation and posture

Surgical correction of ptosis as needed

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

(ALS). The management of CHCHD10-related ALS is identical to that of ALS due to other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 1999].

Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine.

Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan.

Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands.

Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression.

Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for CHCHD10-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Treatment follows routine practices.

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations.

The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment.

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTD often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

Spinal motor neuronopathy. The management of SMAJ is identical to that of adult-onset SMA due to other causes.
Seizures should be managed by an experienced pediatric neurologist.

At this time, no specific guidelines regarding choice of specific antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) exist, as the best AED regimen for CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorders is not yet established. Most patients remain refractory to treatment and require multiple AEDs.

Although a ketogenic diet may be a treatment option, it was not effective in three patients [Thomas et al 2015].

For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.
Hematologic and immunologic defects

The only treatment that cures the hematologic and immunologic defects is allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). A conditioning regimen, described in detail by Haddad et al [1995], generally includes a combination of etoposide, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide. The current standard of care is HSCT as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed and the accelerated phase has either been ruled out or is in remission.

The most favorable outcome is achieved when HSCT is performed prior to development of the accelerated phase.

If signs of the accelerated phase are present, hemophagocytosis must be brought into clinical remission before HSCT can be performed.

Guidelines for treatment of the accelerated phase, revised in 2004 [Henter et al 2007], are the same as those for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH-2004 protocol). Combination therapy consists of etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine A. Select individuals may also receive intrathecal methotrexate and prednisilone. Remission is achieved in 75% of individuals within eight weeks [Filipovich 2006]; however, relapses are common and response to treatment declines over time. Once remission occurs, prompt HSCT is recommended.

The overall five-year survival rate in 35 children with CHS who underwent HSCT was 62% [Eapen et al 2007]. Success was highest with HLA-matched siblings or unrelated donors; transplantation during the accelerated phase had a higher mortality rate. Individuals in remission following symptoms of the accelerated phase can have successful outcomes following HSCT [Eapen et al 2007].

Ocular abnormalities

Correction of refractive errors may improve visual acuity.

Sunglasses should be used to protect sensitive eyes from UV light.

Skin hypopigmentation. Skin protection varies depending on the degree of hypopigmentation. Regardless, all individuals should use sunscreen to prevent sun damage and skin cancer.

Neurologic abnormalities. Because of the progressive nature of the neurologic symptoms, older patients should engage rehabilitation specialists early in the course of the disease.
Treatment protocols for cherubism are not well established since both ends of the spectrum (mild clinically unrecognized cases and severe cases with extensive bone loss) are seen. Given that cherubism is considered to be a self-limited condition that improves over time, treatment should be tailored to the individual's needs. Depending on the severity, surgery may be needed for functional and esthetic concerns.

Children with cherubism should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience for evaluation. A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team, medical geneticist, dentist, orthodontic specialist, ophthalmologist, and social worker.

Surgical interventions include curettage with or without bone grafting [Kozakiewicz et al 2001, Roginsky et al 2009]. Liposuction has also been used successfully to re-contour the jaws. Surgical interventions are likely to occur between ages five to 15 years in individuals with disfiguring enlargement of jaws or locally aggressive lesions associated with complications.

Orthodontic treatment is commonly required as the jaw distortion leads to permanent dental abnormalities including a malocclusive bite, premature loss of deciduous teeth, and widely spaced, misplaced, unerupted, or absent permanent teeth.

Ophthalmologic treatment is necessary in rare individuals in whom orbital manifestations such as lower lid retraction, proptosis, diplopia, globe displacement, and visual loss caused by optic atrophy are present.
Skeletal dysplasia

Corrective osteotomies may be warranted in late childhood or adolescence for excessive varus deformity of the lower extremities [Riley et al 2015].

In persons with AD, surgery may be needed to fuse malformed cervical vertebrae in infancy and to correct or prevent the progression of kyphoscoliosis.

Orthopedic surgery may be complicated by low bone density.

Short stature. Treatment with recombinant growth hormone has not shown any sustained benefit in individuals with CHH and cannot be recommended [Obara-Moszynska et al 2013].

Immunodeficiency and infection. The treatment of infections in individuals with immunodeficiency is based on their type, location, and severity.

Immediate antiviral treatment with intravenous high-dose acyclovir must be considered at the first symptoms of varicella infection to prevent complications.

Consider prophylactic antibiotic therapy if the individual has recurrent infections or if neutropenia/severe lymphopenia is present. Consider also immunoglobulin replacement therapy if immunoglobulin or IgG subclass levels are low, or if vaccine responses are inadequate.

Individuals with bronchiectasis need proper management of infectious exacerbations and physiotherapy. Consider also long-term treatment with inhaled antibiotics or oral macrolide [Altenburg et al 2015].

Recurrent severe infections and/or the presence of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) may warrant bone marrow transplantation / hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Guggenheim et al 2006]. HSCT has resulted in normalization of T-lymphocyte numbers and function, resolution of autoimmune manifestations, and catch-up growth, probably due to reduced infections. Overall survival rates have been reported at 63% for unrelated donor transplants and as high as 80% for matched sibs. HSCT should be considered in selected individuals with CHH with recurrent infections and autoimmune manifestations or bone marrow dysplasia for whom a well-matched donor is available [Bordon et al 2010].

Anti-TNFa therapy has been used successfully in the treatment of cutaneous and visceral granulomas. However, fatal progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by JC virus has been described during treatment with anti-TNFa antibodies. HSCT resulted in disappearance of granulomas in two out of three transplanted individuals [Moshous et al 2011].

Anemia

Treatment of severe anemia secondary to depressed erythropoiesis may require repeated red cell transfusions in infancy and childhood; life-long transfusions or bone marrow transplantation are rarely needed [Williams et al 2005]. In individuals requiring repeated transfusions iron chelation is successful and well tolerated when needed [Taskinen et al 2013].

Although steroid treatment has been effective in treating anemia in some persons with CHH, the available data are not sufficient to recommend this therapy in general, especially considering the potential side effects of immune suppression and growth retardation.

Malignancy. No specific recommendations for the treatment of the observed malignancies are available. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma often has a poor prognosis with conventional cytotoxic protocols [Taskinen et al 2008].
Retinal detachment which may occur more commonly in patients with high myopia (as seen in CHM) is treated by conventional surgical techniques by an ophthalmologist.

Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with a posterior subcapsular cataract.

UV-blocking sunglasses may have a protective role when an affected individual is outdoors.

Low vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs.

Counseling from organizations or professionals who work with the blind and visually impaired may be needed to help the affected individual cope with issues such as depression, loss of independence, fitness for driving, and anxiety over job loss.

Nutrition and ocular health have become increasingly topical:

For those individuals who do not have access to fresh fruit and leafy green vegetables, a supplement with antioxidant vitamins may be important.

No information is available on the effectiveness of vitamin A supplementation in the treatment of CHM.

A source of omega-3 very-long-chain fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid, may be beneficial, as clinical studies suggest that a regular intake of fish is important.
Parents seem best able to deal with this severe disorder when accurate information regarding the prognosis is given as soon as possible after the diagnosis is recognized. For those with severe lissencephaly, it is usually appropriate to discuss limitations of care, such as "do not resuscitate" (DNR) orders, in the event of severe illnesses.

Poor feeding in newborns is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, as the feeding problems often improve during the first weeks of life. But they often worsen again with intercurrent illnesses and with advancing age and size. At least 50% of children with LIS1-related lissencephaly (but not SBH) eventually have a gastrostomy tube placed for feeding.

A large majority of children with lissencephaly have seizures, including frequent infantile spasms, which can be difficult to control. Management of seizures in children with ILS or SBH is based on the specific seizure type and frequency. In general, seizures should be treated promptly and aggressively by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently results in decline in function and health. Specifically, poor seizure control worsens feeding and increases the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed, and increases the risk for pneumonia.
Infants require close monitoring in anticipation of episodes of laryngospasm with respiratory distress, bouts of hyperthermia (≤42º C [108° F]), seizures, and possible sudden death. Preparedness for appropriate countermeasures (e.g., supplemental oxygen, cooling blankets, antiepileptic drugs) is essential.

An apnea monitor is recommended.

Serial or continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring may be required during the first few weeks if seizures are observed. Anticonvulsants may be required.

Nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding is indicated until at least age one year to overcome precarious feeding problems in infancy.

Bracing, occupational therapy, or plastic surgery may be necessary to correct congenital finger and hand deformities.

Surgical instrumentation or prolonged

bracing may be required to correct a progressive thoracolumbar scoliosis.

Paradoxical sweating. Treatment should be reserved for adults and older children. The combined prescription of clonidine and amitriptyline can provide excellent and long-term symptom control.

Clonidine. Episodes of cold-induced sweating are associated with a prominent increase in plasma noradrenaline. Clonidine, a central presynaptic α2-adrenoreceptor agonist, induces feedback inhibition of synaptic noradrenaline release. Oral clonidine, at starting doses of 0.05 mg to 0.1 mg twice daily, effectively reduces cold-induced sweating and is usually well tolerated. If there are no contraindications, the drug is maintained at the lowest dose required for acceptable symptom control.

Before initiating a prescription of clonidine, check potential interactions with already prescribed medications.

The beneficial effects of clonidine may lessen within a few weeks of starting the drug, due to habituation.

A gradual increase in the daily dose of clonidine to tolerance (side effects: dry mouth, postural hypotension, sedation) or to a maximum of 0.1 mg four times daily may be required.

If clonidine needs to be discontinued, the prescription should be phased out over four to six days; abrupt cessation of clonidine can lead to prominent hypertension.

Amitriptyline, 10 mg orally at bedtime may be added to the prescription of clonidine when symptoms are not adequately controlled. The dose may need to be increased gradually to a maximum of 25 mg four times daily (taken together with clonidine).

Moxonidine, prescribed at a maximum oral dose of 6 μg/kg/d, was shown to provide effective symptom relief in two teenage sibs with CISS [Herholz et al 2010]. Moxonidine was well tolerated in the short term; however, long-term observations are not yet available.
NICCD. The symptoms in most children with NICCD resolve by age 12 months following supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins and use of lactose-free and MCT-enriched therapeutic formulas [Ohura et al 2003, Song et al 2010, Hayasaka et al 2012, Zhang et al 2014a].

Two sibs improved after switching from breast milk to formula, which has higher proline content [Ben-Shalom et al 2002].

Some children with NICCD improve without treatment, which could be the effect of reduction of breast milk and/or common formulas while simultaneously introducing solid supplements such as eggs and meat, which are rich in protein and lipid and therefore beneficial for citrin-deficient individuals [Song et al 2010].

The treatment with therapeutic formulas is not lifelong. Most infants with NICCD will recover clinically and biochemically by age one year, at which point protein- and lipid-enriched textured or solid supplements could be introduced. Whether continued treatment beyond a year can reduce the likelihood of the FTTDCD and CTLN2 phenotype is currently unknown.

Moreover, zinc deficiency is common in NICCD, and thus zinc supplementation should be encouraged when laboratory evidence indicates zinc deficiency, especially in individuals with marked failure to thrive.

Four infants with NICCD and severe liver dysfunction were diagnosed as having tyrosinemia of unknown cause and underwent liver transplantation at age ten to 12 months [Tamamori et al 2002, Kobayashi et al 2006].

FTTDCD. Few treatment measures have been described for this novel citrin-deficient phenotype.

A toddler with FTTDCD was fed in accordance with his own food preferences (including aversion to rice and fondness for fish); FTT improved gradually, with weight for age recovering beyond the third percentile at age three years. The dyslipidemia also improved gradually [Song et al 2009a].

In addition to dietary treatment, administration of sodium pyruvate may be effective in correcting growth restriction [Mutoh et al 2008, Saheki et al 2010]. Sodium pyruvate reduces the NADH/NAD+ ratio in the hepatocyte, a pivotal alteration for citrin deficiency development, and this could be associated with its ameliorating effect on growth restriction.

CTLN2. The most successful therapy to date has been liver transplantation [Ikeda et al 2001, Kasahara et al 2001, Yazaki et al 2004, Hirai et al 2008], which prevents episodic hyperammonemic crises, corrects the metabolic disturbances, and eliminates preference for protein-rich foods [Kobayashi & Saheki 2004]. Nearly all individuals with CTLN2 required liver transplantation in the past; however, the introduction of arginine and sodium pyruvate and medium chain triglyceride (MCT) oil administration has altered the situation. Other treatments include the following:

Administration of arginine (5-10 g/day) was reported to be effective in decreasing blood ammonia concentration.

Reducing calorie/carbohydrate intake and increasing protein intake ameliorates hypertriglyceridemia [Imamura et al 2003].

Administration of sodium pyruvate (4-9 g/day) was effective in decreasing frequency of hyperammonemic episodes and improving growth in several cases [Mutoh et al 2008; Saheki et al 2010; Yazaki et al 2010; Ohura et al, personal communication; Okano et al, personal communication].

Administration of MCT oil (Mactone oil containing 85% MCT; 45 mL/day) was associated with complete recovery with all normal laboratory findings or improved with no hyperammonemic symptoms [Hayasaka et al 2014].
Due to the difference in severity, treatment strategies for ARO and ADOII differ. IAO lies between these two forms and has a variable prognosis. Therefore, treatment options must be evaluated on an individual basis.

ARO

Hypocalcemic convulsions, occurring in a substantial number of neonates as the first disease manifestation, should be treated by calcium supplementation. The management of calcium homeostasis may be difficult and recommendations are conflicting: whereas physiologic doses of calcium and vitamin D have been used to treat children with osteopetrosis who have rickets, restriction of calcium and vitamin D has been used to prevent progression of disease and hypercalcemic crisis following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Treatment needs to take into account the particular situation of the affected individual.

Bone marrow failure may require erythrocyte or platelet transfusions (irradiated products). In the case of leukocytopenia and/or hypogammaglobulinemia, which may develop in a subset of individuals, antibiotics and immunoglobulins may be given in a prophylactic or therapeutic manner.

Newly diagnosed individuals should be transferred as soon as possible to a pediatric center experienced in allogeneic stem cell transplantation in this disease.

Sensory and neurologic manifestations require the collaboration of pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, ophthalmologists, and psychologists. Surgical decompression of the optic nerve, a difficult procedure, has been performed with some success to prevent vision loss [Hwang et al 2000].

Fractures require treatment and surveillance by an experienced bone surgeon or orthopedist in collaboration with the treating pediatrician.

Dental. Without HSCT, most children do not reach the age at which secondary dentition erupts. Children undergoing early HSCT may have normal secondary dentition despite defective primary dentition [Jälevik et al 2002].

In some cases, defective tooth eruption, ankylosis, abscesses, and the formation of cysts and fistulas may require surgical intervention. Special attention is required to prevent mandibular osteomyelitis and extreme brittleness of the alveolar bone [Luzzi et al 2006].

ADOII

Orthopedic treatment is often required for fractures and arthritis. Post-surgical complications such as delayed union or non-union of fractures and infections are common (50%) because of the brittleness of the bones. Fractures near joints may require total joint arthroplasty [Strickland & Berry 2005].
Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietitian, and physical therapist when possible.

No specific dietary or other metabolic treatment is available.

Thorough developmental assessment is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Early intervention may include physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy.

Treatment of the neurologic manifestations is per current clinical practice based on the findings. To date no specific recommendations regarding the use of antiepileptic drugs are available.

Excessive drooling can be reduced with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of saliva glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts [SB Wortmann, personal communication].

Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) administered subcutaneously can be used to increase neutrophil counts to help reduce the frequency of infections, especially in individuals with the mild or moderate phenotype (see Clinical Description) [SB Wortmann, personal communication].

Note: Immunizations are not contraindicated and all children should be immunized as per national standards.
Individuals with CLS should be provided with every opportunity to develop communication skills and to participate in activities and self-care in order to develop a degree of independence.

Awareness of SIDAs should allow early intervention to minimize the occurrence of triggering stimuli and to provide protection from falls:

Trials with different medications and efforts to optimize the dosage may improve outcome [O'Riordan et al 2006].

A trial of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., valproate, clonazepam, or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors) may be indicated [Fryssira et al 2002], although generally they are not effective.

Benzodiazapines, sometimes in increasing doses, have proved effective in some cases [Touraine et al 2002, Nakamura et al 2005].

In an individual who was not helped by a variety of medications, Havaligi et al [2007] reported a good response with sodium oxybate.

If attacks occur with great frequency, use of a wheelchair may be required to prevent falling and injury.

Risperidone may be of benefit to individuals who display destructive or self-injurious behavior [Valdovinos et al 2002].

Feeding difficulties, abnormal growth velocity, and obesity, if present, should be assessed and treated in a standard manner.

Treatment of behavioral problems is standard and requires periodic reassessment.

Treatment of kyphoscoliosis is standard but requires reassessment well into adulthood.
No definitive treatments exist for the congenital muscular dystrophies; however, multidisciplinary medical care improves quality of life and longevity. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMD subtype, and rate of progression.

Respiratory therapy and use of respiratory aids including assisted cough and hyperinsufflation devices, Percussionaire®, noninvasive ventilatory support, or mechanical ventilation via tracheostomy are appropriate for those with respiratory insufficiency [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises help promote mobility and prevent contractures. Mechanical assistive devices including canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs can be used as needed to help ambulation and mobility. Posture in vertical, sitting, and supine positions has to be evaluated and assisted if necessary as improved posture may positively affect chest expansion.

Surgical intervention may be needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and scoliosis. Pros and cons of surgery for hip dislocation or joint contractures need to be considered given that any functional benefit may be insignificant compared to the high risk of pain and rapid relapse. Proactive trunk bracing (plexidur Garchois brace) is used in some countries to reduce the degree of deformity and to slow the progression of scoliosis in order to delay consideration of surgical intervention until puberty [Quijano-Roy et al 2010].

Speech therapy may be indicated.

Close attention to oral hygiene is indicated.

Assistance in education (school technical aide) and social and emotional support and stimulation can improve the sense of social involvement and productivity and can reduce the sense of social isolation common in those with CMD [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Steroid treatment using dosages based upon guidelines used in the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy has been reported in the dystroglycanopathies. In those who respond, the use of steroids appears to support prolonged ambulation [Godfrey et al 2006].
There are no recent published consensus guidelines for the management of CMS treatment.

Medical Treatment

The choice of medical treatment varies with the CMS subtype [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. Therefore, it seems reasonable to consider a first-line genetic testing to evaluate the genetic subtype. However, there may be individual clinical situations demanding an immediate therapeutic trial. Monotherapy is the usual course of treatment for congenital myasthenia; however, a combination of drugs may be necessary to optimize the therapeutic effect and to minimize side effects.

Acetylcholineesterase (AChE) inhibitors (pyridostigmine). Although the majority of individuals with CMS benefit from AChE inhibitors (pyridostigmine), some myasthenic symptoms may remain refractory to treatment even in individuals who are otherwise responsive. Certain CMS subtypes (see Table 2) including endplate (EP) AChE deficiency, slow-channel CMS (SCCMS), and DOK7-related CMS are refractory to or deteriorate with AChE inhibitors [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013].

3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP). Alternatively or in addition to AChE inhibitors, the potassium channel blocker 3,4-DAP may be used [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. This drug increases the release of ACh and prolongs the presynaptic action potential. Of note, two children with fast-channel CMS (FCCMS; caused by autosomal recessive loss-of-function variants of the genes encoding the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunits that shorten the time that the AChR channel is open) died when started on 3,4-DAP [Beeson et al 2005]. Although a relation to 3,4-DAP has not been proven, clinicians must be cautious when using 3,4-DAP in young children and in individuals with FCCMS.

Ephedrine treatment shows positive effects in different subtypes of CMS [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013, Vrinten et al 2014] and may be an alternative treatment option for CMS subtypes that are refractory to AChE inhibitors, such as COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Bestue-Cardiel et al 2005, Schara et al 2009, Lashley et al 2010, Witting & Vissing 2014]. It is well tolerated by most patients and improvement in strength can be profound.

Albuterol, an alternative to ephedrine, may have a role in the treatment of COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Liewluck et al 2011, Burke et al 2013, Lorenzoni et al 2013, Witting & Vissing 2014].

Quinidine, fluoxetine. Some individuals with genetically defined SCCMS (caused by autosomal dominant gain-of-function variants of the genes encoding the AChR subunits that prolong the time that the AChR channel is open) have been successfully treated with quinidine, a long-lived open-channel blocker of AChR [Harper & Engel 1998]. Quinidine in turn may be detrimental in individuals with AChR deficiency.

The therapeutic benefit of fluoxetine in SCCMS has been shown [Harper et al 2003, Colomer et al 2006]; however, it may induce suicidal ideation; thus, caution is strongly suggested in its use in childhood [Engel 2007].

Overall fluoxetine appears to be the accepted first-line treatment in SCCMS, whereas quinidine is the treatment of choice in children and teenagers because of the risk of psychiatric side effects associated with fluoxetine [Chaouch et al 2012a, Chaouch et al 2012b].

Non-Medical Treatment

In addition to medical therapy, a multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMS subtype, and rate of progression.

Depending on the individual clinical situation the clinical management may include the following:

Physical and occupational therapy

Speech therapy

Orthotics or a wheelchair

A percutaneous gastric tube

Ventilatory support
Individuals with GDAP1-HMSN are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Corrado et al 2016, McCorquodale et al 2016]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following [Mathis et al [2015]:

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles tendon shortening.

Exercise within the affected individual's capability

Note: (1) Fatigue may improve with exercise; (2) unconfirmed anecdotal observations suggest benefit from the stimulant modafinil [Carter et al 2006, Ramdharry et al 2012].

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Guillebastre et al 2011, Phillips et al 2012]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Boffeli & Tabatt 2015, Faldini et al 2015, Ferraro et al 2017]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchair for mobility because of gait instability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) [Kroenke et al 2009]

Treatment of neuropathic pain with tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin [Shy 2006, Bril et al 2011, Ribiere et al 2012, Jeong et al 2013]

Weight control to avoid obesity, which has a negative effect on gait and balance

Career and employment counseling because of persistent weakness of hands and/or feet

Individual psychotherapy, group therapy, and/or antidepressant medication for depression [Cordeiro et al 2014]

Treatment may require involvement of specialists to evaluate and manage potential complications, including the following:

Lower urinary tract involvement [Krhut et al 2014]

Obstructive sleep apnea and restless legs [Boentert et al 2014]

Pulmonary compromise and/or phrenic nerve involvement [Aboussouan et al 2007]

Vocal cord paresis

Hip dysplasia [Bamford et al 2009, Novais et al 2014]

Note: No special diet (including supplements with essential fatty acids, vitamin E, or creatine) has been shown to be beneficial [Mathis et al 2015].
Treatment of DI-CMTB is symptomatic and involves evaluation and management by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. Due to the great phenotypic variability, disease treatment should be tailored to the individual’s needs.

Treatment may include:

Ankle/foot orthoses

Orthopedic surgery

Forearm crutches or canes; rarely, wheelchairs

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs)

Career and employment counseling
Reviews of treatment approaches to CMT are available [Carter et al 2008, Young et al 2008, Reilly & Shy 2009]. Reviews of the diagnosis, natural history and management are available [Pareyson & Marchesi 2009a, Pareyson & Marchesi 2009b].

Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 2004, Grandis & Shy 2005]. Quality of life has been measured and compared among various groups of individuals with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) [Vinci et al 2005a, Burns et al 2010]. Persistent weakness of the hands and/or feet has important career and employment implications; anticipatory counseling is appropriate.

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed. Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking.

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% of individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise is encouraged within the individual's capability and many individuals remain physically active.

Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Guyton 2006, Casasnovas et al 2008, Ward et al 2008]. Surgery is sometimes required for hip dysplasia [Chan et al 2006].

The cause of any pain should be identified as accurately as possible [Padua et al 2006].

Musculoskeletal pain may respond to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents [Carter et al 1998].

Neuropathic pain may respond to tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin.

Modafinil has been used to treat fatigue [Carter et al 2006].
Individuals with CMT1 are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter 1997, Grandis & Shy 2005].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support; affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Ramdharry et al 2012a].

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008, Boffeli & Tabatt 2015]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability for some individuals; fewer than 5% of individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability; many remain physically active. Exercise is not detrimental to persons with CMT [Piscosquito et al 2014].

Serial night casting to help increase ankle flexibility [Rose et al 2010]

Accurate identification, as far as possible, of the cause of pain:

Musculoskeletal pain may respond to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents [Carter et al 1998].

Neuropathic pain may respond to tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin.

Career and employment counseling to address persistent weakness of hands and/or feet

Interventions designed to improve leg cramps, tremor, agility, endurance, and ankle flexibility, thereby improving quality of life; see Burns et al [2010] study of children with CMT1A.
Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005, McCorquodale et al 2016].

The following may be indicated:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Treatment of sleep apnea or restless legs [Aboussouan et al 2007]

Exercise within the individual's capability. In a systematic review of all reports of exercise for CMT, Sman et al [2015] identified the following significant improvements following exercise: strength, functional activities, and physiologic adaptations. The optimal exercise modality and intensity for people with CMT as well as the long-term safety of exercise remain unclear.

Pain and depression should be treated symptomatically [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006].
The affected individual is often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles tendon shortening

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Holmes & Hansen 1993, Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchairs for mobility because of gait instability

Exercise within the individual's capability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents [Carter et al 1998]

Treatment of neuropathic pain with tricyclic antidepressants or drugs such as carbamazepine or gabapentin

Career and employment counseling because of persistent weakness of hands and/or feet
Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005].

For treatment of findings common to all

TRPV4-associated disorders

Sensorineural hearing loss. Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the extent of hearing loss and the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of management issues.)

Pain and depression. Symptomatic treatment

For the TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders the following are indicated:

Neuropathy

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity as needed [Guyton & Mann 2000]

Forearm crutches, canes/walkers for gait stability, and wheelchairs

Exercise within the individual's capability (Many individuals remain physically active.)

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006]

Vocal cord involvement

Laryngeal surgery for vocal fold paresis (arytenoidectomy and tracheostomy)

Speech therapy

Respiratory dysfunction. Respiratory therapy/support (e.g., BiPAP)

For the TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias the following treatments may be indicated:

Physical therapy/exercise to maintain as much function as possible. Daily heel cord-stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.

Orthopedic evaluation with consideration of surgical intervention (i.e., spinal fusion) when kyphoscoliosis compromises pulmonary function and/or causes pain

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression. To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, it is preferred that intervention in children occur when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation. Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI. The patient should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression (which can influence physical function). Note that chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.
Appropriate treatment includes:

Prosthetic and adaptive devices for weak hands. Numerous devices are available for various activities of daily living.

Ankle support, toe-up braces, and ankle-foot orthotics, as necessary to improve gait.
Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005].

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed.

Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking.

Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Holmes & Hansen 1993, Guyton & Mann 2000].

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Exercise is encouraged within the individual's capability and many individuals remain physically active.

Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.

Pain should be treated symptomatically [Gemignani et al 2004].
The affected individual is often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009, Rossor et al 2015].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% of affected individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active
Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. See Grandis & Shy [2005] for a discussion of general treatment for CMT.

Treatment of spinal deformities

Physiotherapy helps to preserve flexibility.

If the curvature can be reduced with bracing, either a plaster or a thermo-molded plastic corset can be used.

If bracing and physiotherapy together are not sufficient to correct the scoliosis, surgery can be performed at an early age, even before the end of linear growth (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Gabreëls-Festen et al 1999]. Surgical intervention requires consensus among the family, child (if possible), and attending physicians.

Treatment of foot deformities

Special shoes with good ankle support and/or ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking

Physiotherapy to preserve flexibility

In approximately 9% of individuals, surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Guyton & Mann 2000, Colomer et al 2006]

Treatment of pain and cramps

Neuropathic pain can be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., pregabalin, gabapentin).

Mechanical pain can generally be managed with a combination of physiotherapy and orthopedic treatment.

Cramps can be controlled with quinine. However, quinine is known to induce tinnitus and reversible high-tone hearing loss.

Other

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; some need wheelchairs.

Exercise to help the individual remain physically active according to his/her abilities is encouraged.
Individuals with CMT4H are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Grandis & Shy 2005].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Physiotherapy with daily heel cord stretching exercises to help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening and physical activity adapted to the abilities of each individual to prevent contractures and help preserve flexibility

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Surgery to correct spine deformities

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability

Wheelchairs as needed because of gait instability

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) [Carter et al 1998]
No specific treatment reverses the manifestations of CMT4J.

Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; severely affected individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active

BIPAP for those with respiratory muscle weakness
Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists.

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed.

Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking.

Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity.

Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.

Exercise is encouraged within the affected individual's capability, and many remain physically active.
Peripheral neuropathy. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth Hereditary Neuropathy Overview, Management.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management.

Optic atrophy. Use of routine low-vision aids as needed is appropriate.
The following are appropriate:

Individualized educational program for developmental delay

Physical therapy and assistive devices to maintain ambulation in the presence of gait abnormalities

Feeding gastrostomy tube placement for failure to thrive

Medication for spasticity (baclofen) and tremor (carbidopa-levodopa) if needed

Management of hearing loss

Management of cataracts and other ophthalmologic complications

Use of sunscreens for cutaneous photosensitivity

Use of sunglasses for lens and retina protection
The following are appropriate:

Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapies to optimize developmental outcomes

Feeding therapy, nutritional supplementation, and/or gastrostomy tube placement as needed to meet nutritional needs

Spectacles as needed to correct refractive errors and surgery as needed for strabismus and/or ptosis

Hearing aids as needed
Ophthalmologic issues are among the most concerning for families of individuals with Cohen syndrome registered in the National Cohen Syndrome Database. Management includes the following:

Spectacle correction of refractive errors

Low vision assessment with training as needed for the visually impaired

Psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families

Early intervention and physical, occupational, and speech therapy are appropriate to address gross developmental delay, hypotonia, joint hypermobility, and motor clumsiness.

If neutropenia is documented, consideration may be given to the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). In a study reported by Kivitie-Kallio et al [1997] response to adrenaline stimulation and to hydrocortisone was subnormal in 12 of 14 individuals and in eight of 16 individuals, respectively. However, recombinant G-CSF, administered to three individuals in the study, caused granulocytosis in all three.

Recurrent infections should be treated per standard therapy.
Hypertensive individuals must be treated to reduce the global risk of stroke.

Supportive care including practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.

No specific support exists for individuals with COL4A1-related disorders.

Seizures are managed using standard protocols.

Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with severe lens opacities.

Glaucoma is initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication. Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy.

Symptomatic paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmia should be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs (beta blockers).

Surgical or endovascular treatment should be discussed for asymptomatic intracranial aneurysms >10.0 mm in diameter.
Pharmacologic Treatment

Coenzyme Q10 supplementation. Individuals with primary CoQ10 deficiency may respond well to high-dose oral CoQ10 supplementation (ranging from 5 to 50 mg/kg/day). Soluble formulations are apparently more bioavailable [Desbats et al 2015a].

Treatment should be instituted as early as possible [Montini et al 2008] because it can limit disease progression and reverse some manifestations; however, established severe neurologic and/or renal damage cannot be reversed.

Individuals with the following genetic causes of primary CoQ10 deficiency apparently respond well to CoQ10 supplementation:

COQ4-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Neurologic signs responded to CoQ10 supplementation in a single individual reported to date with a heterozygous deletion encompassing COQ4 [Salviati et al 2012]; no response was observed in patients reported by Chung et al [2015].

COQ6-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Homozygotes for the pathogenic variants p.Gly255Arg or p.Ala353Asp responded [Heeringa et al 2011].

COQ8B-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. In a patient homozygous for a truncating pathogenic variant, edema resolved and proteinuria was significantly improved.

PDSS2-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. The only kindred reported responded [Rötig et al 2000].

Data for response to CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with mutation of other genes causing primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency are limited or lacking:

COQ8A-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. While most affected individuals respond poorly to CoQ10 supplementation, three individuals had a favorable response: one had objective stabilization of ataxia [Lagier-Tourenne et al 2008]; one had a dramatic and long-lasting improvement of dystonia and myoclonus after six months of treatment; and in one tremor and drawing ability improved [Mignot et al 2013].

COQ9-related coenzyme Q10 deficiency. One patient with multiple-system disease characterized by intractable seizures, global developmental delay, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and renal tubular dysfunction did not respond to CoQ10 supplementation; however, this may be due to late diagnosis [Duncan et al 2009].

Ineffective treatments (or those without validated effects) for individuals with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency include the following CoQ10 derivatives:

Ubiquinol, the reduced form of CoQ10, has recently become commercially available; however, data on the therapeutic dosage and its efficacy are still lacking.

Short chain quinone analogs such as idebenone [Rötig et al 2000, López et al 2010] have been reported to cause clinical deterioration in individuals with CoQ10 deficiency [Hargreaves 2014].

Renal Disease

ACE inhibitors may be used in combination with CoQ10 supplementation in individuals with proteinuria [Heeringa et al 2011].

Renal transplantation is an option for those with end-stage renal disease [Salviati et al 2005].

Other

Treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, retinopathy, and sensorineural hearing loss is routine (see Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy and Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness).
Growth. Most infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. Because of gastroesophageal reflux and irritability, Nissen fundoplication is often performed. Pyloric stenosis is treated surgically.

Anecdotally, affected children have very high caloric needs. Even after nutrition is improved through supplemental feeding, growth retardation persists.

Cardiac. Treatment of cardiac manifestations is generally the same as in the general population. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with an identified cardiac abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history [Lin et al 2011]. Ongoing studies of the natural history will continue to define management for older individuals. Arrhythmias have been well documented, but incompletely defined from a management point of view. Non-reentrant tachycardia (chaotic atrial rhythm/multifocal tachycardia) may require aggressive anti-arrhythmic drugs or ablation.

Pharmacologic and surgical treatment (myectomy) has been used to address severe cardiac hypertrophy.

Individuals with Costello syndrome and severe cardiac problems may choose to wear a Medic Alert® bracelet.

Skeletal. Ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers responds well to early bracing and occupational and/or physical therapy.

Limited extension of large joints should be addressed early through physical therapy. Surgical tendon lengthening, usually of the Achilles tendon, is often required. Hip joint abnormalities are common and may require surgical correction.

Kyphoscoliosis may require surgical correction.

Central nervous system. When seizures occur, underlying causes (including hydrocephalus, hypoglycemia, and low serum cortisone concentration) need to be considered [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004].

Cognitive. Developmental disability should be addressed by early-intervention programs and individualized learning strategies.

Speech delay and expressive language limitations should be addressed early with appropriate therapy and later with an appropriate educational plan.

Alternate means of communication should be considered if expressive language is significantly limited.

Respiratory. A high index of suspicion should be maintained for obstructive sleep apnea as the cause of sleep disturbance.

Dental. Dental abnormalities should be addressed by a pediatric dentist.

Papillomata. Papillomata usually appear in the perinasal region and less commonly in the perianal region, torso, and extremities. While they are mostly of cosmetic concern, papillomata may give rise to irritation or inflammation in hard-to-clean body regions and may be removed, as appropriate.

Recurrent facial papillomata have been successfully managed with regular dry ice removal.

Endocrinopathies. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Rarely, hypoglycemia occurs in older individuals and may present with seizures. Under these circumstances, growth hormone (GH) deficiency needs to be excluded as the underlying cause [Gripp et al 2000]. Hypoglycemic episodes unresponsive to GH therapy responded well to cortisone replacement in another individual [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004]; thus, cortisol deficiency may also be considered.

Malignant tumors. Treatment of malignant tumors follows standard protocols.
Guidelines for the treatment of CPT1A deficiency can be found at newbornscreening.info and ghr.nlm.nih.gov.

When individuals present with acute hypoglycemia, sufficient amounts of intravenous fluid containing 10% dextrose should be provided as quickly as possible to correct hypoglycemia and to prevent lipolysis and subsequent mobilization of fatty acids into the mitochondria.

Because individuals presenting with profound hypoglycemia have little to no residual hepatic glycogen, treating physicians should continue the glucose infusion beyond the time that blood glucose concentration has normalized in order to provide sufficient substrate for glycogen synthesis.

A letter should be provided to affected individuals (or their parents/guardians) and involved health care providers alerting them to the potentially catastrophic metabolic crises for which these individuals are at risk and explaining the appropriate emergency treatment.
Current treatment for long-chain fatty-acid oxidation disorders:

Avoid known triggers.

Reduce the amount of long-chain dietary fat while covering the need for essential fatty acids.

Provide carnitine to convert potentially toxic long-chain acyl-CoAs to acylcarnitines.

Provide a large fraction of calories as carbohydrates to reduce body fat utilization and prevent hypoglycemia.

Provide approximately one third of the calories as even-chain medium chain triglycerides (MCT). Metabolism of the eight to ten carbon fatty acids in MCT oil, for example, is independent of CPT I, carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase, CPT II, very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), trifunctional protein, and long-chain hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHAD) enzyme activities.
Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention. Compression of a nerve canal or narrowed foramen magnum can be surgically treated.

Severe bony overgrowth of facial bones and nasal, forehead, and cranial regions can be contoured. However, surgical procedures can be technically difficult and bone regrowth is common. As severe complications have occurred, surgery is considered for conservative purposes to relieve severe symptoms caused by cranial nerve compression.
Craniofacial. Children with any of the FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes benefit from the multidisciplinary team approach practiced in most craniofacial clinics affiliated with major pediatric medical centers. The specialists usually include plastic surgeons, neurosurgeons, otolaryngologists, and dentists as well as audiologists, speech pathologists, developmental pediatricians, social workers, and medical geneticists. The team can usually identify and address physical and developmental problems as well as psychosocial and other issues.

Individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis usually require a series of staged surgical procedures; the number and type are tailored to the individual's needs [Posnick & Ruiz 2000, Honnebier et al 2008]. Three-dimensional skull CT can be used for morphologic mapping to help plan surgical treatment [Binaghi et al 2000]. Some individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis require a dozen or more surgeries over a lifetime. Seldom is the correction perfect, but significant cosmetic improvement is often possible. Evidence suggests that the calvarial bone needed for these surgeries is often more brittle, thinner, and less robust than cranial bone from unaffected donors [Tholpady et al 2004].

In contrast to children with nonsyndromic craniosynostosis, in whom the first surgery is usually performed between ages six months and one year, children with syndromic craniosynostosis often have their first surgery as early as age three months. The procedure is a bilateral craniotomy with a fronto-orbital advancement to expand the cranial vault. Because the procedure leaves uncovered areas of dura that fill in by age 15-18 months, it must be performed before the child is 18 months old. In a series of 2,317 individuals who underwent surgery for craniosynostosis, improved cosmetic and functional results followed early surgery; no increased operative risk was seen in infants [Lajeunie et al 2000, Renier et al 2000b].

Distraction osteogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton and long bones of the extremities may be a less invasive alternative approach to bone grafting in some individuals. In addition, the distraction procedures can expand the overlying soft tissues simultaneously. The devices used for distraction of the mandible, midface, and cranium tend to be the buried type and made of absorbable materials; cytokine administration may shorten the consolidation period. The usefulness and appropriateness of the distraction procedure must be assessed for each disorder [Matsumoto et al 2003].

In some cases, other complications including hydrocephalus, upper-airway obstruction, and exposure keratopathy of the cornea may prompt even earlier craniotomy or fronto-orbital advancement, or other interventions including ventriculo-peritoneal stunting, tracheostomy, or surgical eyelid closure.

Timing of subsequent craniofacial surgeries influences their success. Procedures done prior to the cessation of growth in the particular facial region usually have poor long-term results and require additional operations.

Individuals with Apert syndrome have the highest incidence of repeat surgery to correct forehead contour [Wong et al 2000, Thomas et al 2005].

Wilkie et al [2010] noted that children with craniosynostosis resulting from single-gene pathogenic variants were more likely to require repeat surgery compared to individuals whose craniosynostosis was caused by a chromosome abnormality.

Spine. Congenital spine anomalies can cause scoliosis and spinal injury and thus need immediate attention.

Limbs. Surgical correction of limb defects is usually not possible because the skeletal anomalies are developmental and the structures have never formed normally.

In the mitten-glove syndactyly seen in Apert syndrome, surgical separation of the digits often provides relatively little functional improvement.

With the elbow ankylosis seen in Pfeiffer syndrome types 2 and 3, some functional improvement can be gained by altering the angle at which the elbows are fixed. For example, in most affected individuals, elbow contractures are at approximately the same angle, often so that an individual cannot reach the mouth easily with the hands or clean appropriately following toileting; functional improvement can be achieved if the angle of each arm is altered so that one arm is positioned for eating and the other for toileting.
The following are appropriate:

Occupational therapy, physiotherapy and speech-language therapy for global developmental delay by physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech-language therapist

Behavior therapy for behavior problems by developmental pediatrician

Seizure management with antiepileptic drugs by epilepsy specialist

Treatment of movement disorder by movement disorder specialist

GAMT Deficiency

Treatment of GAMT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate and to decrease accumulation of neurotoxic GAA in the central nervous system by ornithine supplementation and protein- or arginine-restricted diet [Schulze et al 2001, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. Creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation decrease GAA accumulation by competitive inhibition of AGAT enzyme activity. A decrease in the level of GAA in cerebrospinal fluid was reported in two individuals with GAMT deficiency treated with creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation and with arginine restriction [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b].

Treatment is as follows:

Creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]

Supplementation of ornithine ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day. Administration of ornithine is divided into three to six daily doses [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001].

Dietary restriction of arginine to 15-25 mg/kg/day that corresponds to 0.4-0.7 g/kg/day protein intake [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001, Schulze et al 2003]

To prevent protein malnutrition, essential amino acid medical formula should be supplemented (0.5-0.8g/kg/day). Available databases (e.g., the US Department of Agriculture National Nutrient Database) can be used to determine exact arginine content of foods to allow precise calculation of daily arginine intake in individuals with GAMT deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b].

Because of the challenges involved in understanding arginine restriction, reading dietary labels, and calculating arginine intake (particularly since arginine content is not always indicated), many centers use protein restriction instead [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b].

Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency

Global developmental delay and intellectual disability improved only in 21% of the individuals. None of the individuals achieved normal development or cognitive functions on treatment [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Seizures. In 18% of individuals seizures were eliminated; in 49% seizure frequency decreased; 33% of individuals had no improvement in seizures [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Movement disorder. Improvement was seen in 60% of individuals; in 40% of individuals, there was no change in the movement disorder [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014].

Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency

Normal neurodevelopmental outcome has been reported in three individuals with GAMT deficiency who were diagnosed and treated in the neonatal periodbased on a positive family history of GAMT deficiency in an older sib [Schulze et al 2006, El-Gharbawy et al 2013, Viau et al 2013].

Another asymptomatic sib treated from age eight days showed global developmental delay and hypotonia at age 11 months. The authors suggested compliance problems in this family [Dhar et al 2009].

AGAT Deficiency

Treatment of AGAT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400 to 800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses.

Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. Treatment outcome results were reported in 11 individuals with AGAT deficiency [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. If initiation of treatment was after age ten years, no improvement in cognitive function or intellectual disability was seen [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. Normal cognitive function was reported in a female whose treatment was initiated before age two years [Ndika et al 2012]. Muscle weakness was improved in all individuals treated with creatine monohydrate [Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013].

Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. An asymptomatic sib treated from age four months with creatine monohydrate supplementation therapy had normal neurodevelopment at age 18 months; in contrast, his sisters had already shown signs of developmental delay at this age [Battini et al 2006].

CRTR Deficiency

The goal of treatment is to replenish cerebral creatine levels. Treatment of both males and females with CRTR deficiency with creatine-monohydrate was not successful [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012]. Only one heterozygous female with learning disability and mildly decreased creatine concentration on brain 1H-MRS showed mild improvement on neuropsychological testing after 18 weeks of treatment with creatine-monohydrate (250-750 mg/kg/day) [Cecil et al 2001]. Additionally, combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a].

Since the enzymes for creatine biosynthesis are present in the brain [Braissant & Henry 2008], individuals with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine and L-glycine, precursors in the biosynthesis of creatine.

Treatment has included:

Creatine monohydrate 100-200 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

Arginine (hydrochloride or base) 400 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

Glycine 150 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses

The authors recommend that all three of the supplements listed above be started together in new patients – especially in early childhood – to slow disease progression. The clinical effectiveness of treatment with three supplements has not been confirmed.

Treatment outcome of individuals with CRTR deficiency. To date 22 males and three females with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine with or without glycine supplementation [van de Kamp et al 2014].

In some patients improvements were reported, but in general results appeared to be discouraging and cerebral creatine was not restored [van de Kamp et al 2014].

Four males and two females with CRTR deficiency treated for 42 months with creatine, arginine, and glycine showed increased muscle mass and improved gross motor skills [Valayannopoulos et al 2012].

Nine males with CRTR deficiency showed improvement in locomotor and personal social IQ subscales [van de Kamp et al 2012].

Combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a].
The following are appropriate:

Spectacles or contact lenses for correction of refractive errors

Management of strabismus

Penetrating keratoplasty. Most grafts remain clear after penetrating keratoplasty. Penetrating keratoplasty in children before the age of ten years has been performed successfully. However, only children with a risk for deep amblyopia should be considered for penetrating keratoplasty before age six or seven years.
Coincident high myopia or hyperopia can be managed with glasses or contact lenses.

In some cases, conventional strabismus surgery may be required to improve binocularity or head posture.
As soon as a diagnosis of CTLN1 is made, acute (if needed) and chronic management should be initiated per established treatment guidelines [Batshaw et al 2001, Summar 2001, Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001]. See ACMG-ACT Sheet, ACMG Algorithm.

Acute Management of Hyperammonemia

Hallmarks of therapy include rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia concentration, reversal of catabolism, and avoidance and/or treatment of increased intracranial pressure [Häberle et al 2012].

Rapidly decreasing plasma ammonia concentration. When hyperammonemia is diagnosed or suspected, all protein intake should be withheld for a maximum of 24-48 hours. This time frame allows for the plasma ammonia concentration to be lowered via nitrogen scavenger therapy and/or dialysis and avoids an essential amino acid deficiency that would promote a catabolic state:

Pharmacologic nitrogen scavenger therapy (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate and arginine) should be given intravenously as soon as hyperammonemia is diagnosed in an individual known to have CTLN1. (For information pertaining to the mechanism of action of this treatment, see Scavenger Therapy.)

Priming infusion (to be given continuously over 90 minutes):

Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2

Sustaining infusion (to be given continuously over 24 hours):

Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2

10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2

Note: Repeat boluses are not recommended unless the individual is receiving dialysis (see following).

Dialysis is the most effective means of reducing plasma ammonia rapidly. Failure to control ammonia with scavenger therapy requires the emergency use of dialysis.

Hemodialysis is the preferred method of dialysis and exceeds both peritoneal dialysis and hemofiltration in the rate of ammonia clearance.

Scavenger therapy should be continued while dialysis is being performed.

Note: Exchange transfusions have no place in hyperammonemic treatment.

Reversal of catabolism. An anabolic state should be promoted through the provision of IV glucose (and insulin in the event of hyperglycemia) and intralipids.

Complete protein restriction should be limited to 24-48 hours to avoid a catabolic state.

In small infants, 40 kcal/100 mL given as D10W can be significant in averting catabolism. As soon as possible, osmolar load permitting, the individual should receive total parenteral nutrition (TPN) providing 0.25 g/kg/day of protein and 50 kcal/kg/day, advancing (as plasma ammonia concentration allows) to 1.0-1.5 g/kg/day of protein and 100-120 kcal/kg/day. Standard TPN solutions of dextrose, aminosol, and intralipid are used.

Control of intracranial pressure. It is critical to monitor fluid balance, intake and output, and body weight.

The affected individual should be maintained on the dry side of fluid balance: approximately 85 mL/kg of body weight per day in infants and appropriate corresponding fluid restriction in children and adults.

Increased intracranial pressure is manifested by tension in the fontanel, acute enlargement of the liver, edema, and worsening neurologic signs including fisting, scissoring, ankle clonus, and coma. Cerebral edema and ischemia may be documented by MRI.

Chronic Management

Chronic therapy for those with CTLN1 consists of lifelong protein restriction, medications (nitrogen scavenger therapy and carnitine), and possible liver transplantation based on the degree of metabolic control achieved with dietary modification and medication therapy.

Protein restriction. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist.

Nitrogen scavenger therapy

When the affected individual is able to tolerate solid food, the oral medication sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®, Ammonaps®), at a dose of 450-600 mg/kg/day divided into three doses, and arginine-free base of 400 and 700 mg/kg/day are begun. As children grow, doses change to 9.9-13 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day of arginine. For details of management, the reader is referred to Brusilow & Horwich [2001] and Häberle et al [2012].

Glycerol phenylbutyrate (Ravicti®) is a more palatable option. The initial dosage for phenylbutyrate-naïve patients is 4.5-11.2 mL/m2/day (5-12.4 g/m2/day). If the individual is transitioning from sodium phenylbutyrate to glycerol phenylbutyrate, the daily dose of glycerol phenylbutyrate (mL) = daily dose of sodium phenylbutyrate (g) x 0.86.

Success of therapy is defined by a plasma ammonia concentration lower than100 µmol/L and near-normal plasma glutamine concentration. Plasma arginine concentration may be up to 250% above upper normal limit for age.

Treatment with L-carnitine has been advocated as auxiliary treatment to prevent systemic hypocarnitinemia, which may result from therapy with acylating agents.

Liver transplantation for urea cycle disorders is the only known curative therapy [Morioka et al 2005]. Transplantation eliminates the need for dietary protein restriction but does not reverse any neurologic sequelae that affected individuals may have at the time of transplant.

Liver transplantation should ideally be performed in affected individuals who are younger than age one year (prior to the development of any neurocognitive impairment) but older than age three months and/or above 5 kg body weight, to decrease complications and improve survival rates [Häberle et al 2012].

Liver transplantation of four individuals with CTLN1 between the ages of six and 64 months showed better developmental outcomes when the transplant was performed at earlier ages [Kim et al 2013].

Survival rates in those who underwent liver transplantation prior to age two years was between 90% and 95% five years post transplant [Bourdeaux et al 2007, Perito et al 2014].

Note: Although liver transplantation cures the ASS enzyme deficiency, arginine is extrahepatically synthesized and remains low post-transplantation, requiring ongoing supplementation.

Living related-donor liver transplantation

A successful living related-donor liver transplantation (240 g) from mother to six-year-old daughter has been reported. The allopurinol challenge test was normalized in this child, who previously had very brittle control with four to six hyperammonemic episodes per year [Ito et al 2003].

A living related-donor liver transplantation from mother to son resulted in continued elevation in plasma concentration of citrulline (200-400 µmol/L). The mother, a heterozygote, had 28% residual ASS1 enzyme activity [Ando et al 2003].
It is recommended that a multidisciplinary team that includes nephrologists, metabolic disease specialists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, gastroenterologists, nutritionists, and psychologists manage individuals with cystinosis.

Renal Fanconi syndrome

Replacement of tubular losses of electrolytes, bicarbonate, minerals, and other small molecular weight nutrients

For children, free access to water and bathroom privileges and supplementation with citrate to alkalinize the blood

Phosphate replacement to prevent and treat rickets; vitamin D supplementation to assist the gastrointestinal absorption of phosphate and calcium

Early treatment of skeletal deformities with the help of orthopedic specialists

Careful attention to fluid and nutrient replacement is required during episodes of dehydration. (Obligatory urinary losses amount to 2-6 L electrolyte-rich water per day.)

Renal glomerular disease

Reduction of cellular cystine concentration through treatment with the cystine-depleting agent cysteamine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Renal transplantation. Renal replacement is usually indicated when the creatinine clearance falls below 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and azotemia and hypertension rapidly progress. The time frame for appropriate renal replacement is the point at which the reciprocal serum creatinine value plotted against age reaches approximately 0.1. Symptoms often determine the exact time of transplantation.

Ophthalmologic problems are treated symptomatically and with cystine-depleting agents:

The photophobia, resulting from corneal crystal accumulation, can be ameliorated by sun avoidance, dark glasses, and lubrication with over-the-counter eye drops (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Corneal transplantation is very rarely required for intractable pain resulting from recurrent corneal ulcerations.

Retinal involvement is irreversible.

Growth for children with cystinosis requires good nutrition, adequate phosphate supplementation, and robust intracellular cystine depletion (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations):

Nutrition must be adequate for growth.

Growth hormone therapy has proven beneficial for children with cystinosis in providing catch-up growth and bringing them into the normal percentiles for height [Gahl et al 2001, Wühl et al 2001, Gahl et al 2002].

Early and diligent treatment with supplements and oral cysteamine can obviate the need for growth hormone [Kleta et al 2004a].

Other

Oral L-thyroxine replacement for hypothyroidism

Insulin for diabetes mellitus

Testosterone to induce secondary sexual characteristics in males with primary hypogonadism

Specific exercises for the muscle deterioration and swallowing difficulties of older individuals with cystinosis. Hand tendon transfer has been partially successful in improving strength.

Speech therapy and physical therapy

Standard treatment for benign intracranial hypertension. Other central nervous system complications are irreversible.

Feeding via gastrostomy for those with dysphagia, poor nutrition, and risk of aspiration (Figure 2b)
Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). Long-term treatment with CDCA (750 mg/day in adults) normalizes bile acid synthesis (leading to disappearance of abnormal metabolites from serum, bile, and urine), normalizes plasma and CSF concentration of cholestanol by suppressing cholestanol biosynthesis, and improves neurophysiologic findings [Mondelli et al 1992, Mondelli et al 2001] and other clinical manifestations including osteoporosis [Federico et al 1993]. For recent reports see: Bonnot et al [2010], Ginanneschi et al [2013], Martini et al [2013], and Yahalom et al [2013].

Treatment with CDCA has been reported to lead to the following [Mondelli et al 2001]:

Normalization of nerve conduction velocities and subsequent stabilization

Slow and continuous improvement in motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and sensory evoked potentials (SEPs)

Overall stabilization of clinical manifestations without significant improvement of neurologic deficits.

In peripheral nerves CDCA treatment did not influence the number of axons activated by maximum electrical stimulation but instead it increased the conduction of the still-excitable fibers. This suggests that CDCA treatment promotes myelin synthesis in nerve fibers with residual unaffected axons.

The effect of therapy may therefore depend largely on the extent of irreversible structural damage to axons.

CDCA treatment may be more useful when started early. In a case in which treatment onset was at birth the development of disease appears to be delayed [Authors, personal data; Luyckx et al 2014].

Inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase alone or in combination with CDCA are also effective in decreasing cholestanol concentration and improving clinical signs [Peynet et al 1991, Verrips et al 1999b]. However, because of clinical evidence that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may induce muscle damage and even rhabdomyolysis, caution is required in the use of these drugs [Federico & Dotti 1994].

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis has been proposed as a possible treatment; results are controversial [Mimura et al 1993, Berginer & Salen 1994, Dotti et al 2004].

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) treatment may improve muscle weakness.

Liver transplantation, although never performed in individuals with CTX, remains a possibility.

Eyes. Cataract extraction is typically required in at least one eye by age 50 years.

Symptomatic treatments for epilepsy, spasticity, and parkinsonism have been utilized. Parkinsonism is poorly responsive to levodopa, whereas an antihistamine drug, diphenylpyraline hydrochloride, had an excellent effect in three individuals [Ohno et al 2001].
The following are appropriate:

Repair of inguinal hernia(s)

Routine management of hip dislocation

Routine management of refractive errors

Early education services and developmental therapies with later special education supports

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs): valproate. Because treatment with valproate is often unsuccessful, carbamazepine can serve as a second-line drug and levetiracetam as a third-line drug; or a combination of AEDs can be used.

Psychological help as needed for self-image issues
Management of CPVT is summarized in a specific consensus document from the Heart Rhythm Association (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) [Priori et al 2013b] (full text) and summarized in the recent version of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on ventricular arrhythmias [Priori et al 2015] (full text).

Beta-blockers are the first therapeutic choice (class I indication) of proven efficacy for about 60% of individuals with CPVT [Leenhardt et al 1995, Priori et al 2002]. The proposed mechanism of action in an individual with CPVT is inhibition of adrenergic-dependent triggered activity. This effect can be due to both heart rate reduction and direct effect on calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Chronic treatment with full-dose beta-blocking agents prevents recurrence of syncope in the majority of affected individuals.

The reproducible induction of arrhythmia during exercise allows effective dose titration and monitoring. Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day divided into two doses per day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day divided into 3-4 doses per day). Nadolol is reported to be more effective than selective beta blockers [Leren et al 2016]. However, selective beta-blockers can be used in individuals with asthma or other respiratory conditions. Importantly, the dose of beta-blockers should always be individualized with exercise stress testing. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006] (see Surveillance).

Flecainide. Clinical [van der Werf et al 2011] and experimental [Liu et al 2011] data show that to improve arrhythmia control, flecainide (100-300 mg/day) can be given along with beta-blockers to persons who have recurrence of syncope or complex arrhythmias during exercise (class IIa). Although controlled clinical trials are lacking, the evidence for effectiveness of flecainide is sufficient to indicate the use of this drug whenever beta-blockers are not sufficient to control arrhythmias. Beta-blockers and flecainide are also indicated for affected individuals who have experienced a previous aborted sudden death to reduce the probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) shocks (class IIb). The antiarrhythmic effects of flecainide appear to be independent from the specific CPVT genetic subtype [Watanabe et al 2013].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation in addition to beta-blockers with or without flecainide is recommended in individuals with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience cardiac arrest, recurrent syncope or polymorphic/bidirectional VT despite optimal therapy. Furthermore, in those individuals in whom the highest tolerated dose of beta-blockers fails to adequately control arrhythmias [Priori et al 2002, Sumitomo et al 2003], an ICD can be considered for primary prevention of cardiac arrest/sudden death [Zipes et al 2006]. Whenever possible, pharmacologic therapy should be maintained/optimized even in individuals with an ICD in order to reduce the probability of ICD firing.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) may be considered in those with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience recurrent syncope, polymorphic/bidirectional VT, or several appropriate ICD shocks while on beta-blocker and flecainide and in those who are intolerant of or with contraindication to beta-blocker therapy (class IIb). However, LCSD is not without side effects, including palpebral ptosis, elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, and lack of sweating from the left arm and face. Recurrences of cardiac events have been also reported in those with LCSD. Therefore, pharmacologic therapy should always be optimized prior to considering LCSD.
Conventional management includes prompt treatment of fevers and infections with antibiotics.

Individuals with abdominal pain require careful evaluation for the potentially lethal complications of peritonitis and bacteremia.
For the most part, treatment for DBH deficiency is supportive and directed at relieving orthostatic symptoms.

The treatment of choice is administration of L-threo-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine (or droxidopa, marketed in the USA as Northera™). Droxidopa is converted directly to NE by L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, thereby bypassing DBH (Figure 1).

Administration of 100 to 500 mg droxidopa orally twice or three times daily increases blood pressure and concomitantly restores plasma NE to the normal range; however, urinary NE excretion exceeds normal levels.

Although NE becomes detectable, plasma epinephrine concentration still remains below a detectable level.

Droxidopa administration restores DOPA to within the normal range and reduces DA somewhat, but plasma concentration of DA and its metabolites remains somewhat elevated [Biaggioni & Robertson 1987].

This favorable alteration in catecholamines alleviates the orthostatic hypotension and restores function to a near-normal level. An affected female completed a marathon approximately five years after her diagnosis, while taking 1200 mg of droxidopa daily [Garland et al 2005b].

Individuals with DBH deficiency respond somewhat to standard therapeutic approaches for autonomic failure but not nearly as well as they respond to droxidopa.

Fludrocortisone, at dosages of 0.1-0.3 mg daily, has been used with some benefit, but marked orthostatic hypotension still occurs.

Indomethacin (50 mg 3x/day) has been of limited benefit in raising blood pressure.

Metyrosine, a tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor, raises blood pressure and reduces urinary DA concentration in individuals with DBH deficiency. However, the dose normally used for pheochromocytoma has too much of a pressor effect and has some side effects, including sedation.

Ptosis can be corrected by surgery.

Sinus problems should be treated as needed.
Appropriate management of males with DMD/BMD can prolong survival and improve quality of life.

Dilated cardiomyopathy. Recommendations are based on an American Academy of Pediatrics policy statement and various additional publications [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005, Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012].

A retrospective observational study found that ventricular remodeling may occur in males with DMD and BMD with early diagnosis and treatment of cardiomyopathy [Jefferies et al 2005]. Among 69 affected boys with a first echocardiogram indicating dilated cardiomyopathy (e.g., LVEP <55% or left ventricular dilation), 27 with DMD and four with BMD were started on an ACE inhibitor at a mean age of 15 years. If echocardiography at three months showed no improvement, a beta blocker (carvedilol or metoprolol) was added. When these 31 individuals had repeat echocardiography at a mean of 3.3 years later, left ventricular size and function had normalized in 19 (66%), improved in eight (26%), and stabilized in two (8%). Mean LVEF increased from 36% to 53%. Measurement of reduced sphericity indicated improved ventricular geometry.

Whether this therapy reverses the cardiomyopathy or only masks the manifestations of a progressive process is not clear; however, a more recent study [Duboc et al 2005] lends support to the hypothesis that early introduction of afterload reduction therapy may lead to improved preservation of myocardial function and reduced mortality [Colan 2005, Duboc et al 2007]. Further studies are underway to create evidence-based recommendations for the prevention and treatment of cardiomyopathy in men with DMD/BMD.

The authors' institution commonly treats children with DMD or BMD early with an ACE inhibitor and/or beta blocker. When used in combination, these appear to lead to initial improvement of left ventricular function; however, ACE inhibitors are also used without beta blockers. The impact of combined prophylactic treatment is currently under investigation in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial. The optimal time to start treatment in DMD is unknown, but most cardiologists will initiate treatment when the LVEF drops below 55% and fractional shortening is less than 28% [Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012]. Angiotensin II-receptor blockers (ARBs) such as losartan are similarly effective and can be used in cases of poor tolerability of ACE inhibitors [Allen et al 2013]. In cases of overt heart failure, other heart failure therapies including diuretics and digoxin are used as needed. Cardiac transplantation is offered to persons with severe dilated cardiomyopathy and BMD with limited or no clinical evidence of skeletal muscle disease.

Scoliosis treatment as needed is appropriate.

Corticosteroid Therapy

Studies have shown that corticosteroids improve the strength and function of individuals with DMD.

Prednisone. It is hypothesized that prednisone/prednisolone has a stabilizing effect on membranes and perhaps an anti-inflammatory effect:

In a randomized double-blind six-month trial, prednisone administered at a dose of either 0.75 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day increased strength and reduced the rate of decline in males with DMD [Mendell et al 1989].

In two successive six-month trials of prednisone therapy, improvement began within ten days of starting the treatment, required a single dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day of prednisone for maximal improvement, reached a plateau after three months, and was sustained for as long as three years in those children maintained on doses of 0.5 and 0.6 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991].

One open-label study suggested that therapy with prednisone could prolong ambulation by two years. Side effects include weight gain (>20% of baseline) (in 40%), hypertension, behavioral changes, growth retardation, cushingoid appearance (in 50%), and cataracts [Mendell et al 1989, Griggs et al 1993].

Follow-up studies showed that a dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day was more beneficial than a dose of 0.3 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991]. However, a subsequent study proved the effectiveness of lower doses of prednisolone (0.35 mg/kg/day) in both DMD and BMD. One of the authors noted sustained effectiveness with doses initiated at 0.75 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose: 40 mg) and gradually reduced (usually because of advancing age and weight gain) to as low as 0.4 mg/kg/day. At lower doses of 0.3 mg/kg/day, the improvement is less robust [Darras, personal communication].

Alternate-day dosing and intermittent dosing (e.g., 10 days “on,” 10 or 20 days “off”) are also used.

A study showed reduced incidence of side effects by high-dose (5 mg/kg), twice-weekly dosing [Connolly et al 2002].

A randomized, cross-over, controlled trial of intermittent prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) therapy (prednisone or placebo) during the first ten days of each month for six months showed that prednisone slowed deterioration of muscle function in individuals with DMD [Beenakker et al 2005]; side effects did not negatively affect quality of life.

Similar conclusions regarding the effect and side-effect profile of prednisone treatment for DMD were reached by a Cochrane systematic review [Manzur et al 2004, Manzur et al 2008] and also by the 124th European Neuromuscular Centre workshop on the treatment of DMD [Bushby et al 2004].

High-dose weekly prednisone, 5 mg/kg, given each Friday and Saturday (total 10 mg/kg/week) can be considered as an alternative to daily treatment in males on a daily regimen with excessive weight gain and behavioral issues [Bushby et al 2010a].

Whether the improvement seen in individuals with DMD treated with prednisone is the result of an immunosuppressive effect remains unclear, as individuals treated with azathioprine did not have a beneficial effect.

Deflazacort, a synthetic derivative of prednisolone used in Europe but not currently available in all countries (e.g. U.S.A.), is thought to have fewer side effects than prednisone, particularly with regard to weight gain [Angelini 2007]. A larger study comparing deflazacort to prednisone, carried out in Europe, showed that the two medications were similarly or equally effective in slowing the decline of muscle strength in DMD. Another European multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial of deflazacort versus prednisone in DMD showed equal efficacy in improving motor function and functional performance [Bonifati et al 2000]. A more recent study of deflazacort treatment showed efficacy in preserving pulmonary function as well as gross motor function [Biggar et al 2006].

In a comparison of two different protocols of deflazacort treatment in DMD, a 0.9-mg/kg/day dose was more effective than a dose of 0.6 mg/kg/day for the first 20 days of the month and no deflazacort for the remainder of the month [Biggar et al 2004]; 30% of children on the highest dose developed asymptomatic cataracts that required no treatment. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 studies showed that deflazacort improved strength and motor function more than placebo; whether it has a benefit over prednisone on similar outcomes remains unclear [Campbell & Jacob 2003]. Despite the lack of conclusive evidence for superiority of deflazacort over prednisone in the area of effectiveness [Moxley et al 2005], some experts believe that the more favorable side-effect profile (particularly with regard to weight gain) associated with deflazacort makes it a better choice than daily treatment with prednisone.

Initiation and length of treatment. Data regarding the optimal age to begin treatment with corticosteroids or the optimal duration of such treatment are insufficient. It has been proposed that individuals with DMD begin treatment with low-dose prednisone as soon as the diagnosis is made (age 2-5 years) [Merlini et al 2003]; however, large-scale controlled trials to study the efficacy and safety of corticosteroid therapy in early DMD have yet to be conducted. A large, NIH-funded multicenter blind randomized trial (FOR DMD) comparing the efficacy, tolerability, and side effects of three regimens (prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day, prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day switching between ten days on and ten days off treatment, and deflazacort 0.9 mg/kg/day) is currently being conducted in young (4–7 year old) steroid-naïve children with DMD. Thus, at this point corticosteroid therapy remains the treatment of choice for affected individuals between ages five and 15 years. Corticosteroid therapy is not recommended in children under age two years [Bushby et al 2010a].

Published guidelines. The following recommendations for corticosteroid therapy are in accordance with the national practice parameters developed by the American Academy of Neurology and the Child Neurology Society [Moxley et al 2005] (full text).

Boys with DMD who are older than age five years should be offered treatment with prednisone (0.75/mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 40 mg) as soon as plateauing or decline in motor skills is noted. Prior to the initiation of therapy, the potential benefits and risks of corticosteroid treatment should be carefully discussed with each individual.

To assess benefits of corticosteroid therapy, the following parameters are useful: timed muscle function tests, pulmonary function tests, and age at loss of independent ambulation.

To assess risks of corticosteroid therapy, maintain awareness of the potential corticosteroid therapy side effects (e.g., weight gain, cushingoid appearance, short stature, decrease in linear growth, acne, excessive hair growth, gastrointestinal symptoms, behavioral changes). There is also an increased frequency of vertebral and long bone fractures with prolonged corticosteroid use [King et al 2007].

The optimal maintenance dose of prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) should be continued if side effects are not severe. Significant but less robust improvement can be seen with gradual tapering of prednisone to as low as 0.3 mg/kg/day.

If excessive weight gain occurs (>20% over estimated normal weight for height over a 12-month period), the prednisone dose should be decreased to 0.5 mg/kg/day. If excessive weight gain continues, the dose should be further decreased to 0.3 mg/kg/day after three to four months.

Deflazacort (0.9 mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 36-39 mg) can also be used to treat DMD. Side effects of asymptomatic cataracts and weight gain should be monitored.

BMD. Information about the efficacy of prednisone in treating individuals with BMD is limited. Many clinicians continue treatment with glucocorticoids after loss of ambulation for the purpose of maintaining upper limb strength, delaying the progressive decline of respiratory and cardiac function, and decreasing the risk of scoliosis. Retrospective data suggest that the progression of scoliosis can be reduced by long-term daily corticosteroid treatment; however, an increased risk for vertebral and lower-limb fractures has been documented [King et al 2007]. Men on steroid therapy were less likely to require spinal surgery [Dooley et al 2010b].
For the general approach to managing DCM, see Dilated Cardiomyopathy Overview, Management.

The Pasotti et al [2008] report (see Clinical Description) provides the most longitudinal data on LMNA-related DCM: 94 individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant were followed for a median of 57 months (range: 36-107 months). In the report of Brodt et al, the progression from first observed conduction system disease to the onset of ventricular dysfunction in a subset of 64 individuals with LMNA variants was a median of seven years [Brodt et al 2013]. Additional reports of large prospective longitudinal natural history studies of LMNA-related DCM are not yet available.

The Heart Failure Society of America and Heart Rhythm Society (in conjunction with the European Heart Rhythm Association) have commissioned guideline documents for the management of genetic cardiomyopathies that included specific mention of LMNA-related DCM [Hershberger et al 2009, Ackerman et al 2011]. Elements of the guidelines include the following:

Because of the complexity of treatment interventions in LMNA-related DCM in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, referral to centers with special expertise in cardiovascular genetic medicine should be considered.

Consider therapy based on cardiac phenotype (i.e., DCM or arrhythmia).

With an established arrhythmia or known risk of arrhythmia, consider ICD implantation before the ejection fraction falls below 35%. Note that this recommendation was developed in the Heart Failure Society guidelines in large part because of the risk for lethal arrhythmias in persons with an LMNA pathogenic variant who have systolic function well above a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%, the usual measure of systolic dysfunction below which ICDs are indicated in most US guidelines.

The management of LMNA-related DCM is focused on treatment of conduction system disease, arrhythmia, and DCM.

Cardiac conduction system disease and arrhythmias

Chronic atrial fibrillation unresponsive to cardioversion is treated with anticoagulants and agents for ventricular rate control.

Other symptomatic supraventricular arrhythmias are treated with pharmacologic agents, and at times are augmented with electrophysiologic intervention (e.g., atrial or atrioventricular node ablations).

Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias or asymptomatic but significant heart block is treated with an implantable electronic pacemaker. However, when a device is to be implanted, use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) rather than an electronic pacemaker has been advocated and should be strongly considered, as the risk of mortality from sudden cardiac death usually accompanies supraventricular arrhythmias and conduction system disease. Sudden cardiac death presumably results from lethal tachyarrhythmias despite the presence of a pacemaker to treat bradyarrhythmias [van Berlo et al 2005, Meune et al 2006], and for this reason use of an ICD has been advocated for LMNA-related cardiomyopathy with significant conduction system disease and/or arrhythmia regardless of the left ventricular ejection fraction [Hershberger et al 2009].

Symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and resuscitated sudden cardiac death are treated with an ICD and drug therapy as needed.

When DCM is present and the left ventricular ejection fraction is less than 35%, an ICD should be implanted following the usual guidelines [Yancy et al 2013].

LMNA-related DCM

Treatment of symptomatic DCM, including heart failure, is pharmacologic with ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, diuretics, and other conventional approaches, as summarized in Yancy et al [2013] (full text).

With progressive deterioration in left ventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction <30%) while still in sinus rhythm, some experts recommend full anticoagulation to prevent the development of left ventricular mural thrombus and embolic events including stroke.

Cardiac transplantation or other advanced therapies should be considered with progressive DCM, advancing heart failure, and otherwise refractory disease in persons receiving comprehensive cardiovascular care from experts in the field [Yancy et al 2013].
Treatment can favorably (and at times dramatically) affect the natural history of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Management of DCM includes (1) pharmacologic therapy and (2) pacemaker and implantable cardiac defibrillator device therapy for symptomatic and asymptomatic disease. Care should be provided by physicians skilled in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with heart failure and DCM.

Symptoms include those related to heart failure, arrhythmia, or stroke. Symptomatic DCM represents late disease. Full medical therapy (ACE inhibitors, beta blockers) with evaluation for antiarrhythmic therapy (e.g., pacemakers, implantable cardiac defibrillators) should be considered by cardiovascular specialists with expertise in the field.

Individuals with idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy should:

Be counseled that idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy is treatable even prior to the onset of symptoms, that treatment may result in remission of DCM, and may forestall symptomatic disease; and that treatment of symptomatic disease (heart failure, arrhythmias, or thromboembolic disease) improves survival and quality of life;

Understand the symptoms of heart failure, arrhythmia (including presyncope and syncope), and thromboemoblic disease, and be counseled to urgently seek medical care with the new presentation of any of these symptoms.

Training of relatives and/or caregivers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be suggested, particularly in families with a strong family history of sudden death and/or significant arrhythmias.

Cardiac transplantation remains the definitive treatment for progressive DCM and heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

Additional comprehensive guidelines are available [Yancy et al 2013].
Epileptic seizures require antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Individual treatment strategies should be developed depending on the type and frequency of seizures, EEG results, and responsiveness.

In addition, appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life for individuals with classic lissencephaly.

Feeding problems in newborns may require special strategies including placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube to deal with weak or uncoordinated sucking.

Physical therapy helps to maintain and promote mobility and prevent contractures. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required.

Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor skills and oral motor control.

A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.
Educational. Educational programs appropriate to the developmental and sensory deficits, including training in tactile sign language, should be provided.

Audiologic. Hearing aids have been used in affected males with only variable success [Tranebjaerg et al 1995], probably because of the central location of the auditory damage. The use of cochlear implantation (CI), reported in one instance, had a dubious outcome in a four year-old boy with immunodeficiency and DDON syndrome caused by a de novo deletion of exon 1 of TIMM8A and deletion of exons 17-19 of BTK [Brookes et al 2008].

Dystonia. Dystonia and associated neck pain and spasticity improved over a two-year period in two individuals treated with GABA β-agonists [Kreisel et al 2004]. In contrast, symptoms did not seem to improve with treatment with levodopa, carbamazepine, or trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride [Ujike et al 2001].

Favorable short-term outcome as assessed by the Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale from pallidal deep brain stimulation has been reported in two cases of DDON. However, longer-term benefit in additional patients has not yet been reported [Romito et al 2011, Cif et al 2012].

Ophthalmologic. Spectacle correction is appropriate where indicated.
Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required.

An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss.

The ultimate goal in the evaluation and treatment of a child with hereditary hearing loss and deafness is mainstream schooling. Research shows that diagnosis by age three months and habilitation by six months makes this goal possible for children with mild-moderate hearing loss. Cochlear implantation in children with severe-to-profound deafness who are part of mainstream education leads to social functioning and educational attainment that is indistinguishable from normal-hearing peers [Loy et al 2010, Langereis & Vermeulen 2015].

Recent research has focused on cochlear implant performance based on the gene involved. Due to the genetic heterogeneity of deafness, large sample sizes are difficult to obtain for performance on a per-gene basis. However, the data are clear that individuals with GJB2-related hearing loss (see Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss and Deafness, DFNB1) have excellent cochlear implant outcomes that are significantly better than those of individuals with environmental causes of deafness [Yoshida et al 2013, Abdurehim et al 2017].

In adults, cochlear implant performance may be compromised when the genetic defect affects the auditory nerve itself; however, this hypothesis requires further research [Shearer et al 2017].

DFNX3 is characterized by a mixed conductive-sensorineural hearing loss, the conductive component of which is caused by stapedial fixation. In contrast to other types of conductive hearing loss, surgical correction of DFNX3-related hearing loss can compromise hearing. An abnormal communication between the cerebrospinal fluid and perilymph can lead to fluid leakage ("perilymphatic gusher") at surgery and complete loss of hearing upon fenestration or removal of the stapes footplate.
Manifestations of the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion are variable, and treatment should be targeted to the specific findings identified.

Early diagnosis and provision of therapies facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists (sue.g.,a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist) is recommended based on specific symptoms or signs.

Neurodevelopmental disabilities including ASD. Interventions may include speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. Because of the high incidence of expressive language delays, speech therapy and augmentative and assistive means of communication should be considered early.

Guidelines for management of individuals with ASD are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers et al 2007] (full text).

Seizures. Choice of antiepileptic medication is guided by patient age, seizure type, EEG and imaging findings, side effect profiles, and response to treatment. No specific antiepileptic medications have been identified to be most effective.

Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is responsive to low doses of carbamazepine and phenytoin.

Obesity and overweight. It is important to initiate weight management and nutrition counseling in young children before excessive weight gain begins. Control food intake with normal portion sizes and limitation of food intake between meals. Maintain an active lifestyle. Increased calories are specifically ingested in the absence of hunger and suggest that close supervision of portion size and meal times can be beneficial.

Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia. Brain and spine MRI are indicated for new or progressive symptoms suggestive of a Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia, including sleep apnea, dysarthria, dysphagia, gait disturbance, and scoliosis.
Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Up to 25% of persons with 1p36 deletion syndrome develop infantile spasms associated with a hypsarrhythmic EEG; the spasms are responsive to ACTH.

In most individuals, all seizure types are well controlled by standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), provided that the first-choice drug is started as early as possible.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices, e.g., the "Haberman feeder," can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with an unrepaired cleft palate. Gavage feeding is recommended for those with poorly coordinated swallow. Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner. In one study, a few individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome were managed with gastrostomy [Heilstedt et al 2003b].

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair. "Non-compaction" cardiomyopathy responds well to the standard pharmacotherapy (e.g., furosemide, captopril, digoxin) [Battaglia et al 2008].

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner. Visual inattentiveness, reported in up to 64% of individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome, can be treated with an appropriate rehabilitation program [Bolognini et al 2005, Battaglia et al 2008].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Other. Structural anomalies (e.g., gastrointestinal, renal) should be addressed in a standard manner. Hypothyroidism is treated in a standard manner.
Depending on the age and presenting concerns of the individual with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, care from specialists in the following areas is often necessary: medical genetics, speech pathology, occupational and physical therapy, child development, neurology, cardiology, gastroenterology, nutrition/feeding in cases of failure to thrive, ophthalmology, and audiology.

Medical care may be coordinated by a medical geneticist or other health care professional skilled at managing patients with complex needs.

Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program. Most school-age children benefit from an individualized educational program (IEP) with input from a multi-specialty group of physical, occupational, and speech therapists with pediatric assessment.
No guidelines have been established for treatment of Dent disease. The primary goals of treatment are to decrease hypercalciuria, prevent kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis, and delay the progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD).

Interventions aimed at decreasing hypercalciuria and preventing kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis have not been tested in randomized controlled trials. Thiazide diuretics in doses greater than 0.4 mg/kg/day have decreased urinary calcium excretion by more than 40% in boys with Dent disease [Raja et al 2002, Blanchard et al 2008]. However, frequent side effects included hypokalemia, volume depletion, and cramping. Careful dosing and close monitoring for these side effects are necessary.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) have been used in children with proteinuria to prevent or delay further loss of kidney function; however, their effectiveness has not been clear. Note: Treatment with ACE inhibitors or ARB may be somewhat beneficial, at least in those with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) on kidney biopsy, as angiotensin blockade is not thought to significantly affect LMW proteinuria.

Although a high citrate diet has been shown to slow progression of CKD in clcn5 knockout mice [Cebotaru et al 2005] and has been used in the treatment of Dent disease, no human trials have proven its effectiveness. Note: Citrate is commonly used in Lowe syndrome to treat the metabolic acidosis resulting from renal tubular acidosis.

If males with Dent disease progress to ESRD, renal replacement therapy becomes necessary. Hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and renal transplantation are appropriate options. Because Dent disease manifestations are largely localized in the kidney, the disease will not recur.
The response to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) is variable. While some individuals respond well to first-line AEDs, others are more refractory to treatment. In four families with ADNFLE with a heterozygous DEPDC5 pathogenic variant, seven of nine individuals were drug resistant [Picard et al 2014], whereas in previous studies of individuals with ADNFLE, only one third of individuals were drug resistant.

There is currently no evidence that seizures respond better to one particular AED.

Attention should be paid to possible (long-term) side effects of AEDs. As in all patients with epilepsy, the goal should be to use as few AEDs as possible, in the lowest efficacious dose.

In patients with focal cortical dysplasia, the possibility of epilepsy surgery should be explored early in the disease course. In one study, four of five unrelated individuals who underwent epilepsy surgery with resection of the focal cortical dysplasia had a favorable postoperative outcome [Baulac et al 2015]. Several of these individuals were part of a larger family in which most family members had a history of focal epilepsy without FCD.

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.
Ideally, the team evaluating and treating a deaf individual should include an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required.

Enrollment in appropriate early intervention programs and educational programs for the hearing-impaired

An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, brain stem implants, and cochlear implantation:

Consideration of vibrotactile hearing devices or brain stem implants for individuals with complete labyrinth aplasia [Riazuddin et al 2011]

Evaluation for cochlear implantation in those individuals with a cochleovestibular nerve and a cochlear remnant. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children over age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss.

Routine ophthalmologic management of strabismus, if present
Appropriate treatment includes the following:

Implementation of hearing habilitation devices including hearing aids and vibrotactile hearing tools as needed

Consideration of cochlear implantation (CI) in individuals with severe-to-profound sensorineural hearing loss and auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. Although no CI has been reported among individuals with deafness and myopia syndrome, favorable outcome of CI has been reported in children with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder [Breneman et al 2012].

Enrollment in early intervention programs and educational programs for the hearing impaired to maximize long-term speech and language outcomes

Routine correction of refractive error
When hearing loss is mild to moderate, fitting of hearing aids to provide improved amplification is warranted.

When the hearing loss becomes severe to profound, cochlear implants (CIs) can be considered. In individuals with preserved or relatively good low-frequency hearing and severe-to-profound high-frequency loss, a short electrode may be considered. Short electrodes boost the high frequencies while preserving residual low-frequency hearing.

For school-age children or adolescents, special assistance for the hearing impaired may be warranted and, where available, should be offered.
Early diagnosis, habilitation with hearing aids or cochlear implantation, and educational programming will diminish the likelihood of long-term speech or educational delay.

The following are indicated:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration of cochlear implantation, an effective habilitation option for persons with preserved residual hearing [Gantz et al 2016]

Recognition that unlike with many clinical conditions, management and treatment of mild-to-profound deafness fall largely within the purview of the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for more detailed discussion of management issues.
The following are indicated:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration of cochlear implantation (CI), an excellent habilitation option for persons with profound deafness

Recognition that, unlike with many clinical conditions, the management and treatment of severe-to-profound congenital deafness falls largely within the purview of the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

Also see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for more detailed discussion of management issues.
See Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview for details.

Hearing habilitation

for those with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss

Hearing aids should be fitted as soon as possible.

Cochlear implantation (CI) should be considered as soon as possible. Case reports have shown good outcomes of CI in individuals with OTOF-related deafness [Rouillon et al 2006, Wu et al 2011] and reviewed in Eppsteiner et al [2012].

Note: In the first one or two years of life, OTOF-related deafness can appear to be an auditory neuropathy based on electrophysiologic testing; however, with time electrophysiologic testing becomes more consistent with a cochlear defect. Distinguishing between an auditory neuropathy and a cochlear defect is important as cochlear implants may be of marginal value in persons with auditory neuropathy such as that observed in deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy (DDON) [Brookes et al 2008] as well as individuals with deafness caused by pathogenic variants in spiral ganglion-expressed genes [Eppsteiner et al 2012].

Educational programs designed for individuals with hearing impairment are appropriate.
Sensorineural hearing loss

Cochlear implantation in affected males can improve auditory and oral communication skills.

See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview.
Management requires a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, child development, nutrition, and clinical genetics.

Management of Neurologic Manifestations in Neonatal Multisystem Disease

Hypotonia may be significant. Therefore, ongoing monitoring of gross motor development and skills with the intervention of appropriate therapies is appropriate in these children.

Management of Liver Involvement in both Neonatal Multisystem Disease and Isolated Hepatic Disease

Management of liver disease should be guided by the results of initial evaluation in consultation with a hepatologist.

Children with cholestatic liver disease or renal disease are at significant risk of nutritional insufficiency; therefore, a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic and renal dysfunctions should be involved in their care:

Formulas with an enriched medium-chain-triglyceride content may provide better nutritional support for infants with cholestasis than formulas with predominantly long-chain triglycerides [Feranchak & Sokol 2007].

Cornstarch may reduce symptomatic hypoglycemia in individuals with isolated hepatic disease.

Fractional meals and enteral nutrition during the night can result in good nutritional control [Dimmock et al 2008b].

Affected individuals often develop life-threatening liver failure, but the benefits of liver transplantation are disputable because of the frequent severe neurologic involvement due to the underlying mitochondrial disease. A total of 14 individuals with DGUOK deficiency were reported to have undergone liver transplantation.

The one-year survival rate was 64%.

Five of the 14 survived longer than five years.

Eight of the 14 died within two years of transplantation from severe pulmonary hypertension (3/8), neurologic degeneration (2/8), procedure-related complications (2/8), and early postoperative multi-organ failure (1/8).

Although survival after liver transplantation for DGUOK deficiency is lower than survival after liver transplantation for other indications, a significant proportion of affected individuals survived more than five years despite initial neurologic abnormalities. Nevertheless, a decision to perform liver transplantation for individuals with DGUOK deficiency remains difficult because neurologic manifestations may occur and/or worsen after liver transplantation despite their absence before transplantation [Grabhorn et al 2014].
Eventually, 40% of individuals are steroid dependent, 40% are transfusion dependent, and 20% go into remission [Chen et al 2005, Vlachos et al 2008].

Corticosteroid administration. Corticosteroids can initially improve the red blood count in approximately 80% of affected individuals.

The recommended corticosteroid is prednisone with a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day given orally once a day in the morning, beginning after age twelve months. An increase in hemoglobin concentration is usually seen in two to four weeks.

Corticosteroids may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose. Monitoring of blood counts is needed to ensure that the red cell hemoglobin concentration remains at 80-100 g/L, the minimum required for transfusion independence.

The corticosteroid maintenance dose varies and can be extremely low in some individuals. The recommended maximum maintenance dose is ≤0.5 mg/kg/day or ≤1 mg/kg every other day.

If after approximately one month the recommended steroid dose does not sustain the red cell hemoglobin concentration in an acceptable range, the corticosteroids should be tapered and discontinued.

Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006].

Red blood cell transfusion. If the individual is resistant to corticosteroid therapy, chronic transfusion with packed red blood cells is necessary. The goal of transfusion therapy is a red cell hemoglobin concentration of 80-100 g/L, which is usually adequate for maintaining growth and development [Vlachos et al 2008, Vlachos & Muir 2010].

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for DBA. Persons with DBA who are transfusion dependent or develop other cytopenias are often treated with HSCT.

In one study of 61 persons with DBA who underwent bone marrow transplantation (BMT), the majority (67%) received their bone marrow grafts from an HLA-matched related donor. The three-year probability of overall survival was 64% (range 50%-74%). Transplantation from an HLA-identical sib donor was associated with better survival [Roy et al 2005].

The Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Registry of North America describes 36 individuals who underwent HSCT: 21 HLA-matched sib stem cell transplants and 15 alternative donor stem cell transplants. Survival greater than five years from SCT for allogeneic sib transplants was 72.7% ±10.7% versus survival greater than five years from alternative donor transplants of 17.1% ±11.9% [Lipton et al 2006, Vlachos et al 2008]. Survival was the best (92.3%) for children younger than age ten years transplanted using an HLA-matched sib.

Note: (1) It is recommended that the affected individual, sibs, and parents undergo HLA typing at the time of diagnosis of DBA to identify the most suitable bone marrow donor in the event that HSCT would be required. (2) Because penetrance of DBA is incomplete, it is possible that a relative considered as a bone marrow donor could have a pathogenic variant but not manifest findings of DBA. (3) Relatives with a pathogenic variant, regardless of their clinical status, are not suitable bone marrow donors, because their donated bone marrow may fail or not engraft in the recipient.

Cancer treatment. Treatment of malignancies should be coordinated by an oncologist.
In children, the principle is to maintain joint positioning and mobility as much as possible by physical means (physiotherapy and casting, e.g., for clubfeet); however, tightness of joint capsules and ligaments in diastrophic dysplasia makes correction by casting or other physical means difficult.

Surgical correction of clubfoot is indicated when the foot deformity makes ambulation impossible; however, surgery needs to be undertaken with caution as deformities tend to recur. Simple tenotomy does not suffice, and more extensive plasty of tarsal bones may be needed [Weiner et al 2008].

The rate of spontaneous correction of cervical kyphosis is rather high, and cervical spine surgery in infancy may be restricted to individuals with clinical or neurophysiologic evidence of spinal cord impingement.

Indications for surgical correction of scoliosis have not been established nor have criteria to define a successful surgical outcome [Matsuyama et al 1999, Remes et al 2001]. It should be noted that surgical series are inevitably biased toward more severely affected individuals. Although surgery before puberty may be helpful for those who have developed severe spinal deformity with respiratory compromise or neurologic signs, surgical correction of scoliosis is best postponed until after puberty in the majority of individuals with diastrophic dysplasia [Jalanko et al 2009]. The key issue seems to be the early identification of those individuals at risk for rapid increase in scoliotic curvature.

Total arthroplasty of hips and knees decreased pain and increased mobility in a group of adult Finnish individuals with premature degenerative arthrosis [Helenius et al 2003a, Helenius et al 2003b]. The authors concluded that arthroplasty is indicated in "relatively young adults" with DTD.

A conservative approach to the treatment of cystic ear swelling is recommended [Cushing et al 2011].
The specific treatment for DC-related complications must be tailored to the individual. The recommendations in this section were first discussed at a DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and subsequently at a meeting of experts convened to review the publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015] Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials. Affected individuals may have few or many of the complications associated with DC. Comprehensive coordinated care among specialties is required.

Bone marrow failure (BMF). Following the model of the Fanconi anemia consensus guidelines [Eiler et al 2008] and updated on the DC treatment guidelines [Savage & Cook 2015], treatment of BMF is recommended if the hemoglobin is consistently below 8 g/dL, platelets lower than 30,000/mm3, and neutrophils below 1000/mm3. If a matched-related donor is available, hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) should be the first consideration for treatment for hematologic problems such as BMF or leukemia regardless of age.

HCT from an unrelated donor can be considered, although a trial of androgen therapy (e.g., oxymetholone or danazol) may be considered first [Khincha et al 2014].

Persons with DC may be more sensitive to androgens than individuals with Fanconi anemia, and the dose must be adjusted to reduce side effects such as impaired liver function, virilization, or behavioral problems (e.g., aggression, mood swings). The suggested starting dose of oxymetholone is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day, half the dose used in Fanconi anemia. It may take two to three months at a constant dose to see a hematologic response.

Side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, need to be monitored carefully. Baseline and follow-up liver ultrasound examinations should be performed for individuals receiving androgen therapy because of the possibility of liver adenomas and carcinomas, which have been reported in Fanconi anemia and in persons using androgens for benign hematologic diseases or for non-hematologic disorders [Velazquez & Alter 2004].

Hematopoietic growth factors may be useful in BMF. However, splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and splenic rupture have been reported in two individuals with DC receiving androgens and G-CSF [Giri et al 2007]. G-CSF with erythropoietin has occasionally been useful but perhaps should also not be used in combination with androgens [Khincha et al 2014].

HCT is the only curative treatment for severe BMF or leukemia in DC. It should be performed at centers experienced in treating DC. Reported problems include graft failure, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), sepsis, pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, and veno-occlusive disease [Berthou et al 1991, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007] that is caused in part by underlying pulmonary and liver disease [Yabe et al 1997, Dror et al 2003, Brazzola et al 2005, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007, Ostronoff et al 2007]. As a result, long-term survival of persons with DC following HCT has been poor. Reduced-intensity preparative regimens being studied in a few institutions may improve long-term outcomes [Dietz et al 2011, Nishio et al 2011, Vuong et al 2010, Gadalla et al 2013, Algeri et al 2015].

The range of clinical phenotypes seen in DC and the possibility of non-manifesting or very mildly affected heterozygotes within families may complicate the selection of related HCT donors [Fogarty et al 2003, Denny et al 2008]. Potential related HCT donors should be tested either for the pathogenic variant present in the proband or, if the pathogenic variant is not known, for telomere length.

Cancer. Specific treatment should be tailored to the type of cancer.

Affected individuals undergoing chemotherapy for cancer may be at increased risk for prolonged cytopenias as a result of underlying BMF. This risk has not been quantitated; studies are ongoing.

Individuals with DC may be at increased risk for therapy-related pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Pulmonary function tests and liver function should be monitored carefully.

Long-term data on the effects of cancer radiotherapy in DC are not available. Affected individuals may be at increased risk for radiotherapy-related complications based on observations in persons undergoing radiotherapy in HCT [Author, personal observation].

Although the risk of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is high in DC, many persons have abnormal cytogenetic clones and/or morphologic changes consistent with abnormal myelopoiesis but may not have severe cytopenias.

Pulmonary fibrosis. The options for therapy in persons with DC and pulmonary fibrosis are primarily supportive care. Lung transplantation may be considered in severe cases, although long-term outcomes have not been studied (see Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis).
Consensus recommendations for the management of DLD deficiency do not currently exist. Theoretical difficulties exist for the management of these patients based on the various metabolic pathways affected by the three affected enzyme complexes. In practice, these difficulties have been experienced and make empiric treatment recommendations challenging.

DLD pathogenic variants cause variable deficiency in three enzymatic pathways. The treatment for individual enzyme complex deficiencies warrants consideration:

Branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex. Management consists primarily of dietary leucine restriction, BCAA-free medical foods, judicious supplementation with isoleucine and valine, and frequent clinical and biochemical monitoring (see MSUD).

α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (αKGDH) complex. Due to the rarity of this isolated deficiency, limited information is available for the management of these patients.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex. Due to defective carbohydrate oxidation, ketogenic diets have become part of regular management in these patients. Additionally, dichloroacetate (DCA) and thiamine supplementation are frequently tried [Patel et al 2012].

Early-Onset Neurologic Presentation

Review of treatment strategies. The multiple strategies that have been attempted in children with an early-onset neurologic presentation do not appear to significantly alter the natural history of disease. Even with treatment, children often die in the neonatal/infantile period or experience various degrees of chronic neurologic impairment if they survive the initial episode. The individual treatment strategies typically address deficiency of one abnormal enzymatic complex.

Protein/BCAA-restriction. Based on decreased BCKDH activity, restriction of protein to recommended dietary allowances (RDA) has been attempted with questionable results. Three of the six reported patients experienced laboratory and/or clinical improvement with the use of protein restriction alone or in combination with medication therapy [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Grafakou et al 2003].

Ketogenic/high-fat diet. Ketogenic/high-fat diets are frequently employed in PDH deficiency [Patel et al 2012] and as a result have been attempted in DLD deficiency. A total of seven patients reported to date have been tried on a ketogenic/high-fat diet:

Five had no clinical or biochemical benefit. Of note, two of the five experienced clinical worsening with an increase in acidosis and hypoglycemia [Robinson et al 1981, Craigen 1996].

Two improved clinically. One was treated with lipid infusions (instead of high-dextrose infusions) during acute episodes [Hong et al 1997, Cerna et al 2001].

Carbohydrate tolerance. Patients with PDH deficiency classically present with lactate elevations due to defective carbohydrate oxidation. Although dextrose infusions may theoretically cause further lactate elevations during acute episodes, provision of dextrose-containing IV fluids is essential for the majority of acutely decompensated patients. Only one patient experienced worsening acidosis with increased dextrose concentrations in the TPN [Cerna et al 2001]. Not surprisingly, this patient is one of the two who benefitted from a ketogenic/high-fat diet.

Dichloroacetate (DCA). Through its ability to stimulate PDH activity by inhibiting PDH kinase, DCA has long been used to safely treat patients with congenital lactic acidosis, mitochondrial disorders, and PDH deficiency [Stacpoole et al 2008, Patel et al 2012]. A total of five patients have been tried on DCA with four experiencing at least transient decreases in lactic acid elevations [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Cerna et al 2001].

Additional therapies used with limited success include:

Thiamine

Coenzyme Q10

Lipoic acid

Riboflavin

Biotin

Empiric recommendations

for acute management (based on the above review)

Goals of therapy should be the correction of metabolic acidosis, promotion of an anabolic/metabolically stable state, maintenance of normoglycemia, and treatment of precipitating factors that may be present. This is typically achieved by the following:

Metabolic acidosis should be treated with sodium bicarbonate if bicarbonate is ≤14 mEq/L and/or blood pH <7.2.

Promotion of an anabolic state:

Maintain serum glucose concentration in the normal range. D10 (half or full-normal saline) with age-appropriate electrolytes should be started at maintenance rate and adjusted based on the presence or absence of increased intracranial pressure or hypoglycemia.

Elevation of plasma leucine and increased intracranial pressure are a potential complication of DLD deficiency. Similar to the management of classic MSUD link, overhydration and quickly infused boluses of fluids should be avoided if possible.

If provision of dextrose-containing fluids worsens metabolic acidosis, consider decreasing the infusion rate and providing the majority of calories in the form of intralipid.

Intralipids can be added to provide additional calories with cautious monitoring for acidemia.

Protein should initially be withheld for a maximum of 24 hours to avoid worsening of catabolism. Protein should then be reintroduced gradually.

Branched-chain amino acids should be introduced slowly and followed closely with frequent plasma amino acid evaluations.

Goal levels/ratios should be similar to those listed in MSUD.

Levocarnitine (IV or PO) 50 - 100 mg/kg/d divided three times per day should be given during the acute period.

Dichloroacetate (DCA) can be considered and continued if lactate decreases with its introduction.

Any precipitating factors (infection, fasting, medications) should be treated/discontinued as soon as possible.

If lactic acidosis/encephalopathy persists, dialysis can be considered as it has been successful in DLD deficiency and classic MSUD [Schaefer et al 1999, Quinonez et al 2013].

Hepatic Presentation

Management of patients with the primarily hepatic presentation typically involves supportive therapy during times of acute liver injury or failure, including the following:

Nutritional support in the form of dextrose-containing IV fluids (6-8 mg/kg/min) with age-appropriate electrolytes and/or frequent feedings [Elpeleg et al 1990, Shaag et al 1999, Brassier et al 2013]

Correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate

Correction of any coagulopathy with fresh frozen plasma

Consideration of DCA treatment for lactic acidosis during acute episodes and for chronic management [Aptowitzer et al 1997, Shaag et al 1999]

Use of dialysis to treat persistent lactic acidosis and encephalopathy (successfully in one patient) [Elpeleg et al 1990]

Avoidance of liver-toxic medications

Episodes of catabolic stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgical procedures, pregnancy) require the assistance/care of a biochemical geneticist.

Limited data exist for chronic management of individuals with the primarily hepatic presentation. Between episodes, patients typically return to baseline and do not require treatment beyond the avoidance of fasting, catabolic stressors, and liver-toxic medications.
Initial treatment. Rehydration and intravenous insulin infusion should be started promptly after diagnosis, particularly in infants with ketoacidosis.

Long-term medical management. An appropriate regimen of subcutaneous insulin administration should be established when the infant is stable and tolerating oral feedings. Few data on the most appropriate insulin preparations for young infants are available.

Intermediate-acting insulin preparations (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) tend to have a shorter duration of action in infants, possibly because of smaller dose size or higher subcutaneous blood flow.

The longer-acting preparations with no significant peak-of-action effect such as Lantus® (glargine) or Levemir® (detemir) may work better in small infants.

In individuals with very low insulin requirements, diluted insulin (5 or 10 U/mL) may be more appropriate if used with caution.

Some centers recommend the use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for young infants [Polak & Cave 2007] as a safer, more physiologic, and more accurate way of administering insulin.

Caution:

In general, rapid-acting (lispro and aspart) and short-acting (regular) preparations (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) should be avoided as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events.

Extreme caution should be observed when using a diluted insulin preparation in order to avoid dose errors.

Identification of a KCNJ11 or ABCC8 pathogenic variant is important for clinical management since most individuals with these pathogenic variants can be treated with oral sulfonylureas. Children with pathogenic variants in KCNJ11 or ABCC8 can be transitioned to therapy with oral sulfonylureas; high doses are usually required (0.4-1.0 mg/kg/day of glibenclamide). Transfer protocols are available at www.diabetesgenes.org. Treatment with sulfonylureas is associated with improved glycemic control [Hattersley & Ashcroft 2005, Pearson et al 2006, Thurber et al 2015, Babiker et al 2016].

Long-term insulin therapy is required for all other causes of PNDM, although mild beneficial effect of oral sulfonylureas in persons with GCK pathogenic variants has been reported [Turkkahraman et al 2008, Hussain 2010].

High caloric intake should be maintained to achieve weight gain.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is required in persons with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Rehydration and IV insulin on a sliding scale are usually required. Some infants produce some insulin and can be treated by rehydration alone.

Subcutaneous injection of insulin is introduced as soon as possible, often within two weeks. Continuous insulin pump therapy (as opposed to intermittent insulin injections) has been used successfully in a number of cases in the UK and France [JP Shield, personal communication]. Successful treatment with subcutaneous insulin glargine has also been reported [Barone et al 2011].

Blood glucose concentration should be monitored and insulin doses changed accordingly as in the standard treatment for diabetes mellitus. Insulin can be discontinued when blood glucose concentrations stabilize.

Once diabetes mellitus is in remission, parents need to be alerted to the possibility of recurrence of the diabetes mellitus, particularly during periods of illness. Symptoms such as excessive thirst, polyuria, and repeated bacterial infections should prompt measurement of blood glucose concentration.

If diabetes mellitus recurs, treatment may require diet alone, oral agents, or insulin, although the doses of insulin needed tend to be less than those required in type 1 diabetes mellitus (i.e., some residual endogenous insulin remains). It should be noted that patients do not always require treatment with insulin even in the neonatal period. In several patients at relapse, sulphonylureas or diet alone is adequate [Valerio et al 2004].

Note: Macroglossia could potentially cause airway obstruction; macroglossia severe enough to require treatment has not been reported.
Currently no effective treatment exists for any type of HSAN.

The emphasis of management is to help parents and affected individuals understand the sudomotor defect and injury prevention when sensory impairment is significant.

Because hearing loss may be severe, initial use of hearing aids and/or assistive communication methods may be needed.

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations associated with dementia.

Because behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers, information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers are essential.
The following are appropriate:

Surgical repair of diaphragmatic hernia and postoperative assessment of respiratory function to determine if the risk for long-term respiratory problems is increased

Surgical repair of omphaloceleNote: Surgical repair of omphalocele and/or diaphragmatic hernia seems to pose no greater risk than repair of these defects in children with other genetic syndromes.

Provision of corrective lenses for myopia; treatment of retinal detachments or glaucoma

Provision of appropriate hearing aids and/or cochlear implants (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for more details)

Education tailored to degree of intellectual, visual, and hearing disabilities

Antiepileptic drugs for seizures
Levodopa

Children. Although an initial dose of 25 mg levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI) two to three times a day was recommended by Nygaard et al [1991], an initial dose of 25 mg or less of levodopa/DCI once a day is currently suggested [Furukawa et al 2005] because some children with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD) demonstrated a remarkable response to smaller doses and a child with the dystonia with motor delay phenotype manifested very severe dyskinesia (lasting 4 days) after receiving a single 50-mg dose of levodopa/DCI. Changing the dose slowly and by small increments is recommended.

Adults. An initial dose of 50 mg levodopa/DCI once or twice a day is suggested [Furukawa et al 2005]. Gradual increase to higher doses is recommended.

Motor benefit can be recognized immediately or within a few days of starting levodopa therapy; full benefit occurs within several days to a few months. Maximum benefit (complete or near-complete responsiveness of symptoms) is usually achieved by less than 300-400 mg/day of levodopa/DCI or by less than 20-30 mg/kg/day of levodopa without a DCI [Nygaard et al 1993a, Segawa & Nomura 1993, Steinberger et al 2000, Grimes et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2005]. According to Nygaard & Duvoisin [1999], no dose of levodopa/DCI greater than 400 mg/day has been necessary for individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD.

At the initiation of levodopa treatment, some individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD develop dyskinesias. However, these dyskinesias subside following dose reduction and do not reappear with later gradual increment in dose. It is important to note that such transient dyskinesias are different from those observed in early-onset parkinsonism and idiopathic Parkinson disease during chronic levodopa therapy. A continued stable response to levodopa therapy and no motor-adverse effects (motor response fluctuations and dopa-induced dyskinesias) for more than 30 years have been confirmed in GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 2005].
The following are appropriate:

Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) in a standard manner

Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications

Symptomatic treatment of ataxia using riluzole and rehabilitation therapy [van de Warrenburg et al 2014, Romano et al 2015]

Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia

For affected children, adaptation of educational programming to abilities
Duane anomaly. Severe strabismus may require eye surgery.

Radial ray malformations. Severe malformations of the forearms may require surgery, e.g., surgery to correct aplasia of the thumb by constructing a functional thumb (pollicization).

Heart defects. Cardiac surgery, if required for a congenital heart defect, is standard. A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation.

Hearing deficits. Hearing aids may be required.

Growth retardation. Growth hormone therapy should be considered for treating affected children.
Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings

Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem.

Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment.

Prism glasses may improve the compensatory head position in mild cases. They are more likely to be tolerated by older persons.

Correction of hypermetropic refractive error in children may reduce the angle of strabismus and thus decrease the angle of head turn.

Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle surgery)

To correct or improve compensatory head posture

To improve alignment in primary gaze position

To improve upshoot or downshoot

Note: Surgery does not generally improve abduction of the affected eye, though transposition procedures may provide partial improvement in some cases.

Principles of surgical approach as reviewed in 

Kekunnaya et al [2015]

Type 1 and type 3. If head turn is present, consider recession of the medial rectus muscle or horizontal transposition of the vertical rectus muscles. Vertical rectus muscle transposition may be augmented, either with posterior augmentation sutures on the transposed muscles, or with botulinum toxin injections into the medial rectus muscle. Both the superior and inferior rectus muscles may be transposed, or alternatively the superior rectus muscle alone may be transposed in combination with a medial rectus muscle recession. If up- and/or downshoot occurs in adduction, or if globe retraction is severe and creates a deformity, consider recession of both the medial and lateral rectus muscles. Y-splitting of the lateral rectus muscle may decrease the amount of recession required.

Type 2. If head turn is present, consider recession of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle if the affected individual fixates with the uninvolved eye, and the contralateral lateral rectus if the affected individual fixates with the involved eye. If upshoot or downshoot occurs in adduction, consider recession of the lateral rectus muscle, possibly with Y-splitting.
There is currently no uniform standard of care for patients with Duarte variant galactosemia. Agreement has not been reached as to whether individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia with residual erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity in the range of 14%-25% of controls should be restricted from galactose intake during infancy and early childhood. Until a sufficiently sensitive and statistically powerful study is conducted to determine whether galactose exposure negatively affects long-term developmental outcomes in children with Duarte variant galactosemia, the controversy concerning intervention and outcomes is likely to persist.

Because it is unclear if acute or long-term manifestations can result from Duarte variant galactosemia, and if so, whether dietary galactose restriction would prevent or resolve the issues that have been reported [Powell et al 2009, Lynch et al, in press], any developmental or psychosocial problems experienced by a child with Duarte variant galactosemia should be treated symptomatically and the possibility of other causes should be explored.

Approach for non-treatment. Healthcare providers who choose not to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider Duarte variant galactosemia to be of no clinical significance. These healthcare providers argue against the interruption of breastfeeding when there is no clear evidence to justify it [Fernhoff 2010]. Of note, continued galactose-1-phosphate accumulation may be seen with lactose ingestion but is usually without overt sequelae.

If the infant has not been placed on a galactose-restricted diet, or if feedings are alternating between breast milk and low galactose formula, it is reasonable to check the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level by age 12 months (or sooner if an earlier erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level was particularly high) to ensure that the level is approaching control range by age 12 months.

Approach for treatment. Healthcare providers who choose to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider the intervention to be potentially preventive rather than responsive to current disease manifestations. Options for dietary intervention [Fernhoff 2010, Pyhtila et al 2015] include:

Full dietary restriction of galactose for all infants, through age one year, at which time a galactose challenge is performed;

Following the recommendations for clinical variant galactosemia: immediate dietary galactose restriction for infants with erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate >10 mg/dL;

A compromise approach in which parents either alternate feeding breast milk with low galactose formula, or non-breastfeeding parents use low galactose formula rather than a milk-based formula.

The galactose challenge. If treatment is the chosen approach, conducting a galactose challenge at some point should be considered. For example:

Obtain a baseline erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at diagnosis and again around age six months (i.e., after the introduction of solid foods).

At age 12 months, gradually liberalize the dietary intake of galactose, and obtain an erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level one month later.

If the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is within the normal range (<1.0 mg/dL) despite milk ingestion, dietary restriction of galactose is not resumed.
A multidisciplinary team evaluation is recommended beginning in early infancy to evaluate motor and speech development and later to assist in referrals for appropriate educational programs.

Supportive care may include the following:

Occupational and physical therapy

Alternative and augmentative communication

Behavioral therapy (e.g., applied behavioral analysis therapy)

Psychotropic medications for behavioral manifestations

Standard management for seizures including medications, vagus nerve stimulators, and/or ketogenic diets [Conant et al 2014]. Effectiveness of antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment varies by seizure type and severity. No prospective or randomized-controlled data on AED therapy in dup15q have been published. See Conant et al [2014] for parent-reported effectiveness of various medications and treatments.

Seizure management is important in preventing secondary complications, including (in the most severe cases) brain damage, developmental regression, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) [Devinsky 2011].

Approximately half of seizure-related deaths are not due to SUDEP, but to other causes including status epilepticus, drowning, falls, and accidents. Many of these are preventable. For example, status epilepticus may be prevented with the use of rescue medications such as rectal diazepam or nasal midazolam. Some evidence suggests that prompt identification of a seizure and basic care (e.g., repositioning a person on the side instead of face down) after a seizure may help prevent SUDEP [Ryvlin et al 2013]. However, the only known preventive therapy is the best possible seizure control [Ryvlin et al 2011]. Although a variety of monitors can help detect SUDEP (e.g., wrist and mattress accelerometers), none can prevent it [Devinsky 2011].

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit (pdf).
Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Those with developmental delays, cognitive disability, behavioral problems, or psychological phenotypes (autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) should be evaluated by a neurodevelopmental pediatrician or clinical psychologist/psychiatrist for treatment recommendations.

Seizures should be managed by a neurologist using standard practice.

Individuals with cardiac, ophthalmic, or renal abnormalities should be managed by the appropriate specialist.
Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommendations include speech/language therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. Hippotherapy should be considered, especially for children who have difficulty with balance and children who have an autism spectrum disorder.

Psychological evaluation, psychiatric evaluation, and speech-language evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Childhood apraxia of speech. Intensive speech-language therapy (preferably by a speech-language pathologist who has specific training in treating this disorder) is recommended for children who have childhood apraxia of speech or signs of this disorder, in order to maximize effective oral communication and prevent or limit later language impairment and/or reading disorder.

Anxiety/selective mutism. Cognitive-behavioral intervention for anxiety (preferably by a licensed clinical psychologist) is recommended for those with social anxiety or selective mutism. Educators should be made aware of the signs and symptoms of social anxiety disorder and selective mutism and the appropriate educational interventions and support for children with these disorders. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated. For children who have selective mutism, co-treatment by the speech-language therapist and the psychologist should be strongly considered.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Applied behavior analysis (preferably conducted by a board-certified behavior analyst) or other empirically supported intervention for ASD is recommended for those with co-morbid ASD to address social communication difficulties.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Behavioral modifications in the home and school settings are recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Aggression. When shown, physical aggression should be assessed and treated immediately to prevent development of a long-standing pattern of aggression. Applied behavior analysis intervention is recommended. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Oppositionality. Behavioral interventions are recommended to address oppositionality, with an emphasis on reinforcing positive behaviors. Psychotropic medication may also be indicated.

Specific medical problems are treated in the following ways:

Hydrocephalus as needed with ventriculo-peritoneal shunting

Aortic dilation with beta blocker therapy in some affected individuals. Some with severe aortic dilation have required surgery [Zarate et al 2014, Morris et al 2015, Parrott et al 2015].

Strabismus in the usual manner

Recurrent otitis media in the usual manner

Poor feeding in infants. Feeding therapy

Constipation. Aggressive management at all ages to prevent encopresis and impaction

Growth hormone deficiency. Human growth hormone replacement therapy

Club feet. Casting
Educational program should be tailored to individual needs.
Treatment includes the following:

Ongoing routine medical care by a pediatrician or other primary care physician

Educational programs to address the specific needs identified; speech therapy directed at improving communication skills; introduction of sign language and augmentative communication aids such as picture cards, communication boards and/or computer touch screens as early as possible

Therapeutic management of sleep disturbances if necessary

Early intervention with occupational therapy for feeding problems; consideration of tube feeding for severe persisting feeding problems

Epilepsy treatment in accordance with standard practice under care of a neurologist

Early intervention with physical therapy for hypertonic musculature and gait disturbances. A wheeled walker may be useful for children with serious gait disturbances.

Standard treatment for orthopedic, endocrine, dental, cardiac, ophthalmologic, and other medical issues
Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2011, Lubarr & Bressman 2011, Bertucco & Sanger 2015, Dressler et al 2016, Shanker & Bressman 2016].

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (in the range of 100 mg/day) in children, who tend to tolerate high doses better than adults.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely. Pyridostigmine can be used to counter anticholinergic side effects, but does not improve cognitive side effects.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines

Other medications including levodopa, antiepileptics, and dopamine-depleting agents; these have been used to treat dystonia with variable effects.

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail

Surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for medically refractory isolated generalized dystonia in randomized controlled studies [Vidailhet et al 2005, Kupsch et al 2006, Vidailhet et al 2007], including in individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia [reviewed in Fox & Alterman 2015].

GPi DBS has become a well-established and important treatment option for individuals with medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia. Overall, individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia tend to have good outcomes after GPi DBS, with some showing dramatic improvement.

Some, though not all, studies have found that the presence of a TOR1A pathogenic variant is a positive predictive factor of good outcome of GPi DBS surgery [Isaias et al 2008, Andrews et al 2010, Borggraefe et al 2010, Air et al 2011].

Shorter disease duration has been correlated with improved outcomes, highlighting the importance of early referral for DBS in children with severe, medically refractory DYT1 dystonia. [Markun et al 2012, Lumsden et al 2013]. Conversely, referral for DBS should not be made prematurely (i.e., prior to sufficient medication trials).

Clinical effect has been found to be well sustained at follow up of up to 13 years [Alcindor et al 2010, Cif et al 2010, Panov et al 2013, Krause et al 2016].

Note: Intrathecal baclofen therapy has been used for treatment of generalized dystonia of various etiologies in the past [van Hilten et al 2000, Walker et al 2000, Albright et al 2001], however, GPi DBS surgery has become the preferred surgical treatment for severe, medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia because of the good treatment outcomes.

Physical therapy and an appropriate exercise program may be of benefit.
Several drugs variably improve symptoms in affected individuals but, with the lack of clinical trials comparing the efficacy of these drugs, no single medication has been proven to be very effective. Thus, response to the following treatments may be poor.

Acetazolamide

(ACTZ), a carbonic-anhydrase (CA) inhibitor, may reduce the frequency and severity of the attacks in some but not all affected individuals. The mechanism by which ACTZ reduces the frequency and severity of the attacks is unclear. The recommended starting dosage is 125 mg once a day, given orally. However, individuals with good renal function may require higher daily doses, ranging from 8 to 30 mg/kg/day in one to four divided doses (not to exceed 1 g/day). ACTZ should not be prescribed to individuals with liver, renal, or adrenal insufficiency.

Chronic treatment with ACTZ may result in side effects including tiredness, paresthesias, rash, and formation of renal calculi; therefore, for some affected individuals treatment must be discontinued [Graves et al 2014, D’Adamo et al 2015].

Antiepileptic drugs

(AEDs) may significantly reduce the frequency of the attacks in responsive individuals; however, the response is heterogeneous as some individuals are particularly resistant to drugs [Eunson et al 2000].

Diphenylhydantoin treatment at a dose of 150-300 mg daily resulted in reasonable control of seizures in some individuals [VanDyke et al 1975]. In particular, phenytoin treatment at a dose of 3.7 mg/kg/day may improve muscle stiffness and motor performance [Kinali et al 2004]. Nevertheless, phenytoin should be used with caution in young individuals, as it may cause permanent cerebellar dysfunction and atrophy [De Marcos et al 2003].

Sulthiame 50-200 mg daily may reduce the attack rate. During this treatment abortive attacks were still noticed lasting a few seconds and troublesome side effects were paresthesias and intermittent carpal spasm.

Carbamazepine has been prescribed in doses up to 1600 mg daily [Eunson et al 2000]. The dose needs to be adjusted according to different factors including, age, weight, the particular carbamazepine product being used, responsiveness of the individual, and other medications being taken.

Lamotrigine ameliorates attacks in some affected individuals and therefore it has been proposed as an alternative treatment [Graves et al 2014].
Acetazolamide is effective in controlling or reducing the frequency and severity of attacks in two thirds of individuals with EA2 [Mantuano et al 2010, Ilg et al 2014]. The typical starting dose is 125 mg/day given orally, but doses as high as 500 mg/2x/day may be required. This medication is generally well tolerated; the most common side effects are paresthesias of the extremities, rash, and renal calculi.

4-aminopyridine, a potassium channel blocker, also reduces attack frequency and duration at doses of 5-10 mg/3x/day [Mantuano et al 2010, Strupp et al 2011].

Generally acetazolomide is used as the firstline therapy, although there are no specific recommendations regarding which medication should be trialed first [Ilg et al 2014].
Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure.

In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary nonadherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

Addition of a topical antibiotic or antiseptic such as bacitracin, mupirocin, silver, or honey

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix® or Conform®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net® or Tubifast®).

Gastrointestinal

Surgical intervention is required to correct pyloric atresia. Many children need medical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

Consultation with a dietitian or nutritionist can be helpful, especially if there is significant mucosal blistering in the mouth preventing adequate oral intake.

Renal. The following are appropriate:

Referral to an urologist if there are symptoms of difficulty or discomfort with voiding

Referral to a nephrologist if renal function studies and/or urinalysis are abnormal

Other

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert the clinician to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue [Ida et al 2012]. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].
Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure [Pope et al 2012].

Families must decide which of the many correct and effective methods of bandaging works best for them. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers may include any the following:

Ordinary Band-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Non-stick products (e.g., Telfa® or N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®)

A secondary layer providing stability for the primary layer and adding padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Conform®, Kerlix®,) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer (usually with some elastic properties) that ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Tubifast®, Coban® or elasticized tube-gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Various lubricants and antimicrobial agents such as topical antibiotics, silver, or honey are often added to the contact layer to prevent and treat infection and promote healing.

In infants and children with RDEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes et al 1996, Stehr et al 2008]. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Castillo et al 2002, Kay & Wyllie 2002, Azizkhan et al 2006].

Other. Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management.

Anemia is a chronic problem with RDEB and can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.

Other nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed:

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation for osteopenia and osteoporosis

Selenium and carnitine replacement to help prevent dilated cardiomyopathy

Zinc replacement to enhance wound healing

Good prophylactic dental care is essential to insure the ability to eat and to allow for adequate caloric intake [Harris et al 2001].

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Occupational therapy may be helpful in preventing progressive hand contractures. Splinting of the hands can be problematic because of skin fragility. Surgical release of fingers by several methods has been described; it often needs to be performed repeatedly [Marín-Bertolín et al 1999, Glicenstein et al 2000].

Psychosocial support including social services and psychological counseling is essential.
Skin. The skin needs to be protected from shearing forces and caretakers need to learn how to handle the child with EB [Denyer 2010, Pope et al 2012].

New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers:

A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following:

OrdinaryBand-Aids®

Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®)

Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®)

Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®)

A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®)

Other. The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007].

A hoarse cry in an infant should alert to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007, Ida et al 2012].

Gastroesophageal reflux disease, when present, should be treated as in the general population.

Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Treatment of granulation tissue can be attempted with high-potency topical steroids, silver nitrate, electrocautery, or autologous skin grafts.

Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].

Pain management becomes an important part of daily care [Goldschneider & Lucky 2010]. In those with difficult-to-control pain, referral to a pain management specialist can be considered.

Dental care is necessary because of inherent enamel abnormalities [Kirkham et al 2000, Krämer et al 2012].

Urologic and renal problems may be serious in this population [Kajbafzadeh et al 2010]. For those affected individuals who survive, referral to a urologist may be considered.
Supportive care to protect the skin from blistering, appropriate dressings that will not further damage the skin and will promote healing of open wounds, and prevention and treatment of secondary infection are the mainstays of EB treatment.

Encourage children to tailor their activities to minimize trauma to the skin while participating as much as possible in age-appropriate play.

Lance and drain new blisters to prevent further spread from fluid pressure.

Dressings usually involve three layers:

A primary nonadherent dressing that will adhere to the top layers of the epidermis must be used. There is wide variability in tolerance to different primary layers; some individuals with EBS can use ordinary bandages. Some dressings are impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® Gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform). Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa or N-Terface®) or silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®) are also popular.

A secondary layer absorbs drainage, provides stability for the primary layer, and adds padding to allow more activity. Foam dressings and/or rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used.

A tertiary layer, usually with some elastic properties, ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban™ or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters, such as BandNet®).

Note: Many individuals with EBS, in contrast to those with junctional EB and dystrophic EB, find that excessive bandaging may actually lead to more blistering, presumably as a result of increased heat and sweating. Such individuals may benefit from dusting the affected areas with corn starch to help absorb moisture and reduce friction on the skin, followed by a simple (i.e., one-layer) dressing.
Dystrophic nails. Artificial nails may improve the appearance of the hands/feet, and may be especially helpful to young girls and women.

Hypotrichosis. No special pharmaceutical agent is available to improve hair growth. Alopecia was found to respond to treatment with a combination of topical minoxidil and tretinoin in an individual with probable congenital hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia [Melkote et al 2009]. The individual’s clinical findings were compatible with the clinical diagnosis of HED2; however, the diagnosis was not confirmed with molecular genetic testing. The authors also noted that the efficacy and safety of long-term treatment need to be explored further.

Special hair care products may help to manage dry and sparse hair.

In many cases, wigs are helpful.

Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. Skin emollients may help relieve palmoplantar hyperkeratosis.
For pain control, a combination of analgesics and physiotherapy including hydrotherapy is helpful to many affected individuals; however, pain can be difficult to control. Referral to a rheumatologist or pain specialist may be indicated.

Limitation of joint destruction and the development of osteoarthritis is a goal. Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon can determine if realignment osteotomy and/or acetabular osteotomy may be helpful in slowing the progression of symptoms.

In some individuals, total joint arthroplasty may be required if the degenerative hip changes are causing too much pain or dysfunction.

Psychosocial support addressing issues of short stature, chronic pain, disability, and employment is appropriate.
Symptomatic individuals should be seen by a physical therapist and an orthopedist in order to assess the possibility of treatment (physiotherapy for muscular strengthening and maintaining mobility, cautious use of analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) and the optimal time for surgery (joint replacement), if indicated.

Career counseling is recommended.
The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic surgeries to release Achilles tendons and other contractures or scoliosis as needed

Use of mechanical aids (canes, walkers, orthoses, wheelchairs) as needed to help ambulation

Specific treatments for cardiac features (arrhythmias, AV conduction disorders, and congestive heart failure), including antiarrhythmic drugs, cardiac pacemaker, implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), and both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic therapy for heart failure [Bécane et al 2000, Bonne et al 2003, Boriani et al 2003]. Heart transplantation may be necessary in the end stages of heart failure; some individuals may not be candidates for heart transplantation because of associated severe skeletal muscle and respiratory involvement.

Use of respiratory aids (respiratory muscle training and assisted coughing techniques, mechanical ventilation) if indicated in late stages
In children with hypotonia and delayed motor development, a physiotherapeutic program is important.

Non-weight-bearing muscular exercise, such as swimming, is useful to promote muscular development and coordination.

Individuals with muscle hypotonia and joint instability with chronic pain may have to adjust lifestyle and professional choices accordingly. Emotional support and behavioral and psychological therapy may help in developing acceptance and coping skills.

Dermal wounds should be closed without tension, preferably in two layers. Deep stitches should be applied generously. Cutaneous stitches should be left in place twice as long as usual and additional fixation of adjacent skin with adhesive tape can help prevent stretching of the scar.

For recommendations on treatment of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type. (Note: Surgical stabilization of joints may lead to disappointing, or only temporary, improvement.)

Anti-inflammatory drugs may help with joint pain.

Long-term chronic pain may result in the need for mental health services.

Cardiovascular problems should be treated in a standard manner.
Physical Therapy

Myofascial release (any physical therapy modality that reduces spasm) provides short-term relief of pain, lasting hours to days. While the duration of benefit is short and it must be repeated frequently, this pain relief may be critical to facilitate participation in toning exercise for stabilization of the joints. Modalities must be tailored to the individual; a partial list includes heat, cold, massage, ultrasound, electrical stimulation, acupuncture, acupressure, biofeedback, and conscious relaxation.

Low-resistance muscle toning exercise can improve joint stability and reduce future subluxations, dislocations, and pain. See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Transvaginal pelvic physical therapy and myofascial release (in which massage or ultrasound is applied to the pelvic musculature via a transvaginal approach) may improve dyspareunia, abdominal pain, back pain, and sometimes radicular lower-extremity pain.

Assistive Devices

Braces are useful to improve joint stability. Orthopedists, rheumatologists, and physical therapists can assist in recommending appropriate devices for commonly problematic joints such as knees and ankles. Shoulders and hips present more of a challenge for external bracing. Occupational therapists may be consulted for ring splints (to stabilize interphalangeal joints) and wrist or wrist/thumb braces in affected individuals with small joint instability. A soft neck collar, if tolerated, may help with neck pain and headaches.

A wheelchair or scooter may be necessary to offload stress on lower-extremity joints. Special wheelchair customizations such as lightweight and/or motorized chairs, seat pads, and specialized wheels and wheel grasps may be necessary to accommodate pelvic and upper-extremity issues.

A waterbed, adjustable air mattress, or viscoelastic foam mattress (and/or pillow) may provide increased support with improved sleep quality and less pain.

Pain Medication

Pain medication is frequently underprescribed, and should be tailored to the individual's subjective symptoms and objective measures of pain, not to physical examination or radiologic findings. Individuals with mild to moderate pain may get sufficient relief from as-needed use. Those with more significant pain typically require higher doses and combinations of multiple medications. Prevention or control of pain with regularly scheduled dosing is often more successful than acute treatment with as-needed dosing. Many clinicians recruit a pain management specialist, but pain can be managed by the primary physician if desired.

Note: All of the following dose recommendations are for adults without hepatic or renal disease; adjustments may be necessary for other populations.

Acetaminophen, 4000 mg daily in three or four divided doses, will not completely alleviate pain but is a useful and well-tolerated adjunct in combination with other agents. Acetaminophen is often present in combination with other analgesic medications and cold/flu preparations, and careful attention should be paid to the total daily dose to avoid exceeding 4000 mg/day.

NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) (e.g., ibuprofen, naproxen, meloxicam, nabumetone) should be titrated to the maximum dose or as tolerated by upper gastrointestinal symptoms. NSAIDs are particularly useful for arthralgia, myalgia, and secondary inflammatory conditions (e.g. bursitis, tendinitis, costochodritis, or post-dislocation pain). Bruising is not a contraindication to NSAID therapy, but occasionally requires dose reduction or change to a Cox-2 inhibitor.

Cox-2 inhibitors (e.g., celecoxib) in maximal doses are no stronger than dose-equivalent NSAIDS, but may be better tolerated and thus more effective.

Topical lidocaine as a cream or patch is sometimes useful for localized areas of pain. Topical capsaicin is of questionable utility, but is safe.

Skeletal muscle relaxants are useful in combination with all of the above to treat myofascial spasm. They are also sometimes helpful in treating neuropathic pain. Metaxalone may be the least sedating, but all are potentially limited by sedation. There is theoretic risk that skeletal muscle relaxants can increase joint instability by reducing muscle tone. This is not a contraindication to their use, but does justify monitoring for potential complications.

Magnesium, either topically as Epsom salt baths or orally in any form, may also reduce muscle spasm and pain. No specific formulation or dosage has been established as superior to any other. The most common adverse effects – sedation, nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea – are more likely to occur with oral rather than topical supplementation.

Tricyclic antidepressants are often effective for neuropathic pain, with additional benefits of mild sedation (for those with sleep disturbance) and a little mood elevation. Constipation, a common side effect, can be managed with fluids, fiber, stool softeners, and laxatives. For those with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome, the constipating effect may be therapeutic. Typical doses are nortriptyline (25-150 mg) or trazadone (50-300 mg) every evening.

Serotonin/norepinephrine receptor inhibitors (SNRIs), such as venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, and milnacipran also offer combined benefit for depression and neuropathic pain. Venlaxafine may raise the blood pressure a few points, which potentially could be helpful for individuals with neurally mediated hypotension.

Some anti-seizure medications are also effective for neuropathic pain and can be used in addition to tricyclic and/or SNRI antidepressants. All require gradual titration before reaching therapeutic levels. Gabapentin should be titrated as tolerated up to at least 1200 mg/3x/day before declaring failure, but is often limited by sedation and/or gastrointestinal side effects. Pregabalin can be dosed twice or three times daily up to a total daily dose of at least 300 mg, and tends to be better tolerated than gabapentin. Topiramate and lamotrigine have also been used successfully.

Short courses of steroids can be very effective for controlling acute flares of pain associated with secondary inflammation. EDS is not an intrinsically inflammatory condition, and there is no role for chronic steroid use.

Glucosamine and chondroitin may help to prevent or treat osteoarthritis in the general population. They have not been studied specifically in EDS, but are not contraindicated.

Cannabinoids such as dronabinol and (where legal) marijuana may be helpful for several different types of pain. Their benefits should be weighed against the potential for dependency and/or psychoactive effects.

Tramadol can be added to acetaminophen plus an NSAID or Cox-2 inhibitor before resorting to opioids. Nausea is the most common side effect.

Opioids are effective for both myofascial pain and neuropathic pain, but should be reserved for use after failing the above medications. They should be administered in conjunction with all of the above, except tramadol, in order to minimize total opioid requirements. Since they are typically used chronically (or at least several months), the primary formulation should be long acting (e.g., sustained-release oxycodone or morphine or topical fentanyl patch) with short-acting forms of the same drug used as needed for breakthrough pain. Routine use of two or more daily doses of a short-acting form should prompt an increase in the long-acting dose or another adjustment to the pain regimen.

Benzodiazepines may offer some short-term reduction in muscle spasm, but are poor choices for long-term muscle relaxation and carry high risk of tolerance, dependency, and addiction. Routine use of benzodiazepines is not recommended.

Medication precautions

It is critically important to evaluate all potential sources of acetaminophen and assure that total daily use does not exceed 4000 mg.

Abrupt cessation of anti-seizure medications can precipitate a seizure. When discontinuing, they should be tapered gradually.

Chronic opioid use can result in tolerance and dependency with escalating dose requirements and diminishing effect. Narcotic bowel syndrome can also develop, and may be confused with irritable bowel syndrome.

Serotonin syndrome can occur when combining multiple serotonergic medications, such as tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants, SNRI antidepressants, anti-seizure medications, and opiods. Symptoms and signs may include agitation, restlessness, tremor, hyperreflexia, ataxia, confusion, irritability, nausea, diarrhea, hyperthermia, tachycardia, hyper/hypotension, and/or diaphoresis. Severity can range from mild to life threatening. Many of these manifestations overlap those associated with EDS, making diagnosis difficult. Some individuals find mild-to-moderate serotonergic symptoms acceptable in order to achieve adequate pain control.

Surgery and Other Procedures

Many individuals will have undergone several orthopedic procedures prior to diagnosis. These often include joint debridement, tendon relocations, capsulorraphy, and arthroplasty. The degree of stabilization and pain reduction, overall patient satisfaction, and duration of improvement are variable, but usually less than in individuals without EDS [Aldridge et al 2003, Rose et al 2004, Rombaut et al 2011b]. In general, orthopedic surgery should be delayed in favor of physical therapy and bracing. When surgery is performed, the affected individual and physician should cautiously anticipate some improvement but expect less than optimal results. There is one report of long-term improvement in shoulder stability with Achilles tendon allograft reconstruction of the joint capsule in an individual with EDS, hypermobility type [Chaudhury et al 2012]. It is not yet known if this approach will be successful in other affected individuals. Unlike the classic and vascular types of EDS, the hypermobility type is not associated with increased risk for perioperative skin and soft tissue complications.

Prolotherapy, in which saline and/or other irritants are injected in tendons or around joints to induce scar formation and increase stability, has not been objectively studied. It is probably safe and probably subject to the same limitations as orthopedic surgery.

Anesthetic/corticosteroid injections for localized areas of pain and acute inflammation are often helpful, but cannot be repeated indefinitely. "Dry needling" without injection of any material sometimes provides similar benefit.

Anesthetic nerve blocks can provide temporary relief of neuropathic pain. These are sometimes followed by surgical nerve root destruction and/or implantable stimulators (sensory or motor), with variable results.

Constant intrathecal delivery of anesthetic and/or opioid medication may reduce the need for oral/systemic medications, but should only be considered as a last resort.

Bone Density

Therapy is the same as for any other individual with low bone density, including supplementation of calcium and vitamin D. Simple weight-bearing exercise, such as walking or use of an elliptical trainer, should not be overlooked as a means to help maintain bone density as well as improve resting muscle tone.

Hematologic

Easy and spontaneous bruising does not require treatment, and does not require avoidance of NSAIDs.

For severe bleeding (e.g., epistaxis, menometrorrhagia) or operative prophylaxis, desmopressin acetate (ddAVP) is often beneficial [Stine & Becton 1997, Mast et al 2009].

Gastrointestinal

Gastritis and reflux symptoms may require intensive therapy, including proton pump inhibitor twice daily before meals, high-dose H2-blocker at bedtime (e.g., famotidine 20-40 mg or ranitidine 150-300 mg), sucralfate one gram four times daily, and over-the-counter acid-neutralizing agents. Other treatable causes, such as H. pylori infection, should be investigated. Upper endoscopy is indicated for resistant symptoms, but frequently is normal other than chronic gastritis.

Delayed gastric emptying should be identified if present and treated the same way as in patients without EDS. Assistance from a gastroenterologist experienced in managing GI dysmotility can be helpful.

Irritable bowel syndrome is treated as usual with dietary modification, fiber, antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, and laxatives as needed. Lubiprostone is a motility enhancer that may be helpful for those with constipation only. Tricyclic antidepressants may be helpful for persons with both neuropathic pain and diarrhea.

Cardiovascular

Beta-blockade is rarely necessary, but should be considered for progressive aortic enlargement. Rarely, severe enlargement (>4.5-5.0 cm) requires surgical evaluation. When such severe enlargement is noted, other hereditary disorders of connective tissue should be considered (see Differential Diagnosis).

Neurally mediated hypotension and postural orthostatic tachycardia are treated as usual, with avoidance of sudden postural change, consideration of lower-extremity and/or abdominal compression garments, exercise to increase muscle tone, supplementation of sodium and water to expand the blood volume, and sometimes pharmacologic treatment with beta-blockers, midodrine, fludrocortisone, and/or other medications [Mathias et al 2011]. Commercially available electrolyte tablets can be added to water to facilitate oral expansion of blood volume.

Dental

Orthodontic and palatal corrections may tend to relapse, requiring prolonged use of a retainer.

Periodontal disease should be identified and treated.

Temporomandibular joint laxity and dysfunction are difficult to treat. There are no specific interventions of proven benefit. Intra-oral devices are sometimes helpful. Oral rest (minimization of chewing and talking), local myofascial release, and muscle relaxant medications may be beneficial for acute flares. Surgical intervention is often disappointing and should be considered only as a last resort.

Psychiatric

Validation of the affected individual's symptoms can be immensely helpful, as many with EDS, hypermobility type have been accused of malingering or diagnosed with primary psychiatric disorders by previous physicians.

Establishing trust, rapport, and a supportive relationship between patient and provider is important. Emphasis should be placed on chronic, rather than acute, pain management. Distraction and hypnosis are often helpful [Branson et al 2011].

Depression is a common result of the chronic pain, disability, and other complications. Psychological and/or pain-oriented counseling can improve adaptation to and acceptance of these issues and the necessary physical limitations. Cognitive behavioral therapy can be particularly beneficial, but requires active patient participation [Baeza-Velasco et al 2011]. Antidepressants are also of great benefit. Many individuals initially resist a diagnosis of or therapy for depression because of concern that their problems are being written off as purely psychiatric.

Consumer support groups are available and can be very beneficial.
Surgical intervention may be life-saving in the face of bowel rupture, arterial rupture, or organ rupture (e.g., the uterus in pregnancy). When surgery is required for treatment, it is appropriate to target the approach and minimize surgical exploration because of the risk of inadvertent damage to other tissues [Oderich et al 2005]. In general, surgical procedures are more likely to be successful when the treating physician is aware of the diagnosis of vEDS and its associated tissue fragility [Shalhub et al 2014]. There are no guidelines to direct recommendations for elective repair in individuals with aneurysm(s) and vEDS. A decision about the timing and approach of an elective vascular procedure or the use of endovascular approaches is typically based on an individualized risk/benefit assessment. Reports of successful endovascular approaches are growing but no studies have compared outcomes between endovascular and open repair.

Prompt surgical intervention of bowel rupture is essential to limit the extent of infection and facilitate early restoration of bowel continuity. Death from bowel rupture is uncommon because intervention is generally effective. Bowel continuity can be restored successfully in most instances, usually three to six months after the initial surgery.

The recurrence of bowel tears proximal to the original site and the risk of complications resulting from repeat surgery have led some to recommend partial colectomy to reduce the risk of recurrent bowel rupture. Some physicians and affected individuals consider total colectomy as a prophylactic measure to avoid recurrent bowel complications and the need for repeat surgery [Fuchs & Fishman 2004].

Affected individuals should be instructed to seek immediate medical attention for sudden, unexplained pain.
Musculoskeletal

Referral to an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis is appropriate.

Orthopedic surgery is not contraindicated in individuals with EDS, kyphoscoliotic form and can be performed as necessary.

Bracing may be required to support unstable joints.

Physical therapy is recommended for older children, adolescents, and adults to strengthen large muscle groups, particularly at the shoulder girdle, and to prevent recurrent shoulder dislocation. Swimming is recommended.

Due to skin fragility, protective pads over knees, shins, and elbows may be helpful in preventing lacerations, particularly in children. The use of helmets in active sports is always advised.

Cardiovascular

Vigilant observation and control of blood pressure can reduce the risk of arterial rupture.

Vascular surgery is fraught with danger. Although virtually no surgical literature exists on EDS, kyphoscoliotic form, the review by Freeman et al [1996] on surgical complications of EDS, vascular type is relevant.

Individuals with aortic dilation may require treatment with beta blockers to prevent further expansion.

Ophthalmologic

Myopia and/or astigmatism may be corrected by glasses or contact lenses.

Laser treatment of the retina is indicated in case of imminent detachment.
Multi-specialty care that includes child neurology, pediatrics, clinical genetics, nutrition, gastroenterology, orthopedic, pain management, and physical therapy can help with timely detection and treatment of the multi-organ dysfunction that characterizes ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Treatment is primarily supportive including anti-spastic medications, muscle relaxants, and antiepileptic drugs. Physical therapy early in the disease course can help prevent contractures.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Spasticity

Antispastic medications

Dystonia

Muscle relaxants

Contractures

Physical therapy

Seizures

Antiepileptic drugs

Severe diarrhea

Maintain hydration & caloric intake

Tube feeding often necessary

Poor energy metabolism & oxidative stress

L-carnitine, riboflavin and/or coenzyme Q10 supplements (a cocktail of drugs generally used in mitochondrial disorders) as well as other vitamin therapies 1

1. 

Gorman et al [2016]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Gorman et al [2016]

Off-label compassionate use of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in combination with metronidazole may be considered as they are the only drugs known to slow disease progression and improve the metabolic abnormalities of EE [Viscomi et al 2010, Kılıç et al 2017].

N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a cell-permeable precursor of glutathione, is abundant in mitochondria where it can act as one of the physiologic acceptors of the sulfur atom of hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which has deficient clearance in persons with EE.

Metronidazole is widely used to combat infections caused by anaerobic bacteria, and can reduce the sulfide-producing bacterial load in the large intestine.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay / intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies, and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, writing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.
Hernia. Routine repair is appropriate.

Pulmonary emphysema is treated symptomatically. Tracheostomy may be necessary when retrognathia leads to upper airway obstruction.

Arterial abnormalities. No definitive treatment is available. Based on experience in other related disorders (e.g., Marfan syndrome), treatment with beta-blockers or angiotensin receptor blockers can be considered when aortic root dilatation is present. However, the efficacy of these interventions in EFEMP2- related disorders has not been proven. Surgical repair of large aortic aneurysms (at risk for dissection) should be considered. Aortic aneurysm replacement has been performed successfully

Joint hypermobility can be supported by muscle reinforcing physical therapy.
Depending on the age and extent of systemic involvement of the individual with Emanuel syndrome, evaluations involving healthcare providers from multiple specialties are necessary.

In some individuals, palliative care is appropriate when there are severe structural defects and/or renal failure.

Standard management of gastroesophageal reflux; supplementary formulas and consideration of enteral feeds if there is failure to thrive

Surgical correction for anal atresia (or stenosis if indicated) and inguinal hernias

Standard interventions for:

Cardiac defects

Cleft palate

Hip dysplasia and other skeletal complications. Assistive devices such as walkers are often required for ambulation.

Hearing loss

Cryptorchidism and/or micropenis

Refractive errors, strabismus, or other ophthalmologic issues

Seizures, if present

Ongoing physical, occupational, and speech therapies to optimize developmental outcome

Alternative communication methods to facilitate communication as verbal skills are often very limited
Detailed management guidelines for hereditary spherocytosis (HS) have been published [Eber & Lux 2004, Bolton-Maggs et al 2012].

Conservative management recommendations for mild EPB42-HS (Hgb 11-15 g/dL, reticulocytes 3-8%) (Table 1) include the following:

Folic acid supplementation (400 µg 1x daily until age 1 year; then 1 mg 1x daily thereafter)

Avoidance of iron supplementation unless concurrent iron deficiency is confirmed with iron studies, in which case treatment with supplemental iron should be carefully monitored and discontinued after iron stores are repleted to avoid iron overload

Note: Hereditary spherocytosis (as all chronic hemolytic anemias) involves an increased risk for iron overload even with oral iron supplementation (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, if needed, for hemolytic or aplastic crisis

Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. However, when disease is moderate (see Table 1) and normal activity or quality of life is compromised, splenectomy can be performed after age five years provided that hereditary stomatocytosis has been ruled out (see Differential Diagnosis). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).

Although splenectomy is curative, it entails potential long-term increased risk for life-threatening infection and, thus, should not be undertaken before the risks and benefits have been fully weighed [Casale & Perrotta 2011].

Ideally, the following immunizations should be completed before splenectomy:

Immunizations for Streptococcus pneumoniae with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and for N. meningitidis with a meningococcal conjugate vaccine against the serogroups A, C, W, and Y (MenACWY) at least two weeks before splenectomy. A two-dose primary series of MenACWY is recommended 8-12 weeks apart [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2011].

Prevnar-13® and H. influenzae type b vaccines during infancy per general pediatric immunization guidelines

The incidence of post-splenectomy sepsis varies among studies. Although low overall, the risk for sepsis, a life-threatening complication, is higher than in the general population [Iolascon et al 1998]. To reduce the risk of infection post splenectomy, the following are recommended:

Give booster vaccination for PPSV23 five years after the first dose. No more than two PPSV23 doses are recommended [Pekka Nuorti & Whitney 2010].

Give booster dose for meningococcal vaccine three years after the primary series if the primary two-dose series was given between ages two and six years and every five years for persons whose two-dose primary series or booster dose was given at age seven years or older [Cohn et al 2013].

Serogroup B meningococcal vaccines are recommended for people age ten years and older with history of splenectomy.

Controversy exists regarding the duration of use of antibiotics for prophylaxis post-splenectomy: some hematologists recommend prophylactic antibiotics for the first three years post splenectomy and others for life [Eber & Lux 2004]. The antibiotics recommended are penicillin V-K 250 mg twice daily or erythromycin for those allergic to penicillin.

In any case, an individual who has undergone splenectomy needs immediate medical attention for fever and prompt use of IV antibiotics with good coverage for encapsulated organisms (typically ceftriaxone in doses adequate to treat meningitis: 100 mg/kg/day up to 2 g/day in single daily dose).

Partial splenectomy appears to be associated with a lesser risk for post-splenectomy sepsis and a sustained decrease (although not elimination) of hemolysis and may be preferable for young children if the surgeon is experienced in the procedure [Bader-Meunier et al 2001]. An ongoing prospective observation of more than 100 children in a congenital hemolytic anemia multi-institutional registry, who have undergone total or partial splenectomy, may elucidate better the risks and benefits of each procedure [Rice et al 2012, Rice et al 2015].

Antibiotic prophylaxis may be discontinued one year after partial splenectomy if immune splenic function is adequate as assessed by pit count (percentage of pitted or pocked red cells) or the uptake of radioactive colloid by the spleen [Eber & Lux 2004].

Cholecystectomy

The gallbladder should be removed in affected individuals undergoing splenectomy who have a history of cholelithiasis.

In children who require cholecystectomy, concurrent splenectomy is not recommended automatically any more. The need for splenectomy should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and the indication of splenectomy justified independently [Bolton-Maggs et al 2012, Ruparel et al 2014].
Symptomatic pharmacologic and rehabilitative management are the mainstay of patient care [Kälviäinen et al 2008]:

Valproic acid is the first drug of choice. It diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures.

Clonazepam, the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of myoclonic seizures, is used as add-on therapy [Shahwan et al 2005].

High-dose piracetam has been formally studied and has been found useful in the treatment of myoclonus [Koskiniemi et al 1998].

Levetiracetam has been evaluated in several series and seems to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures.

Topiramate and zonisamide may also be used as add-on therapies.
Acute photosensitivity. Afamelanotide (Scenesse®), a synthetic α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog was approved for treatment of EPP by the European Medicines Agency in 2014. The drug is administered through a subcutaneously inserted bioresorbable implant which results in increased pigmentation due to an increase in eumelanin. Phase III clinical trials in the US and Europe showed an increase in pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in individuals with EPP. In the United States, the drug is pending FDA approval.

The phototoxic pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Current management centers on prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Tanning products. Some tanning creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all. Topical sunscreens are typically not useful.

β-carotene. Oral Lumitene™ (120-180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight in some patients if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600-800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The dose of Lumitene depends on age, ranging from two to ten 30-mg capsules per day and usually started six to eight weeks before summer. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. However, there are currently no data to support its efficacy [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Some affected individuals develop severe liver complications that are difficult to treat, often requiring liver transplantation [Anderson et al 2001]. Hepatic complications may be accompanied by motor neuropathy.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988].

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002].

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, transplant recipients may experience a recurrence of protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006].

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].
Acute photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment specific for this disease; furthermore, there is no specific treatment for the acute photosensitivity.

The pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics.

Although several treatments have been proposed, most have been tried only in a single patient or a small number of patients. The only effective current treatment is prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light.

Use of protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats is indicated.

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows prevents exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection.

Topical sunscreens are typically not useful; however, some tanning products containing creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent (e.g., zinc oxide) are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all.

Oral Lumitene™ (β-carotene) (120–180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600–800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. While oral beta-carotene has been used typically six to eight weeks before summer to reduce photosensitivity, its effectiveness may be limited [Minder et al 2009].

A systematic review of about 25 studies showed that the available data are unable to prove efficacy of treatments including beta-carotene, N-acetyl cysteine, and vitamin C [Minder et al 2009].

Hepatic disease. Treatment of hepatic complications, which may be accompanied by motor neuropathy, is difficult.

Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988]

Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002]

Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, many transplant recipients experience a recurrence of the protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006]

Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy in EPP [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].

Whatley et al [2008] reported some evidence of diminished iron stores in males with XLP; in one patient with iron deficiency, iron repletion decreased protoporphyrin accumulation and corrected the anemia.
The pain of SCN9A-related IEM or secondary erythromelalgia is often refractory to treatment.

Reports on treatments in a series involve heterogeneous populations. In a report of 169 individuals with erythromelalgia of mixed etiologies, 84 medications or treatments were used [Davis et al 2000]. Response is highly variable, and no treatment is consistently effective. No controlled treatment trial has compared the effectiveness of various classes of medications.

Cooling the extremities reduces pain in a symptomatic person.

Medications. The effectiveness of medications and the order in which they should be tried is highly controversial, according to a consensus of expert opinion. Treatment should be determined by the individual’s treating physician, based on factors including other medical conditions, known medication allergies, and potential for drug-drug interactions.

Aspirin should be tried because of the known, dramatic response of thrombocythemia-associated EM to low-dose aspirin. A positive response warrants evaluation for and monitoring for myeloproliferative disease because the symptoms of thrombocythemia-associated EM may precede a diagnosis by several years. If pain is not relieved, aspirin should be discontinued.

Misoprostol, an oral prostaglandin E1 analog, was tested in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, one-way crossover clinical trial in 21 adults with erythromelalgia and 11 healthy controls. Improvements in pain and cooling scores were significant (p<0.01) [Mork et al 2004].

Seratonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) /selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Venlafaxine, an SNRI, has induced remissions in approximately a dozen individuals even after other classes of medications have been unsuccessful [DiCaudo & Kelley 2004]. SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline) have been reported to be helpful in some additional affected individuals.

Gabapentin has been one of the more effective medical treatments in both primary and secondary EM. Of 16 individuals taking gabapentin in a survey of Erythromelalgia Association members, all 16 reported benefit, although the degree was not quantified. Experts have reported typically mild to moderate pain relief. Remissions (i.e., remaining pain-free for 4-6 months) on gabapentin have been reported in an adult and a child [Cohen 2000].

Sodium channel blockers including lidocaine infusion, lidocaine patch, or oral mexilitine have been used successfully in inherited erythromelalgia and secondary erythromelalgia [Kuhnert et al 1999, Davis & Sandroni 2005, Nathan et al 2005, Choi et al 2009]. Because of the absence of systemic side effects, partial relief in 55% of the individuals studied, and greater than 80% pain relief in 12% of individuals, Davis & Sandroni [2005] have suggested a lidocaine patch as first-line treatment. It is not known whether sodium channel blockers are more effective in individuals with SCN9A-related IEM than in individuals with other forms of EM.

Carbamazepine. In a survey of 41 members of the Erythromelalgia Association, one of four persons using carbamazepine reported improvement [Cohen 2000]. A family with a known SCN9A pathogenic variant (p.Val400Met) reported significant improvement of symptoms while using carbamazepine [Fischer et al 2009].The combination of carbamazepine and gabapentin has been reported to produce relief in one individual with SCN9A-related IEM [Natkunarajah et al 2009].

Oxcarbazepine use in treating EM has not been reported.

Tricyclic antidepressants used alone or in combination with other classes of medications have reduced pain. Their use has diminished with the introduction of newer agents with a more favorable side-effect profile, but they should be considered in refractory individuals. Topical application of 1.0% amitriptyline hydrochloride and 0.5% ketamine hydrochloride in pluronic lecithin organogel has been reported effective in four of five patients with refractory EM [Sandroni & Davis 2006].

Calcium antagonists. Diltiazem is very effective in some individuals, inducing at least one remission. Paradoxically, diltiazem and other calcium channel antagonists have been reported to trigger secondary EM.

Magnesium. In 13 persons, high doses of oral magnesium induced remission in one person, improved symptoms in seven, did not change them in four, and exacerbated symptoms in one. Diarrhea was a limiting side effect [Cohen 2002]. Remission (freedom from pain) was also reported in an Italian child [Dell'era et al 2004].

Sodium nitroprusside infusion has been successful in the acute hospital setting in individuals with severe attacks [Chan et al 2002].

Cyclosporine was successful in one person with erythromelalgia. The postulated mechanism was inhibition of nitric oxide synthase in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells [Sano et al 2003]. Conversely, cyclosporine caused EM in another individual treated for psoriasis vulgaris [Thami & Bhalla 2003].

Sympathetic block, surgical sympathectomy, and epidural infusion

Sympathetic block has had mixed results in individuals with severe symptoms. Some have improved, some have not improved, and others have worsened [Cohen 2000]. Sympathetic block should be tried – and the response to repeated blocks considered – prior to surgical sympathectomy.

In at least two individuals, sympathectomy reduced redness but not pain.

Epidural infusions of opiates have been used in combination with bupivicaine and other oral and topical medications with good results in a few individuals.

Other

Reports of a single or a few individuals have noted remission or significant improvement with cyproheptadine, propranolol, or thalamic stimulation [Delye et al 2005].

Additional combinations of medical, surgical, and alternative treatments tried with varying success in individuals with either primary EM or secondary EM are summarized by Davis et al [2000] (see Table 2) and Cohen [2000] (see Table 3).
No specific therapy is available. Treatment is symptomatic. The main problems to manage are:

Contractures, including scoliosis, due to neurogenic atrophy, by passive or active movement and if necessary by bracing.

Prevention of aspiration due to bulbar muscle and respiratory muscle involvement

Adaptation of education to the level of cognitive handicap

Epilepsy, which is amendable to standard treatments
Osteochondromas require no therapy in the absence of clinical problems.

Angular deformities, leg-length inequalities, and pain resulting from irritation of skin, tendons, or nerves often require surgery. Most individuals with HMO have at least one operative procedure and many have multiple procedures [Porter et al 2004]:

Painful lesions without bony deformity can be treated with simple surgical excision. Excision of osteochondromas may also slow the growth disturbance and improve cosmesis and must include the cartilage cap and overlying perichondrium to avoid recurrence.

Surgery for forearm deformity may involve excision of the osteochondromas, corrective osteotomies, and/or ulnar lengthening procedures that may improve pronation, supination, and forearm alignment [Matsubara et al 2006, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007, Watts et al 2007]; however, adults with HMO and untreated forearm deformities describe few functional limitations.

Though uncomplicated resection of osteochondromas in growing children is frequently reported [Fogel et al 1984, Danielsson et al 1990, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007], there is a theoretic risk of growth abnormality resulting from resection of periphyseal osteochondromas.

Abnormal growth and development of the forearm and leg in untreated individuals with HMO is common, including both proportionate and disproportionate shortening of the two bones of the forearm or leg, producing shortened and angulated limbs, respectively.

Waiting to resect osteochondromas until they have migrated away from the physis would decrease the risk of injury to the physis, as well as potentially limiting the likelihood of recurrence of lesions [Chin et al 2000, Shin et al 2006]. However, numerous studies suggest that early treatment (in individuals age <10 years) of forearm deformities via resection of distal osteochondromas may decrease proportionate shortening and bowing of the forearm [Masada et al 1989, Ishikawa et al 2007] as well as deformity about the ankle [Chin et al 2000].

Leg-length inequalities greater than 2.5 cm are often treated with epiphysiodesis (growth plate arrest) of the longer leg.

Angular misalignment of the lower limbs may be treated with hemiepiphysiodeses (or osteotomies) at the distal femur, proximal tibia, or distal tibia [Ofiram et al 2008, Boero et al 2011, Rupprecht et al 2011, Tompkins et al 2012, Driscoll et al 2013].

Early surgical treatment of tibio talar tilt may prevent or decrease the incidence of late deterioration of ankle function; long-term follow-up studies are needed [Noonan et al 2002].

Surgical resection is the treatment for sarcomatous degeneration. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy are controversial for secondary chondrosarcoma, but are often used in the setting of a secondary osteosarcoma.
Recommendations for treatment were agreed upon at a 2014 consensus conference (full text).

Androgens improve (at least transiently) the red cell and platelet counts in approximately 50% of individuals. Androgen therapy can be considered when the hemoglobin drops below 8 g/dL or the platelet count falls below 30,000/mm3 ('severe' – see Table 2). Although only 10%-20% of individuals receiving continuous low-dose androgen therapy are long-term responders, this option can be particularly useful for individuals who do not have access to or are not ready for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), or to individuals for whom of a suitable donor is not available.

Oxymetholone, given orally at a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day, may be increased up to 5 mg/kg/day.

Doses may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose with careful monitoring of the blood counts.

Other synthetic androgens used in FA include stanazolol in Asia, and oxandrolone and danazol in North America.

Side effects of androgen administration include virilization and liver toxicity such as elevated liver enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis (vascular lesion with multiple blood-filled cysts), and hepatic tumors. Individuals taking androgens should be monitored for liver tumors and undergo regular liver function tests (LFT) for abnormalities. Blood tests for LFTs should be performed every three to six months; liver ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 months. If no response is seen after three to four months, androgens should be discontinued [Scheckenbach et al 2012, Rose et al 2014].

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves the neutrophil count in some individuals. G-CSF dose should be titrated to the lowest possible dose and frequency to keep ANC above 1,000/mm3. Note: (1) A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed prior to the initiation of G-CSF and monitored every six months throughout treatment, given the theoretic risk of stimulating the growth of a leukemic clone. (2) G-CSF should be administered in consultation with an FA expert.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations, including aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and acute leukemia. Ideally, HSCT is performed prior to onset of MDS/AML and before multiple transfusions [MacMillan & Wagner 2010, Mehta et al 2010]. Individuals with FA are sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation, need special transplant regimens, and should be cared for and transplanted at centers with the most experience in HSCT in FA.

A multi-institutional study reported a one-year probability of overall survival of 80% in 45 individuals with FA transplanted for marrow failure and/or MDS, using alternative donors (including mismatched related and unrelated donors) and chemotherapy-only preparative regimen. Survival for individuals younger than age ten years transplanted for marrow failure was even better, at 91.3% (±5.9%) [Mehta et al 2017].

Fludarabine reduced the incidence of graft failure and allowed for removal of radiation from the preparative regimens in a matched sib donor setting [MacMillan et al 2015].

MDS/AML treatment remains challenging. Options include chemotherapy, HSCT with or without prior induction chemotherapy, and investigational trials. Chemotherapy should be undertaken in coordination with centers experienced with FA, as it can cause severe, prolonged, or irreversible myelosuppression. Plans for HSCT should be in place prior to starting chemotherapy. Published reports of chemotherapy regimens for AML in individuals with FA are sparse and limited by the unclear benefit to the overall outcome due to the lack of longitudinal follow up [Mehta et al 2007, Talbot et al 2014, Beier et al 2015].

Solid tumors. Prompt, aggressive workup for any symptoms suggestive of a malignancy is indicated. Early detection and surgical removal remains the mainstay of therapy. Treatment is challenging secondary to the increased toxicity associated with chemotherapy and radiation in FA. Data is limited on use of chemotherapy at standard doses or reduced doses and schedules in individuals with FA, and there are reports of severe or fatal toxicities and poor treatment outcomes [Masserot et al 2008, Hosoya et al 2010, Tan et al 2011, Spanier et al 2012]. Individuals diagnosed with a genital tract cancer should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist immediately, and care should be coordinated with FA experts.
Acroparesthesia

Diphenylhydantoin. The severe pain of such episodes in affected males and heterozygous females often responds to low-maintenance doses of diphenylhydantoin by reducing the frequency and severity of the periodic crises of excruciating pain and constant discomfort. A potential side effect of diphenylhydantoin is gingival hypertrophy.

Carbamazepine has similar effects. The combination of the two drugs may also significantly reduce the frequency and severity of the pain. Dose-related autonomic complications with carbamazepine include urinary retention, nausea, vomiting, and ileus.

Gabapentin has been demonstrated to improve pain [Ries et al 2003].

Renal disease. Renal insufficiency is the most frequent and serious late complication in males with the classic phenotype. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be used in those with evidence of renal involvement, especially to reduce proteinuria [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014, Warnock et al 2015].

Chronic hemodialysis and/or renal transplantation have become lifesaving procedures. The engrafted kidney remains histologically free of glycosphingolipid deposition because the normal alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme activity in the allograft catabolizes endogenous renal glycosphingolipid substrates. Therefore, successful renal transplantation corrects renal function.

Reviews of the registries of the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplantation Association and the United States Renal Data System support excellent outcomes for renal transplantation in individuals with Fabry disease. For example, during the ten-year period from 1988 to 1998, 93 individuals who underwent renal transplantation were reported to the US registry. Compared to a matched control group, recipients with Fabry disease had equivalent five-year life survival (82% vs 83%) and graft survival (67% vs 75%), respectively.

Note: (1) Immune function in males with Fabry disease is similar to that in other individuals with uremia, obviating any immunologic contraindication to transplantation in this disease. Autoimmune conditions have, however, been reported to occur at an increased frequency in individuals with Fabry disease [Martinez et al 2007]. (2) Transplantation of kidneys from female heterozygotes should be avoided, as the organs may already contain significant substrate deposition; all related potential donors must be evaluated to exclude affected males and heterozygous females.
Thrombosis

The management of individuals with factor V Leiden thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin or intravenous unfractionated heparin [Kearon et al 2008a]. Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with low molecular-weight heparin (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international normalized ratio (INR). A target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.5 (therapeutic range 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in individuals with homozygous factor V Leiden [Baglin et al 1998, Kearon et al 2008a]. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin therapy should be overlapped for at least five days, and until the INR has been within the therapeutic range on two consecutive measurements over two days. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin are both safe in breast-feeding women.

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be tailored to the individual, based on an assessment of the risks for VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with an incident VTE develop recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent ten years [Prandoni et al 1996]. Since individuals remain at risk for recurrence even after ten years, VTE is now considered a chronic disease. The optimal duration of anticoagulation for individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele is debated. Individuals with a spontaneous thrombosis and no identifiable provoking factors or persistent risk factors require a longer course of anticoagulation. In contrast, individuals with transient (reversible) risk factors such as surgery require a shorter course of therapy [Kearon et al 2008b].

The risk for VTE recurrence is higher in persons with proximal than with distal DVT (relative risk=0.5) and in those with one or more prior episodes of VTE. Other risk factors for recurrent VTE include male sex and a negative D-dimer level one month after discontinuation of warfarin [McRae et al 2006, Palareti et al 2006]. Multiple other studies confirmed residual proximal thrombosis after a course of anticoagulation as a strong risk factor for recurrence [Siragusa et al 2008, Prandoni et al 2009].

The presence of hereditary thrombophilia was not a major factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2008 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy based on evidence that these disorders are not major determinants of recurrence risk. Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2008b].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring.

Long-term anticoagulation should also be considered in individuals homozygous for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant or with multiple thrombophilic disorders [Kearon et al 2008b]. In these individuals at high risk for recurrence, the potential benefits from long-term warfarin may outweigh the bleeding risks.

Individuals receiving long-term therapy should be reevaluated at periodic intervals to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation outweigh the bleeding risks.

Unfractionated and low molecular-weight heparin, fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide), and warfarin are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolism. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin and argatroban) are approved for use in certain circumstances. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. It is unknown whether the presence of a factor V Leiden allele should influence the duration of anticoagulation in children. There are no randomized trials of antithrombotic therapy of VTE in children and treatment guidelines are adapted from those in adults. The American College of Chest Physicians 2008 guidelines recommend at least three months of anticoagulation after a provoked VTE. A minimum of six months is recommended for children with a first idiopathic VTE. Indefinite anticoagulation is favored for children with recurrent idiopathic VTE [Monagle et al 2008].
Practice parameters, including information on surgery, have been outlined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) [Provenzale et al 2016] (full text), the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] (full text), the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons [Church et al 2003b], the American Society of Clinical Oncology [Stoffel et al 2015] (full text), and the Society of Surgical Oncology [Guillem et al 2006] (full text).

Colonic polyps. For individuals with FAP, colectomy is recommended after adenomas emerge. Colectomy may be delayed depending on adenoma size, presence of advanced histology (villous architecture, high-grade dysplasia), and number of adenomatous polyps. Absolute indications for colectomy include documented or suspected colorectal cancer or significant symptoms (obstruction, bleeding – although these are uncommon in the absence of cancer). Relative indications for colectomy include presence of multiple adenomas larger than 6 mm that cannot be reasonably managed by endoscopy, a significant increase in adenoma number between surveillance examinations, presence of adenomas with high-grade dysplasia or inability to adequately survey the colon (e.g., due to innumerous diminutive adenomas or limited access/compliance with colonoscopy).

For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient (see Surveillance).

Types of colectomy include the following:

Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA) which can be performed laparoscopically, laparoscopically-assisted, or open. The IPAA can be stapled, leaving 1-2 cm of anal transition epithelium and low rectal mucosa; or it can be hand-sewn after a complete anal mucosectomy.

Total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA). This is a single-stage procedure.

Total proctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy

The choice of procedure depends on the clinical circumstances.

An IPAA is generally performed in FAP where the rectal polyp burden is high or as a second procedure after IRA when rectal disease burden cannot be managed endoscopically. The advantage of this procedure is nearly eliminating the risk of rectal cancer and relatively good preservation of bowel function. There may be an increased risk of bladder/sexual dysfunction and functional results can be variable.

A study of individuals with FAP and ileal pouches found that 57% had adenomatous polyps in the ileal pouch. No apparent relationship between the development of pouch adenomas and the severity of polyps in the colon or duodenum was found [Groves et al 2005]. Cancer in the surgical transition zone has been reported [Ooi et al 2003] but is rare.

An IRA is generally considered when the rectal polyp burden is low and deemed to be endoscopically manageable (usually in the setting of attenuated FAP). It is a technically straightforward procedure with low complication rates. It is usually associated with good functional outcome and minimizes risk of sexual or urinary dysfunction. This procedure should not be performed if there is severe rectal disease or the individual cannot reliably undergo endoscopic surveillance of the remaining rectum post-operatively.

A total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy is almost never required unless a proctocolectomy is necessary (due to rectal polyp/cancer burden) and a contraindication to IPAA is present (e.g., a mesenteric desmoid preventing a pouch from reaching pelvic floor, low rectal cancer invading pelvic floor, or individual preference due to poor sphincter control).

Small-bowel polyps. Endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas is recommended if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms [Wallace & Phillips 1998, Saurin et al 1999, Kadmon et al 2001].

Surgical options include a pancreas-sparing duodenectomy which is a good option when the papilla is not involved and there is no suspicion for cancer. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) is a surgical option associated with significantly higher morbidity; however, it must be considered if the duodenal papilla is involved or there is confirmed or strongly suspected cancer.

Osteomas may be removed for cosmetic reasons.

Desmoid tumors. Available treatments include surgical excision (associated with high rates of recurrence), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-estrogens, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and radiation [Griffioen et al 1998, Clark et al 1999, Smith et al 2000a, Tonelli et al 2003, Gega et al 2006]. A review of desmoid treatments can be found in Guillem et al [2006].

Adrenal tumors.

Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP.

Chemoprevention. There are currently no FDA-approved chemopreventive agents for FAP.

NSAIDs. Non-placebo controlled trials and observational studies on sulindac were initially promising, showing remarkable reduction in polyp size and number.. However, these preliminary studies were limited in their design (non-placebo controlled, limited number of affected individuals, some individuals with only surveyable rectum). Several controlled trials subsequently confirmed a decrease in polyp burden during sulindac therapy [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a, Nugent et al 1993]. Rapid reappearance or increase in polyp number was observed, however, after sulindac was stopped [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a]. A subsequent study designed to evaluate primary prevention of polyps in indivduals with APC pathogenic variants showed a non-statistically significant trend towards benefit compared to placebo [Giardiello et al 2002].

The FDA initially approved celecoxib for FAP based on evidence showing decrease in polyp burden and size in the colon (as well as modest decrease in the duodenum) [Steinbach et al 2000, Phillips et al 2002]. However, due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular safety concerns, rofecoxib was taken off the market altogether and FDA approval for celecoxib for FAP was withdrawn.

Aspirin has been shown to be of little or no benefit in FAP [Burn et al 2011, Ishikawa et al 2013].

Interest in combination of NSAIDs with other drugs was raised when reports of sulindac plus difluoromethylornithine (celecoxib) showed marked reduction in sporadic metachronous adenomas [Meyskens et al 2008]. In a randomized placebo-controlled study of 92 participants with FAP, sulindac plus erlotinib (an EGF receptor inhibitor) resulted in decreased duodenal polyp burden compared to placebo after six months of use [Samadder et al 2016]. Adverse events were common in the treatment group (87% experienced an acne-like rash), though serious adverse events were rare (2 total participants) [Samadder et al 2016]. When celecoxib was compared to celecoxib plus difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in FAP, there was no significant difference in polyp burden within a defined endoscopic field (however, when more comprehensive video assessment was used, there was a decrease in polyp burden in the combination therapy group) [Lynch et al 2016].

A number of chemoprevention trials are currently under way (see Therapies Under Investigation). The FDA has stated that changes in adenoma number and size are insufficient for regulatory approval, with evidence of clinical benefit required. Suitable examples of clinical benefit cited include decreasing the risk of colorectal cancer or reducing the need for surgery. Trials currently under way are designed to address these end points.

Note: NSAID use before colectomy remains experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).
Appropriate treatment for:

Inguinal hernias. Routine repair

Cutis laxa. Repeat plastic surgery of the face and trunk as needed

Pulmonary emphysema. Symptomatic treatment

Arterial abnormalities. No treatment available
Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including Neurology, Nutrition, Clinical Genetics/ Metabolism, and Developmental Pediatrics. Other specialties including Gastroenterology, Cardiology, Hematology, Immunology, Ophthalmology, and Nephrology may be involved based on the associated complications.

No definite treatment is available to date; thus, treatment is mainly supportive (Table 5). Administration of cofactors and antioxidants, used in mitochondrial disorders with (generally) limited evidence of benefit, may be considered.

Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Inadequate nutrition

A nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube are frequently needed due to feeding difficulties & failure to thrive

In one affected child, improved nutrition resulted in improvement in hypogammaglobulinemia & neutropenia 1

Seizures

Standard treatment w/antiepileptic drugs

Immobility/wheelchair dependence

Consultation w/physical medicine & rehabilitation (PM&R) specialists to help w/mobility or assistive devices (e.g., wheelchair

Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia

Standard treatment per Cardiology recommendations

Neutropenia

Consider granulocyte colony stimulating factor 2

Significant acidosis

Consider bicarbonate therapy

Cataract and/or strabismus

Surgical treatment if indicated

Hearing loss

Hearing aids

1. 

Antoun et al [2016]

2. 

Huemer et al [2015]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome

Antoun et al [2016]

Huemer et al [2015]

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.
There is no definite treatment for FCMD. Multidisciplinary and appropriate management can prolong survival and improve the quality of life for individuals with FCMD.

Treatment includes the following:

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Monitoring for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis. When scoliosis is present, spinal fusion can preserve breathing function and improve sitting balance [Takaso et al 2010]

Use of mechanical assistance such as long leg braces to maintain standing posture and wheelchairs to help mobility

Use of respiratory aids such as nasal intermittent positive pressure ventilator when indicated

Note: Noninvasive ventilation is offered, particularly at night, before respiratory distress becomes acute.

Prompt treatment of acute respiratory tract infections; particularly important, as these infections are the most common cause of hospital admissions and death in people with FCMD

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) when indicated

Surgical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux when indicated

Gastrostomy when indicated to assure adequate caloric intake

Routine therapy of cardiomyopathy
Feeding problems. Maintain adequate nutrition and avoid aspiration. For infants, thickened formula and different-shaped nipples are useful in managing orophyaryngeal incoordination. Aversion to feeding and failure to thrive are managed frequently by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement.

Gastroesophageal reflux. Upright positioning with feeds, prokinetic agents, H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and gastrostomy with or without fundoplication are appropriate.

Vomiting crises are treated with intravenous or rectal diazepam (0.2 mg/kg q3h) and rectal chloral hydrate (30 mg/kg q6h), and IV administration of fluids to prevent dehydration.

Other treatments used include [Palma et al 2014]:

Alpha2 adrenergic agonist clonidine (transdermal clonidine patch): 0.1-0.3 mg/24h provides stable blood levels and is preferable to oral dosages. Clonidine, which augments baroreflex sensitivity and parasympathetic modulation in familial dysautonomia, stabilizes the cardiovascular system and may attenuate feeding-induced crises [Marthol et al 2003]. Although no controlled trials have been conducted, clonidine is frequently used in autonomic crisis. Slow tapering is recommended when discontinuing clonidine treatment [Palma et al 2014].

In some patients admitted to an ICU, dexmedetomidine (a selective agonist of alpha2 adrenoreceptors in the brain and spinal cord that inhibit sympathetic outflow) was effective.

Carbidopa (a reversible dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor) 200 mg three times daily was assessed in a recent double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that provided level II-b evidence that treatment with carbidopa can reduce the frequency and severity of hypertensive vomiting [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Lung disease. Chronic lung disease is treated with daily chest physiotherapy (nebulization, bronchodilators, cough augmentation, incentive spirometry, and postural drainage). Giarraffa et al [2005] determined that the use of high-frequency chest-wall oscillation improved all measured health outcomes significantly, including pneumonias, hospitalizations, antibiotic courses, antibiotic days, doctor visits, absenteeism, and oxygen saturation.

Early diagnosis of pneumonia and infectious agents is important due to the common involvement of gastric flora (secondary to aspirations).

Individuals with FD are prone to viral respiratory infections and, in some cases, concomitant bacterial infections. Treatment with oseltamivir is indicated for influenza virus infections [Palma et al 2014].

Orthostatic hypotension. Therapeutic measures include hydration, elastic stockings, and leg exercises to increase muscle tone and reduce pooling of blood in the veins of the legs.

Counter-maneuvers (e.g., squatting, bending forward, and abdominal compression) improve orthostatic blood pressure in persons with FD mainly by increasing cardiac output [Tutaj et al 2006]. Squatting had the greatest effect. However, the suitability and effectiveness of a specific counter-maneuver depend on the orthopedic and/or neurologic complications identified in each individual.

To determine whether fludrocortisone is effective in treating postural hypotension and whether it has an effect on survival and secondary long-term FD problems, Axelrod et al [2005] compared persons treated with fludrocortisone with untreated persons and found that cumulative survival was significantly higher during the first decade in treated versus untreated individuals. In subsequent decades, the addition of midodrine improved cumulative survival. Of note, treatment of orthostatic hypotension with high doses of fludrocortisone (>0.2 mg/day) was shown to accelerate the progression of renal damage in persons with FD [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013].

Hypertension. Attention to factors precipitating hypertension rather than use of antihypertensive agents is appropriate because blood pressure is labile.

Sleeping with the head of the bed raised (20°-40°) helps to reduce orthostatic hypotension by lowering supine hypertension, reducing nocturnal pressure-diuresis, and raising intravascular volume in the morning.

The guidelines for hypertension treatment in patients with FD and chronic kidney disease are the same as for the general population.

Kidney and bladder. Chronic renal failure, resulting from ischemic glomerulosclerosis, is common.

Adequate control of blood pressure is an important factor in delaying the appearance of kidney disease.

Renal tubular acidosis, which occurs frequently in FD, often requires treatment with bicarbonate.

Hyperkalemia, which is also common, is treated with low potassium diet.

Bradyarrhythmia. Speculating that fatal bradyarrhythmia is an etiologic factor in sudden death associated with FD, Gold-von Simson et al [2005] studied 20 persons with FD with a history of syncope and cardiac arrest and concluded that a pacemaker may protect from fatal bradyarrhythmia and may decrease the incidence of syncope.

If sleep-disordered breathing is confirmed, treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) must be initiated.

Eyes. Decreased corneal sensation and absence of tearing predispose to corneal ulcerations, which can be managed with artificial tear solutions containing methylcellulose administered three to six times daily, maintenance of normal body hydration, and moisture chamber spectacle attachments. Soft contact lenses can promote corneal healing. Tarsorrhaphy is reserved for treatment of corneal injury that is unresponsive to these measures. Corneal transplantation has had limited success.

Chronic blepharitis is common and requires treatment with combined topical antibiotic/corticosteroid ointment.

Strabismus is almost always present (93%), and early surgical correction may help.

Spine. Spinal fusion may be necessary.

Other

Many adults use walkers or wheelchairs when outside the home.

Sialorrhea is a common. Surgical and anti-cholinergic drugs were used in the past. Recently the use of botulinium toxin injected to major salivary glands has been suggested [Daniel & Cardona 2014].
Appropriate treatment includes the following:

Surgical treatment of gastrointestinal atresia when present

Follow up and treatment of possible cardiac and renal anomalies

Treatment for significant hearing loss

Developmental or educational intervention for children with learning difficulties
Retinal avascularity per se often requires no treatment; however, it can induce ischemia, leading to neovascularization of the retinal periphery, which can be treated with prophylactic cryotherapy or argon laser photocoagulation to attempt to induce regression of the new vessels. Similar treatments are used to treat retinal holes and areas of retinal exudate to prevent retinal detachment.

Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments produced by retinal traction are repaired surgically using conventional methods, but the prognosis is guarded.

Exudative retinal detachments may be stabilized with cryotherapy, but the prognosis is poor.
The following measures are appropriate:

Early individualized education planning and therapies, including physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy

Individualized management of behavior problems

Neurologic management of seizures

Ophthalmologic management of strabismus and other ocular anomalies, if present

Standard management of chronic constipation for individuals with FGS1

Surgical intervention for imperforate anus, congenital heart defects, and other major malformations, if needed
Symptomatic support during an episode of hemiplegic migraine is the only therapy available.

A trial of acetazolamide for individuals with FHM1 or a trial of standard migraine prophylactic drugs (tricyclic antidepressants, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, anti-epileptic medications) for all FHM types may be warranted for frequent attacks. Limited correlation exists between drug response and hemiplegic migraine type.

There are anecdotal reports of therapeutic response to antiepileptic medications including topiramate, lacosamide, levetiracetam, and valproate, along with other medications commonly used for migraine prophylaxis.

Antiepileptic treatment may be necessary for seizures that are prevalent in FHM2 (caused by mutation of ATP1A2).
Treatment includes the following:

Early intervention programs, special education, and vocational training to address developmental disabilities

Communication rehabilitation with sign languages or alternative means of communication

Behavior management strategies including referral to a behavioral specialist/psychologist and consideration of medication if needed

Referral of the family to support groups and other resources

Standard treatment for any of the following if identified:

Refractive errors and strabismus

Hearing loss

Seizures

Renal disease

Cryptorchidism

Orthopedic complications

Dental problems

Referral to an endocrinologist for consideration of human growth hormone (HGH) therapy. HGH therapy with modest response has been reported in three children with FHS. Caution is indicated as limited information about HGH therapy in FHS is available.

Investigation for celiac disease if indicated by clinical features
Cervical spine instability. Case series indicate that early intervention to improve cervical spine stability in asymptomatic infants using posterior arthrodesis is successful. In infants with myelopathic signs function can be stabilized, if not improved, by a combination of anterior decompression and circumferential arthrodesis [Johnston et al 1996, Sakaura et al 2007, Madera et al 2008].

Large joint dislocations. Conservative, nonsurgical management of hip dislocation in Larsen syndrome is often unsuccessful and operative reduction is usually required.

Scoliosis is treated medically; no effective surgical intervention has been described.

Club feet are managed in a routine manner.

Cleft palate should be treated by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team when possible.

Hearing loss. Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf may also be required. An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).
For information on treatment with colchicine see Prevention of Primary Manifestations. Colchicine is not effective as treatment for an acute FMF attack.

During an acute episode, the therapeutic approach should be mainly supportive, including administration of intravenous saline for hydration and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), paracetamol or dipyrone for pain relief [Ozturk et al 2011].

Febrile and inflammatory episodes are usually treated with NSAIDs.

End-stage renal disease caused by renal amyloidosis should be treated as for other causes of renal failure. The long-term outcome of live related-donor renal transplantation in individuals with FMF-amyloidosis is similar to that in the general transplant population [Sherif et al 2003].
Skin. For individuals with significant areas of dermal aplasia, regular care by a dermatologist and use of occlusive dressings and antibiotic creams may help prevent secondary infections as erosive lesions may be painful and pruritic, and therefore prone to infection. Some individuals report that lotion is helpful in managing pruritic erosions. Pulsed dye laser or other photodynamic therapy has been successful in managing excessive granulation tissue [Alster & Wilson 1995, Liu et al 2012].

An individual with refractory exophytic granulation tissue received significant benefit from a combination of curettage and photodynamic therapy [Mallipeddi et al 2006].

An adult individual with multiple cutaneous basal cell carcinomas has been reported. Whether this is more prevalent in FDH is currently unknown, but heightened surveillance and appropriate treatment for such lesions may be indicated [Patrizi et al 2012].

Papillomatosis. Verrucoid papillomas can cause significant morbidity, including breathing problems (which could reflect the presence of laryngeal and/or tracheal papillomas) and GERD symptomatology (which could reflect the presence of esophageal papillomas). When possible, individuals should be referred to an otolaryngologist or gastroenterologist depending on the anatomic location of the papillomas.

Symptomatic papillomas of the esophagus can be removed endoscopically [Kashyap et al 2011] or with balloon-assisted radiofrequency ablation [Bertani et al 2014]. Airway (hypopharyngeal, tonsillar, and tracheal) papillomas can be managed with surgery or laser therapy.

Skeletal. Impaired functionality associated with syndactyly, oligodactyly, and split-hand/foot malformation may improve with occupational therapy, assistive devices, or surgical intervention.

Reduction defects of the long bones, such as transverse deficiency of distal radius/ulna or tibia/fibula, may be managed with prostheses as appropriate.

Camptodactyly often improves with physical and occupational therapy.

Individuals with scoliosis secondary to costovertebral defects should be referred to an orthopedist for routine monitoring and management.

Management of pain related to diastasis pubis with anti-inflammatory medications and/or physical therapy usually resolves the pain. Individuals with pain refractory to these interventions should consult an orthopedist.

Eye. Colobomas of the eyelid may be repaired by an oculoplastic surgeon.

Iris colobomas can be aesthetically treated with colored contact lenses to give the appearance of a round pupil.

The photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas can be reduced by use of tinted glasses.

Because retinal detachment leading to blindness is a potential complication of retinal coloboma, any acute changes in vision should be evaluated urgently by an ophthalmologist.

In patients with microphthalmia, an ocularist using prosthetic intervention can work to expand the palpebral fissures. Additional surgical corrections can be discussed with an oculoplastic surgeon.

Children with reduced vision may benefit from visual aids or other visual resources as part of an early intervention program to increase visual-spatial development.

Dental. Regular care of a dentist and promotion of good oral hygiene, diet counseling, and consideration of fissure sealants are important to minimize the risk of dental caries [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Abnormalities in the structure and number of teeth may cause dental malocclusion and dissatisfaction with the appearance of the teeth. Orthodontic care may be indicated when dental malocclusion is present. Composite veneers and other aesthetic procedures may be used to improve the appearance of abnormal teeth [Tejani et al 2005, Murakami et al 2011].

Other. Consultation with:

A pediatric surgeon for the treatment of diaphragmatic hernia and abdominal wall defects.

A urologist or nephrologist for treatment of structural malformations of the kidneys and urinary collecting system and their sequelae. In individuals with structural renal malformations, standard measures are used to reduce risk for urinary tract infections.

A developmental pediatrician for evaluation and management of behavioral problems, emotional lability, or withdrawn behaviors. Those with intellectual impairment or developmental delay should receive early intervention in occupational, speech, and physical therapies.
The goal of treatment is to prevent hematologic, immunologic, and neurologic deficits and to optimize the cognitive development of children with this disorder. Complete reversal of the systemic consequences of folate deficiency is easily achieved. While correction of the neurologic consequences is more difficult, favorable neurologic outcomes are possible when adequate treatment is initiated promptly.

“Folates” refers to a family of B9 vitamin compounds that are interconvertible in a series of intracellular biochemical reactions. Folate can be effective when administered by oral or parenteral routes; however, much higher oral than parenteral doses are required to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The parenteral route is probably more effective in achieving CSF folate levels appropriate to the age of the affected individual. In either case, achieving CSF folate levels in the normal range for the age of the affected individual is challenging [Torres et al 2015].

Folate Formulations

Based on the current understanding of folate transport and metabolism, the following reduced folates can be used to treat HFM:

5-formyltetrahydrofolate (5-formylTHF), also known as folinic acid or Leucovorin®, is a racemic stable form of folate. The active isomer is found in low quantities in normal human tissues. Leucovorin is available in oral and parenteral formulations. There is considerable experience in dosing with this folate form (see Folate Dosing).

The active isomer of 5-formylTHF, (6S)5-formylTHF (also known as Isovorin® or Fusilev®), is available for parenteral administration. Anecdotal observations suggest that the active isomer may be more effective for treatment when there is refractory neurologic disease. The biologic impact of the active isomer is twice that of the racemic mixture when the dose is the same.

The physiologic folate predominant in blood and tissues, (6S)5-methyltetrahydrofolate or (6S)5-methylTHF, is now available commercially as Metafolin® and Deplin®. Neither drug is available for parenteral administration. Published information on the use of (6S)5-methylTHF for the treatment of HFM is not available, although the dosing should be comparable to that of (6S)5-formylTHF. The formulation of Metafolin® is too low (800 µg) to make this agent feasible for the treatment of HFM. Deplin® is available as a 15-mg tablet.

Note: If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Folate Dosing

Because HFM is rare, controlled studies to establish optimal treatment have not been possible. The oral dose of 5-formylTHF required to overcome the loss of PCFT-mediated intestinal folate absorption appears to vary from individual to individual. The dose required to obviate the neurologic consequences is much higher than that needed to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The dose should be guided by its effect on trough CSF folate concentrations. The end-point is CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to the normal range for the affected individual’s age:

The reported oral dose of 5-formylTHF associated with a “good” outcome is approximately 150-200 mg daily [Geller et al 2002]. Much higher doses have been used as well [personal communication to Author]. A reasonable starting oral dose of 5-formylTHF in an infant could be 50 mg or 10-15 mg/kg given daily as a single dose.

Note: Normal CSF folate is approximately 100 nmol/L for infants to age two years, decreasing to approximately 75 nmol/L by age five years and to approximately 65 nmol/L by age 19 years [Verbeek et al 2008].

The parenteral dose required to achieve adequate blood folate levels is much lower than the oral dose. With intramuscular injections of approximately 1.0 mg/day of 5-formylTHF, the anemia will fully correct; however, the endpoint for treatment is based on the CSF folate level, which will require much higher folate doses [Torres et al 2015].
Speech and language deficits. A speech pathologist will utilize treatments targeted to the specific findings in an affected individual; hence, the importance of a thorough initial assessment to establish the extent of disease and management needs for an individual. No single recommended treatment exists.

The optimal approach should be determined based on the individual’s findings regarding:

CAS [American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 2007, Morgan & Vogel 2008, Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists 2011];

Dysarthria [Pennington et al 2009];

Language deficits [Law et al 2003];

Literacy impairments [Snowling & Hulme 2012].

Cognitive deficits. A clinical psychologist or neuropsychologist may provide strategies to help manage deficits in specific cognitive or social skill domains.

Fine and gross motor deficits. An occupational therapist and physiotherapist can provide strategies to help with these issues.
Fragile X syndrome. No specific treatment is available. Supportive therapy for children and adults with fragile X syndrome currently consists of the following [Hagerman et al 2009, Utari et al 2010]:

Recognition of the need for special education and anticipatory management such as the avoidance of excessive stimulation whenever possible may ameliorate some of the behavioral difficulties.

Early educational intervention, special education, and vocational training should be aimed specifically at the known impediments to learning. Parents and teachers of children with fragile X syndrome have recognized the need for individual attention, small class size, and the avoidance of sudden change. More specific guidelines are available through education resources (see Resources).

Pharmacologic management of behavioral issues that significantly affect social interaction is appropriate. No particular pharmacologic treatment has been shown to be uniquely beneficial; therapy must be individualized and closely monitored. A closely monitored and integrated program of behavioral management and pharmacologic treatment with an experienced developmental team may prove to be beneficial.

Routine medical management of strabismus, otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, seizures, mitral valve prolapse, and hypertension is appropriate.

FXTAS. No specific treatment is available. Supportive care for problems with gait and/or cognitive deficits may require assistance with activities of daily living.

POI. No specific treatment is available. Gynecologic or reproductive endocrinologic evaluation can provide appropriate treatment and counseling for reproductive options.
There is little objective evidence regarding management of FRDA. A multidisciplinary approach is essential for maximal benefit because FRDA affects multiple organ systems:

Prostheses, walking aids, wheelchairs, and physical therapy as prescribed by a physiatrist (rehabilitation medicine specialist) to maintain an active lifestyle

In-patient rehabilitation, which has been shown to improve physical function as measured by the Functional Independence Measure [Milne et al 2012]

Occupational therapy assessment to ensure a safe home and work environment

To manage spasticity: physical therapy including stretching programs, standing frame and splints, pharmacologic agents such as baclofen and botulinum toxin. Intrathecal baclofen can be beneficial where oral administration is unsuccessful or side effects are excessive [Berntsson et al 2013]. Orthopedic interventions, both operative and non-operative, for scoliosis [Milbrandt et al 2008] and foot deformities [Delatycki et al 2005] may be necessary.

Speech therapy to maximize communication skills

Management of dysphagia that may include dietary modification and, in the late stages of disease, use of nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding

Treatment of cardiac disease to reduce morbidity and mortality, including antiarrhythmic agents, anticardiac failure medication, anticoagulants, and pacemaker/implantable cardioverter defibrillator insertion [Lynch et al 2012a]. Cardiac transplantation is more controversial but has been used particularly when there is severe cardiac disease in the setting of mild neurologic symptoms [Sedlak et al 2004, Yoon et al 2012, McCormick et al 2017].

Antispasmodic agents for bladder dysfunction, with some individuals requiring botulinum toxin for the bladder and some requiring intermittent or permanent catheterization

Treatment of sleep apnea by continuous positive airway pressure

Treatment of diabetes mellitus with diet and, if necessary, oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin

Hearing aids, microphone, and receiver as needed [Rance et al 2010] (see also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview)

Psychological (counseling and/or pharmacologic) support for affected individuals and family

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Measures include the following:

Active management of spasticity with physiotherapy and botulinum toxin to prevent permanent contracture and the need for surgery

Treatment of scoliosis with physiotherapy, botulinum toxin, and surgery to prevent cardiopulmonary complications that can result from severe scoliosis

Treatment of diabetes mellitus to prevent complications that can arise from untreated/inadequately treated diabetes

Treatment of cardiac complications of FRDA to prevent arrhythmias that can result in mortality

Treatment of sleep apnea to prevent neurologic and cardiopulmonary complications that can result from untreated sleep apnea
The physical manifestations of Fryns syndrome are treated by surgery and/or supportive measures in the same way that the same manifestations are treated when they are not part of a syndrome. However, treatment of the diaphragmatic hernia often takes precedence over the management of other anomalies present.

For congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), the neonate is immediately intubated to prevent inflation of herniated bowel.

Medical therapies are used to stabilize the infant prior to surgical repair. High-frequency oscillatory ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) have achieved recent popularity in the treatment of CDH [Fallon et al 2013] but proof of improved survival with ECMO has not been established [Losty 2014]. Nitric oxide and surfactant have also been trialed as therapies for persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN).

In Fryns syndrome, additional anomalies may dictate further consultations; management by a pediatric neurologist, pediatric cardiologist, pediatric gastroenterologist, pediatric nephrologist, and a craniofacial team may be appropriate.

See also Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Overview.
Standards of care and management of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy were agreed upon at the 171st ENMC International Workshop. A consensus on the following topics and the recommendations from that conference [Tawil et al 2010] are outlined below:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation

Consultation with a physical therapist is indicated.

Establishment of follow-up frequency is important at the time of diagnosis. Individuals with FSHD should be seen at a frequency based on their disease severity, which for some will be frequent initially, and may include occupational and speech therapy in infantile onset forms of FSHD. For others with mild involvement, annual visits would be appropriate.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation consultations can help establish appropriate exercise regimens and assistive devices that may enhance mobility and reduce the risk of falls in home environments.

Exercise in FSHD

Exercise with moderate weights is not detrimental to individuals with FSHD [Milner-Brown & Miller 1988, van der Kooi et al 2004].

Aerobic training (when possible) has been beneficial to affected individuals [Olsen et al 2005].

Any type of exercise regimen should be instituted under the guidance of a physical therapist and personalized according to the individual’s disease symptoms, age, and cardiovascular status.

Pain. Chronic pain should be managed by physical therapy and medication as necessary.

Respiratory dysfunction. Ventilatory support such as BiPAP should be considered as necessary for those with hypoventilation.

Hearing loss. Standard therapies for hearing loss, including amplification if necessary, are appropriate.

Ophthalmologic disease. Exposure keratitis may occur in individuals who sleep with their eyes partially open. Use of lubricants to prevent drying of the sclera or in more severe cases taping the eyes shut during sleep may be required.

Orthopedic intervention

Ankle/foot orthoses can improve mobility and prevent falls in individuals with foot drop.

Surgical fixation of the scapula to the chest wall often improves range of motion of the arms, although this gain can be short-lived in individuals with rapidly progressive disease [Diab et al 2005, Krishnan et al 2005, Giannini et al 2006]. Evaluation of such individuals prior to surgery is warranted to assure a functional and sustained benefit.
Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTD3 often present a considerable burden for caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

The behavioral and psychological symptoms (BPSD) should be treated as in other types of FTD. There is no consensus treatment guideline for FTD3. In clinical practice those affected individuals who present with very aggressive symptoms have proven quite difficult to treat and have in some cases required high doses of antipsychotics and/or antidepressants in order to relieve the physical aggressiveness.
There is currently no known treatment for FTD-GRN or FTD in general. However, some behavioral symptoms such as apathy, impulsivity, and compulsiveness may respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

Symptoms of roaming, delusions, and hallucinations may respond to antipsychotic medications.

Although reports have suggested potential benefits with certain pharmacotherapy on management of FTD in general, evidence from randomized controlled trials is limited [Freedman 2007]. All of the following findings require confirmation with larger clinical trials.

One double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over trial suggests that trazodone, a serotonergic agent, may be beneficial in treating the symptoms of irritability, agitation, depression, and eating disorders in FTD [Lebert et al 2004].

While an open-label study suggested some benefits on behavioral symptoms with paroxetine, a double-blind placebo-controlled trial of ten subjects found worsening of performance on paired associates learning, reversal learning, and delayed pattern recognition [Moretti et al 2003, Deakin et al 2004].

A study of galantamine in FTD-bv and primary progressive aphasia (PPA) found significant benefits in subjects with PPA but not in those with FTD-bv [Kertesz et al 2005]. A follow-up study of 36 individuals who were on galantamine therapy for 18 weeks revealed stabilization but not improvement on language scores in the PPA group [Kertesz et al 2008].

A 12-month open-label rivastigmine trial showed improvement of behavioral symptoms and decreased caregiver burden in individuals with FTD but the treatment did not prevent cognitive decline [Moretti et al 2004].

A double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over study of methylphenidate found attenuation of risk-taking behavior but worsening of spatial span [Rahman et al 2006].

A small clinical trial of dextroamphetamine treatment on eight individuals with FTD-bv revealed improvement of behavioral symptoms [Huey et al 2008].

A few open-label studies of memantine, a partial NMDA agonist, demonstrated an improvement on the frontal battery inventory (FBI) in individuals with FTD-bv after a six-month trial, but a decline in other cognitive performance was observed [Diehl-Schmid et al 2008]. Among the three subtypes of FTD, PPA-PNFA remained stable on cognitive and functional measurements when treated with memantine [Boxer et al 2009]. A study using [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) as a surrogate outcome in individuals with semantic dementia found that cortical metabolic activity in salience network hubs were sustained when treated with memantine over a six-month period [Chow et al 2013].

Note: Donepezil treatment has been associated with exacerbation of disinhibition and compulsion symptoms [Mendez et al 2007].
Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations.

Individuals with seizures are treated with antiepileptic drugs.

The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment.

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTDP-17 often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.
Seizures in individuals with fumarate hydratase deficiency are often difficult to control. Individuals with seizures need to be evaluated and treated by a qualified specialist (usually a pediatric neurologist) in order to improve clinical outcome. Recommendation of particular medications or interventions is beyond the scope of this review. However, it should be noted that the ketogenic diet is usually considered to be contraindicated for treating epilepsy associated with fumarate hydratase deficiency or other enzymatic defects within the Kreb’s tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Nutritional intervention (e.g., feeding gastrostomy) may be appropriate in hypotonic and/or lethargic children with feeding difficulties and/or aspiration.

Physical therapy and orthopedic management is appropriate to minimize contractures and prevent scoliosis. Wheelchairs can be useful for some individuals.

In individuals with significant developmental deficits (including impairment of motor, language, and social development) special needs services are a required component of care.
Neutropenia. Treatment with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves neutrophil numbers, reduces the number of infections, and improves the quality of life [Boztug et al 2009, McDermott et al 2010, Boztug et al 2012]. Of note, the dose required to keep absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L can vary greatly among patients. In some patients G-CSF -- even in large doses -- may fail to control infections [Smith et al 2012].

A few mildly affected individuals have been reported to be adequately managed with prophylactic antibiotics alone [Banka et al 2013]. However, prophylactic antibiotics have a limited use for preventing severe infections or bronchiectasis and inflammatory bowel disease.

Fevers and infections require prompt treatment with antibiotics.

Other
Treatment of arterial calcification

Bisphosphonate therapy. In a non-randomized, retrospective study, Rutsch et al [2008] compared 43 infants who survived their first day of life (including 17 treated with bisphosphonates) to 26 who did not receive bisphosphonates. Infants treated with bisphosphonates showed significantly increased survival (p=0.026, log-rank test).

Etidronate, a non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate, is the most commonly used based on its potent antimineralization effect. Etidronate doses vary from 5 mg/kg/d [Corbatón Blasco et al 1991] to as high as 35 mg/kg/d [Van Dyck et al 1989], with a usual dose of 20 mg/kg/d [Edouard et al 2011].

Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates such as pamidronate and risedronate were originally formulated to be more potent antiresorptive drugs and, thus, to have a less potent antimineralization effect at therapeutic levels [Otero et al 2013]. The dose of pamidronate has varied from 0.1 mg/kg/week to as high as 5 mg/kg/d IV [Rutsch et al 2008]; the dose of risedronate is 1 mg/kg/week PO [Ramjan et al 2009]. Of note, death can occur even if treatment is started early with etidronate [Stuart et al 1990, Stuart 1993, Galletti et al 2011] or pamidronate [Kalal et al 2012]. After initiation of therapy, vascular calcifications have been reported to disappear as early as 2.5 weeks (as assessed by x-rays, a relatively insensitive method) [van der Sluis et al 2006] and as late as two years [Meradji et al 1978]. Vascular calcifications do not reappear after discontinuation of treatment [Meradji et al 1978], even after ten years [van der Sluis et al 2006]. However, arterial stenosis has been known to persist despite resolution of calcification [Thiaville et al 1994]. Periarticular calcifications have disappeared in some individuals [Meradji et al 1978], whereas in others they have persisted despite treatment, disappearing only after treatment was discontinued [Otero et al 2013].Prolonged etidronate use in patients with GACI has been associated with severe skeletal toxicity, including radiographic findings resembling hypophosphatasia (pan craniosynostosis, bowing of long bones, metaphyseal cupping and fraying, radiolucent tongues) or osteopetrosis (osteosclerosis and femoral Erlenmeyer flask deformity) [Otero et al 2013]. The optimal duration of treatment remains unclear, with reports of children being treated for almost 18 months [van Dyck et al 1989], two years [Edouard et al 2011], three years [Ramjan et al 2009], and almost seven years (in 1 child) [Otero et al 2013]. Given the risk of severe adverse skeletal effects with prolonged bisphosphonate treatment and the failure of calcifications to reappear after discontinuation of treatment, some authors recommend close monitoring for resolution of arterial calcifications during treatment so that use of bisphosphonates can be discontinued as soon as possible [Otero et al 2013]. From current available data (which are limited by small sample size and lack of randomized control data) it is difficult to determine if bisphosphonate treatment is truly protective or if resolution of findings reflects the natural history of the disease.

Cardiovascular treatment

Anti-hypertensive therapy. Since standard anti-hypertensive therapy is warranted for hypertension and since hypertension in GACI is likely caused by renal artery stenosis, in theory it may be beneficial to use medications that act on the renin-angiotensin system, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs).

In one case, severe hypertension refractory to conventional treatment responded to prostaglandin infusion (PGE1) at a dose of 0.017-0.068 μg/kg/min [Ciana et al 1997].

Prevention of coronary thrombosis. Aspirin therapy is warranted in patients with severe coronary stenosis, who are at increased risk for coronary thrombosis.

Treatment of hearing loss. Patients with sensorineural hearing loss may benefit from hearing aids.

Treatment of hypophosphatemic rickets involves calcitriol and oral phosphate supplements in standard doses of 15 ng/kg/d (calcitriol) and 40-60 mg/kg/d (phosphate) [Lorenz-Depiereux et al 2010], with doses adjusted according to serum phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase levels.

Hypercalciuria should be avoided in patients with hypophosphatemic rickets treated with calcitriol or other vitamin D analogs. Freychet et al [2014] reported one patient with biallelic ENPP1 mutations with calciuria of 5 mg/kg/d after institution of alfacalcidol who developed new-onset nephrocalcinosis; cardiac, hepatic, and pancreatic calcifications as evaluated by ultrasound; and recurrence of previously regressed periarticular calcifications as assessed by x-ray. While most of these calcifications regressed when the calciuria was maintained at less than 4 mg/kg/d, the nephrocalcinosis remained unchanged. Thus, it seems prudent to monitor calciuria in order to maintain it at levels below 4 mg/kg/d.

Orthopedics consultation should be obtained if bone deformities develop as a consequence of hypophosphatemic rickets, as surgical interventions may be necessary.
Generalized Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

The acute and potentially lethal symptoms of generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia are prevented or corrected by a galactose/lactose-restricted diet. This means switching infants from breast milk or a milk-based formula to a formula with only trace levels of galactose or lactose, such as soy formula. Of note, some infants with classic galactosemia are prescribed elemental formula, which has even lower galactose content than soy formula. Elemental formula should not be prescribed for infants with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia because the GALE enzyme is required for the endogenous biosynthesis of UDP-galactose; that is, persons with epimerase deficiency galactosemia may require trace environmental sources of galactose. However, the galactose intake needed for optimum outcome remains unknown.

For older children with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia, dietary restriction of galactose/lactose involves continued restriction of dairy products.

Note: Some, but not all, physicians recommend that individuals with classic galactosemia also abstain from non-dairy foods that contain more than trace levels of galactose/lactose (e.g., some fruits and vegetables, organ meats); this more rigorous dietary restriction may not be advisable for persons with generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia.

In generalized epimerase deficiency galactosemia restriction of dietary galactose/lactose appears to correct or prevent the acute signs and symptoms of the disorder: hepatic dysfunction, renal dysfunction, and mild cataracts. Presumably, as in classic galactosemia, dietary treatment would not correct profound tissue damage resulting from prolonged galactose exposure (e.g., hepatic cirrhosis or mature cataracts). Mature cataracts that do not resolve with dietary restriction of galactose/lactose may require surgical removal.

Peripheral Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia do not require any dietary restriction.

Intermediate Epimerase Deficiency Galactosemia

Individuals with intermediate epimerase deficiency galactosemia are typically treated with dietary galactose/lactose restriction, at least in infancy. They may be an (as-yet unknown) increased risk for long-term complications including learning impairment and/or cataracts. Continued breastfeeding or exposure to a milk-based formula containing high levels of galactose/lactose may therefore be inadvisable for these infants; however, insufficient data exist to make firm recommendations.
Treatment, focused on managing the clinical findings, often involves a team including (pediatric) neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, physiotherapists, psychologists, and speech and occupational therapists. Major goals are to optimize intellectual and physical development and, later in life, to slow the inevitable deterioration of these capacities.

Note: Early intellectual development is nearly normal in many affected children, enabling them to attend a normal school initially; however, significant intellectual impairment usually occurs before the second decade of life.

Treatment includes the following:

Speech and occupational therapy to improve communication and activities of daily living

Early intervention and special education directed to the individual's disability. Frequent reassessment is needed because of the progressive nature of the disorder. Special education often becomes necessary between ages five and 12 years.

Physiotherapy (typically for distal weakness, ataxia, and spasticity) to preserve mobility as long as possible

Orthopedic surgery as required for foot deformities (Note, however, that most affected individuals become wheelchair bound between ages ten and 20 years for other reasons.)

Appropriate ophthalmologic treatment (e.g., surgery or glasses), especially if diplopia occurs
Individuals with GATA1-related cytopenia are treated supportively.

Thrombocytopenia. Individuals with moderate to severe epistaxis, gingival bleeding, or gastrointestinal bleeding should receive platelet transfusions. Transfusion requirements vary from person to person as bleeding can be related to quantitative and/or qualitative platelet defects.

For individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects, DDAVP treatment may be helpful for short-term management of mild to moderate bleeding.

Individuals who are only mildly symptomatic (easy bruisability without mucosal or more severe bleeding) do not require specific treatment.

There is no evidence that splenectomy is beneficial in people with GATA1-related disease, although this treatment may be considered if splenomegaly is severe. Although splenectomy may improve the cytopenias, platelet dysfunction will not be improved.

Anemia. Erythrocyte transfusions are indicated when anemia is symptomatic (fatigue, tachycardia).

Iron overload and the development of alloantibodies may limit chronic transfusion therapy.

Extended pre-transfusion red blood cell phenotyping and matching for minor erythrocyte antigens in individuals receiving frequent transfusions can reduce the risk of alloimmunization.

Neutropenia. Individuals with neutropenia who present with fever should be evaluated promptly with a physical examination, complete blood count, and blood culture and should receive appropriate parenteral antibiotics.

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). For severe cases, BMT can be curative [Hollanda et al 2006, Phillips et al 2007, Parrella et al 2014].

BMT should be considered in individuals with severe phenotypes of GATA1-related cytopenia, particularly if an HLA-matched donor is available.

While BMT may offer a cure, clinical experience with BMT in this disease is limited and families must be counseled on the significant risks and morbidity associated with BMT.
Management by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in treating GD is available at Comprehensive Gaucher Centers (see National Gaucher Foundation).

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has changed the natural history of GD and eliminated the need for splenectomy in individuals with hypersplenism, persons not receiving ERT and certain other individuals may require symptomatic treatment, including the following:

Partial or total splenectomy for individuals with massive splenomegaly with significant areas of infarction and persistent severe thrombocytopenia with high risk of bleeding

Transfusion of blood products for severe anemia and bleeding. Anemia and clotting problems unresponsive to ERT should prompt investigations for an intercurrent disease process. Evaluation by a hematologist is recommended prior to any major surgical or dental procedures or parturition [Hughes et al 2007].

Analgesics for bone pain. Persistent bone pain in individuals receiving ERT should prompt evaluations to exclude the possibility of a mechanical problem (e.g., pathologic fracture or joint collapse secondary to osteonecrosis, degenerative arthritis).

Joint replacement surgery for relief from chronic pain and restoration of function (i.e., improved joint range of motion). Bone pain in individuals who have undergone joint replacement may indicate a problem with the prosthesis and the need for surgical revision.

Supplemental treatment. Oral bisphosphonates and calcium/vitamin D may benefit individuals with GD and low bone density [Wenstrup et al 2004].

Persons with GD with findings suggestive of multiple myeloma and parkinsonism should be referred to the appropriate specialists.
Care is best provided by a physician (e.g., pediatric epileptologist) familiar with the pharmacotherapy for this disorder. Seizure control is critical because children with SCN1A-related seizure disorder are at high risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP). In addition, prolonged acute seizures may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010].

Pharmacologic treatment focuses on the observations that abnormal SCN1A channels disproportionately affect GABA neurons [Yu et al 2006] and that the associated seizures respond optimally to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that bind to the GABA receptor:

Clobazam (0.2-1 mg mg/kg/day), part of the standard of care in Europe, is now approved by the FDA in the US. Clobazam is FDA approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009].

Stiripentol (30-100 mg/kg/day) is accepted by epileptologists as an effective therapeutic agent in SCN1A-related seizure disorders. It is part of the early standard of care in Europe, and is used in the US after other conventional anticonvulsants have failed. It is not approved by the FDA for use in the US, but the evidence of effectiveness in SCN1A-related epilepsy is more specific than for any other agent (based on double-blind evaluation of seizure reduction in severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) [Chiron et al 2000]). As a result, stiripentol is not considered an “investigational” therapy. Thanh et al [2002] demonstrated efficacy of the drug when compared with placebo; only moderate side effects including drowsiness, loss of appetite, and occasional neutropenia in infants and young children were observed. In a recent US survey of 82 children with Dravet syndrome, stiripentol was found to be effective in reducing prolonged seizures [Wirrell et al 2013].Stiripentol, which acts directly on GABAA receptors [Quilichini et al 2006], is also a potent inhibitor of the hepatic enzymes CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. As a result, it increases the serum concentration of several common AEDs, including valproic acid, clobazam, and its metabolite nor-clobazam [Thanh et al 2002]. Doses above 50 mg/kg/day are usually not tolerated when used in conjunction with valproic acid and clobazam.Children older than age 12 years may not tolerate stiripentol because of digestive tract side effects and nausea [Thanh et al 2002].

Benzodiazepines. Individuals taking stiripentol must exercise caution in the use of benzodiazepines [Thanh et al 2002]. A single infusion of diazepam and clonazepam appears to be safe [Thanh et al 2002].

Topiramate [Coppola et al 2002]

Valproic acid (10-30 mg/kg/day) [Thanh et al 2002]

Ethosuximide. Can be effective for absence seizures. The dose is usually limited by gastrointestinal side effects, which can be minimized by more frequent dosing.

Levetiracetam (20-80 mg/kg/day). Often effective, but may make seizures worse in some individuals [Caraballo et al 2010].

Potassium bromide. Not FDA-approved in the US, but widely used in Japan with reasonable effectiveness [Tanabe et al 2008].

Phenobarbital. Although effective, phenobarbital is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition. When it is taken in combination with stiripentol, the serum concentration of phenobarbital is increased because stiripentol slows the metabolism and excretion of barbiturates.

Ketogenic diet.

Dressler et al [2010] report that seizures were reduced by more than 50% in 62.5% of persons with Dravet syndrome who stayed on the diet for six months. The findings of Nabbout et al [2011] in 15 individuals also support the use of the ketogenic diet in Dravet syndrome.

Sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN1A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected.

Due to the sedating effects of seizure medications and the possibility of respiratory depression (especially with benzodiazepines and barbiturates), parents are advised to take a CPR course. Routine seizure and personal safety counseling is indicated.

Seizures are not always responsive to conventional AEDs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective for SCN1A-related SMEI seizures [Dravet et al 2002]:

Ethosuximide and high-dose piracetam for myoclonic seizures

Corticosteroids

Immunoglobulins

Non-medical interventions that families have reported to be helpful include the following [Nolan et al 2008]:

Placement of an indwelling venous access device

Creating a portable microenvironment

Having a written emergency department protocol

Establishing emergency routines for the family

Assigning a parent on call to lessen the effect on the siblings

Creating personal time to decrease parent stress

Finding respite care

Contacting an internet support group
The following are appropriate:

Joint manifestations: regular physiotherapy to prevent joint limitation

Heart: valve replacement

Tracheal stenosis: tracheostomy when severe
The primary goal of treatment is to decrease IOP to prevent vision-threatening complications including corneal opacification and glaucomatous optic atrophy. Early treatment to control IOP will reverse some of these complications in children. A Cochcrane review analyzed the literature that addressed the surgical management of congenital glaucoma but could not draw any conclusions from the analysis [Ghate & Wang 2015].

Surgical treatment. The following approach is based on the work of deLuise & Anderson [1983], Ho & Walton [2004], Bowman et al [2011], Sharaawy & Bhartiya [2011], and Al-Obeidan et al [2014].

PCG is almost always managed surgically. The primary goal of surgery is to eliminate the resistance to aqueous outflow caused by the structural abnormalities in the anterior chamber angle. This goal may be accomplished through an internal approach (goniotomy) or an external approach (trabeculotomy or trabeculectomy).

In goniotomy, the surgeon visualizes the anterior chamber structures through a special lens (goniolens) to create openings in the trabecular meshwork. The goal of the procedure is to eliminate any resistance imposed by the abnormal trabecular meshwork. A clear cornea is necessary for direct visualization of the anterior chamber structures during this procedure.

In trabeculotomy, the trabecular meshwork is incised by cannulating Schlemm's canal with a metal probe or suture via an external opening in the sclera.

In trabeculectomy, a section of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal is removed under a partial thickness sclera flap to create a wound fistula [Morales et al 2013, Chen et al 2014a].

In deep sclerectomy the dissection of a deep scleral flap, deroofing of Schlemm's canal, and preserving the structural integrity of the trabecular meshwork results in improved aqueous outflow outside the anterior chamber.

Note: In contrast to goniotomy, deep sclerectomy, trabeculotomy, and trabeculectomy can be performed in individuals with advanced glaucoma and cloudy corneas.

Glaucoma drainage implants or cyclodestruction may be used to control IOP when initial surgical procedures have failed.

More than one surgical intervention may be necessary to control IOP; thus, significant morbidity is associated with both PCG and the currently available surgical treatment options. Individuals with milder forms of disease who present later in childhood often do well with a single surgical procedure and have an excellent visual prognosis later in life.

Clarity of the cornea and other ocular media, control of the ocular dimensions (corneal diameters and axial lengths), and optic nerve damage are important indicators of the course of the disease following surgery. Reported success rates for each (initial) procedure are approximately 80%. Infants with elevated IOP and cloudy corneas at birth have the poorest prognosis. The most favorable outcome is seen in infants in whom surgery is performed between the second and eighth month of life. With increasing age, surgery is less effective in preserving vision.

Medications. Beta-blockers (e.g., timolol), parasympathomimetics (e.g., pilocarpine), sympathomimetics (e.g., adrenergic agonists and alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandin agonists have all been used. These medications, particularly the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists, may have severe side effects and must be used with caution in infants and children [Maris et al 2005, Papadopoulos & Khaw 2007].

Surgery should not be delayed in an attempt to achieve medical control of IOP.

Medication may be used preoperatively to lower the IOP to prevent optic nerve damage, to reduce the risk of sudden decompression of the globe, and to clear the cornea for better visualization during examination and surgery.

Postoperatively, medication may help control IOP until the success of the surgical procedure is established.

Medical therapy is also used when surgery may be life threatening or has led to incomplete control of the glaucoma [deLuise & Anderson 1983].

Treatment of refractive errors. Amblyopia from uncorrected refractive errors often associated with PCG must be treated to obtain optimal visual function.
Ketogenic diet. Diffusion of ketone bodies across the blood-brain barrier is facilitated by the monocarboxylic transporter 1(MCT1). The ketogenic diet, introduced as a treatment for Glut1-DS in 1991, primarily provides an alternative fuel for brain metabolism. The ketogenic diet creates chronic ketosis by largely replacing carbohydrates and proteins with lipids in varying ratios.

Experience over the past two decades indicates that the ketogenic diet is well tolerated in most cases and is highly effective in controlling the seizures and improving gait disturbance. Of note, seizures may recur even with good dietary compliance [Klepper et al 2005]. Even when seizures are controlled, affected individuals may continue to have neurobehavioral deficits involving cognition and social adaptive behavior [Klepper et al 2002].

In the authors’ experience, the neurologic outcome is influenced by the age at which treatment is initiated: affected individuals treated at a younger age have a better outcome [Alter et al 2015].

Note: Because the ketogenic diet is deficient in L-carnitine, a co-factor that is essential for the metabolism of fats, dietary supplementation with 50 mg/kg/day of L-carnitine is recommended [De Vivo et al 1998].

Affected individuals develop a mild compensated metabolic acidosis when ketotic.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are generally ineffective or afford only limited improvement in the absence of a ketogenic diet. Certain AEDs may be relatively contraindicated as adjunctive treatment in children on the ketogenic diet (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Phenobarbital and valproic acid can inhibit Glut1 transport.

Valproic acid may partially inhibit beta-oxidation of fatty acids.

Acetazolamide, topiramate, and zonisamide inhibit carbonic anhydrase and may potentiate the metabolic acidosis. These agents also can cause kidney stones.

Alpha-lipoic acid (thioctic acid) also has been shown to facilitate glucose transport in Glut4-dependent cultured skeletal muscle cells. Preliminary in vitro studies with Glut1 transport systems have shown similar results. Thus, alpha-lipoic acid supplements have been recommended, without supportive clinical evidence, as a treatment for Glut1-DS. Response has been modest at best; however, the dose taken by mouth may be insufficient to approximate experimental conditions [Kulikova-Schupak et al 2001].
Treatment and quality of life can be optimized when care is provided by specialists in biochemical genetics, cardiology, orthopedics, and neurology, and therapists knowledgeable about GLB1-related disorders.

Surgery is best performed in centers with surgeons and anesthesiologists experienced in the care of individuals with lysosomal storage disorders.

Occupational therapy to optimize activities of daily living (including adaptive equipment)

Physical therapy to optimize gait, comfort, and mobility including orthotics and bracing to improve mobility and flexibility

Early and ongoing interventions to optimize educational and social outcomes are recommended.

GM1 gangliosidosis

For patients with GM1 gangliosidosis type I or II, physiatry for appropriate mobility interventions, such as strollers and wheelchairs

Speech therapy to optimize oral motor skills and manage aspiration risk

Maintenance of adequate hydration and adequate calories for growth. Consider gastrostomy (G-) tube or naso-gastric (NG) tube placement as needed.

Routine management of secretions and risk of aspiration with attention to risk for pulmonary sequelae

Routine management of chronic urinary tract infections secondary to incontinence and chronic dehydration

Aggressive seizure control

Medical management of cardiac involvement

When disease is advanced, provide access to hospice services for supportive in-home care

MPS IVB

Since MPS IVA and IVB are clinically indistinguishable, details of interventions are based on those recommended for MPS in general or specifically MPS IVA.
A consensus statement on the management of disorders of sex development (DSDs) was developed under the sponsorship of the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology [Lee et al 2006] (full text). Further consensus guidelines for the care of children with DSD were developed by the Texas Children’s Hospital [Douglas et al 2010] (full text) and others [Parisi et al 2007] (full text).

Evaluation and long-term management should be received at a center with an interdisciplinary care team (including clinical geneticists, endocrinologists, surgeons, and mental health professionals) experienced in the diagnosis and management of DSDs

The general concepts of care include the following.

Sex assignment

All individuals should receive a sex of rearing.

Sex assignment in newborns with ambiguous genitalia should not be decided prior to an evaluation by experts.

The choice of sex of rearing for individuals with 46,XY DSD is based on the underlying diagnosis, expert opinion, and parental beliefs [Houk et al 2006].

Surgical decisions should be made after detailed discussion with the family about risks, benefits, and limitations of any proposed surgery. Many surgeries are not medically necessary and thus, consideration should be given to delay the surgery in order to allow the affected individual to participate in the decision-making process.

Surgical intervention in minors with DSD is controversial, particularly in those being reared female. Surgical intervention should focus on functionality; whenever possible, removal of tissue and irreversible procedures should be avoided.

When male sex of rearing is chosen, surgical options may include hypospadias repair, orchiopexy, scrotoplasty, and phalloplasty. Removal of müllerian remnants may be considered.

When female sex of rearing is chosen, surgical options may include clitoroplasty, vaginoplasty, and urogenital sinus mobilization. Vaginal dilation is also used for creation/expansion of the vagina.

Note: (1) No controlled clinical trials of the efficacy of different surgical techniques have been conducted. The long-term data regarding the quality of life and sexual function among those assigned male and female sex vary. (2) There is no consensus on the appropriate timing of the surgical procedures listed.

Management of gonads

Streak gonads and dysgenetic gonads are at increased risk for gonadoblastoma and should be surgically removed if nonfunctional.If a dysgenetic gonad is located in the inguinal canal, it may be placed into the scrotum if results of an hCG stimulation test indicate some testicular function.

Removal of gonads that are not consistent with the assigned sex of rearing is controversial.

Depending on the specific diagnosis, potentially functional gonads may be retained with appropriate surveillance for tumor development.

Routine surveillance for the development of contrasexual puberty is warranted in those whose sex of rearing is discordant with gonadal sex.

In some states, removal of potentially functional gonads in a minor requires a court order.

Hormone therapy. Sex steroid therapy is important for the development of secondary sexual characteristics and for normal adolescent bone mass accrual.

If an individual is given a male sex assignment:

A short course of testosterone therapy may be used in infancy for treatment of micropenis (stretched penile length that is 2.5 standard deviations below the mean for age).

Testosterone therapy is typically required to initiate and sustain puberty.

If an individual is given a female sex assignment:

Estrogen therapy is used to initiate breast development and puberty.

If the affected individual has a uterus, progesterone will be added once puberty has progressed in order to promote menstrual cycles.

46,XY individuals with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in NR5A1 may need to be managed for adrenal insufficiency.

Psychosocial aspects of care. As noted in the Lee et al consensus statement, “The initial contact with the parents of a child with a DSD is important, because first impressions from these encounters often persist…. Ample time and opportunity should be made for continued discussion with review of information previously provided.” [Lee et al 2006].

Open communication with affected individuals and families, including their active participation in the decision-making process, is critical.

Providers need to address the concerns of the affected individual and family respectfully and in strict confidence.

Fertility

Most individuals with nonsyndromic disorders of sex development are infertile due to dysgenetic or streak gonads. Some pathogenic variants in NR5A1 are associated with normal testicular development in individuals with a 46,XY chromosome complement, which may allow for fertility, although assisted reproductive technology may be required.

Women with 46,XY DSD or 46,XY CGD with müllerian structures may become pregnant through oocyte donation.
Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: allergy, audiology, cardiology, cardiac surgery, child development / psychology, dental, endocrine, ENT, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, general surgery, immunology, clinical genetics, neurology, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, psychiatry, pulmonary, rheumatology, speech, and urology.

Low serum calcium concentration warrants calcium supplementation in a standard manner and, when possible, referral to an endocrinologist/nephrologist because of the increased risk of renal calculi in individuals on long-term calcium supplementation.

Feeding difficulties should be evaluated by a gastroenterologist to assess for possible structural abnormalities such as intestinal malrotation/nonrotation, Hirschsprung disease, and late-onset diaphragmatic hernia [McDonald-McGinn et al 2004].

Strategies for addressing feeding difficulties include: modification of spoon placement when eating; treatment for gastroesophageal reflux with acid blockade, prokinetic agents, postural therapy; and medication to treat gastrointestinal dysmotility and to facilitate bowel evacuation [Dinulos & Graf 1998, Eicher et al 2000].

Early intervention (occupational therapy, physical therapy) and speech therapy/the introduction of sign language should be instituted by age one year or at presentation in childhood because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay. Later, educational and behavioral therapy are often warranted.

Growth hormone deficiency, if present, should be treated as in the general population.

Immune deficiency generally requires no specific intervention except treating infections aggressively. Rarely, prophylactic antibiotics, IVIG therapy, or thymic transplantation are required.

Early diagnosis and early intervention for psychiatric illnesses improve long-term prognosis in individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder [Clarke & O’Callaghan 2003] and other disorders including autism, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder/attention deficit disorder (ADHD/ADD) [Vorstman et al 2006, Bassett et al 2011].
Treatment includes the following:

Regular professional dental hygiene, routine brushing, and fluoride treatment

Oral-motor therapy to alleviate chewing and swallowing problems

Consultation with a pediatric orthodontist regarding malocclusion and need for orthodontic intervention

Routine protocols to alleviate sleep apnea. If other sleep disturbances are present, establishing a bedtime routine can calm and soothe the child. Melatonin has been used to treat insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders with 85% of parents reporting improved or normal sleep [Andersen et al 2008]. Although no controlled studies have been performed in Phelan-McDermid syndrome, melatonin treatment has been used to improve sleep in some children.

Tympanostomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections. If hearing is impaired, management with hearing aids should be considered.

Resolution of cardiac, renal, respiratory, immunologic, thyroid, and other medical issues according to standard protocols

Surgical removal of ingrown toenails to prevent infection

Use of pressure stockings and elevation of the foot of the bed for lymphedema.

Early intervention programs, intensive physical and occupational therapies, adaptive exercise and sports programs, and other therapies to improve coordination and strength

Therapies to improve verbal and nonverbal communication because perceptive language is often more advanced than expressive language. Sign language, picture exchange systems, and computer touch screens may augment communication.

Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified

Walkers or other assistive walking devices

Nutritional assessment for individuals with persistent gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and/or cyclic vomiting. GER may be treated in infants by thickening formula, smaller feedings, and positioning, and in older children by avoiding spicy food and refraining from eating within two to three hours of bed time. In some cases, medication is required to control GER. In the most persistent cases, surgery (fundoplication) may be required.

As in the general population, medication as indicated to help reduce hyperactivity, anxiety, and self-stimulatory behavior

Intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration in individuals with recurrent vomiting; neurologic evaluation to assess cyclic vomiting, particularly to address issues of increased intracranial pressure. If increased intracranial pressure is caused by an arachnoid cyst, surgery may be warranted.

Vigilance by parents or caregivers in monitoring children, particularly those who can walk or run independently, as children may be impulsive and unaware of the consequences of their behavior
The predominant management issues are ultimate adult stature and growth:

Surgical bone lengthening may be an option for some.

Adaptive aids for people with short stature are appropriate. Significant joint laxity should prompt orthopedic evaluation and measures to control the development of arthritis. Males with 3-M syndrome should be referred for endocrinologic evaluation regarding gonadal function at puberty.

Treatment with growth hormone is indicated in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency, but treatment of children with normal serum concentration of growth hormone is experimental. GH treatment should be carried out in a center with experience in managing growth disorders.

Note: (1) Although most children with 3-M syndrome are evaluated for growth hormone deficiency, only one individual has been reported with an incomplete response to growth hormone (GH) stimulation, suggesting partial deficiency of GH [Miller et al 1975]. (2) Several individuals with short stature have been treated with exogenous GH without positive result [Miller et al 1975]. One report suggested that high-dosage GH treatment may be effective in 3-M syndrome [van der Wal et al 2001]. No obvious demonstration of growth hormone efficiency has been published to date [Huber et al 2011].

Hip dislocation has been reported, probably secondary to joint laxity [Badina et al 2011, Huber et al 2011].
Speech/language deficits. Individuals with significant speech/language deficits may benefit from therapy by a speech pathologist. The therapies, which are individualized to the specific speech disorder, often include linguistic approaches and augmentative and alternative communication [Murray et al 2014].

Seizures, if present, should be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Many different AEDs may be effective, and no one medication has been demonstrated to be effective specifically for GRIN2A-related disorders.

In one individual a good response to refractory epilepsy was achieved with topiramate [Venkateswaran et al 2014].

In one individual seizure burden was reduced with the addition of memantine; however, cognitive function did not improve [Pierson et al 2014].

Ketogenic diet and vagal nerve stimulator may also be considered in patients with refractory epilepsy.

Treatment for epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS) and Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) includes AEDs such as valproic acid, benzodiazepines, and corticosteroids. Sulthiame, ethosuximide, and levetiracetam may also be effective.

Of note, intravenous immunoglobulin has not been proven to be efficacious [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.
Guidelines for management have been published by the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2014] (full text).

Treatment includes care by a metabolic team familiar with the medical issues associated with long-term management of persons with GSD. At a minimum, such a team should include the following:

Metabolic specialist familiar with the multisystem nature of GSDI. This individual should monitor current medical issues while providing anticipatory guidance and feedback regarding potential future medical issues (e.g., malignant transformation of liver adenomas, kidney stone management).

Metabolic nutritionist who monitors nutritional adequacy, weight management, food choices, and timing of cornstarch and food intake, and who works with the individual and/or family to assure understanding of the parameters of compliance at different life stages

Health care provider (nurse, genetic counselor, physician assistant) familiar with the inheritance of GSDI who can address questions related to implications of this diagnosis for other family members and future childbearing of the affected person. Such an individual may focus on health care compliance by assisting affected children to transition to independent understanding and management of their GSDI-related health care issues.

Care teams often establish relationships with additional health care workers including:

Medical social worker to assist with formula acquisition and access to community-based services (e.g., access to regular exercise and physical activity plans) and provide early intervention for long-term health management and wellness;

Psychologist with experience in helping affected individuals cope with eating disorders and chronic illness.

Medical Nutrition Therapy Goals

Maintain

normal glucose levels and prevent hypoglycemia:

Frequent daytime feedings. Small frequent meals and snacks high in complex carbohydrates with additional feedings between meals and before bedtime are recommended (monitoring of blood glucose concentration may help adjust feeding schedules to meet individual needs).

Nighttime intragastric continuous glucose infusion through a nasogastric tube or a gastrostomy tube. An optimal infusion should provide 8-10 mg/kg/min glucose in an infant and 6-8 mg/kg/min glucose in an older child.

Uncooked cornstarch orally can be started during infancy [Wolfsdorf & Crigler 1999, Weinstein & Wolfsdorf 2002]. Cornstarch should be given between meals or before bedtime so as not to interfere with appetite at meal time.

Argo® is the preferred brand in the United States in terms of both taste and sustainability. Other brands should be used with caution, and randomly switching between brands is not recommended. A modified cornstarch, waxy maize extended-release cornstarch, Glycosade®, is available in Europe and the United States for overnight treatment [Ross et al 2016].

There is no consensus on the age at which cornstarch therapy should be initiated but a trial is often introduced between ages six months and one year. Amylase is required to digest cornstarch and may not be present until age two years.

The severity and recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes determines the timing of cornstarch therapy initiation via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube in infancy and childhood and oral ingestion in teenagers and adults.

Note: Recommendations for uncooked cornstarch dosing are: 1.6 g/kg body weight every four hours for infants, 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight every six hours for young children through puberty, and 1.7-2.5 g/kg body weight given before bed time for adults. Dosing for modified cornstarch should be decided under the guidance of a metabolic treatment team using frequent glucose monitoring.

Provide

optimal nutrition for growth and development:

Complex carbohydrates (60%-70% of recommended total energy intake) including cornstarch and starches from whole-grain bread, rice, and potatoes for children and adolescents and rice cereals for infants

Note: (1) Intake of sucrose and fructose should be restricted for infants and older children. Avoid sugar, fruits, fruit juice, high-fructose corn syrup, sorbitol, cane juice, and other foods that cannot be broken down into glucose. (2) Intake of lactose and galactose should be limited. One serving per day for an older child usually entails 1.5 ounces of cheese OR 1 cup of yogurt OR 1 cup of skim milk. (3) Blood glucose monitoring for hypoglycemia is important so that overtreatment with cornstarch may be avoided. If excess weight gain occurs, consider decreasing the amount of cornstarch gradually over time and mixing cornstarch in water instead of Prosobee® or Tolerex®.

Protein (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) of high quality, high biologic value (e.g., protein low in fat). Soy formula (Prosobee®) and soy milk (lactose/galactose free) can be used both in infancy and childhood for carbohydrate and protein needs.

Note: (1) Avoid soy milks that are sweetened with sucrose; the ones with rice syrup or brown rice syrup can be taken. (2) Soy milk mixed with cane sugar should be avoided.

Fat (10%-15% of recommended total energy intake) as part of a low-fat diet that includes heart-healthy fats such as canola oil and olive oil. Note: Families need explicit guidelines on fat intake as part of monitoring total energy intake and avoiding excessive weight gain.

Calcium and vitamin D supplements to support bone growth and mineralization. If the individual is not on calcium-fortified soy milk, calcium citrate or calcium carbonate with vitamin D is recommended to meet RDA for age needs and to prevent nutritional deficiencies.

Iron supplements in complete multivitamins with minerals (100% RDA iron and zinc) to avoid anemia and iron deficiency

Treatment of Other Manifestations

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is used to prevent gout when dietary therapy fails to completely normalize blood uric acid concentration, especially after puberty.

Lipid-lowering medications, such as HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and fibrate (e.g., Lipitor®, gemfibrozil), are used when lipid levels remain elevated despite good metabolic control, especially after puberty.

Citrate supplementation may help prevent or ameliorate nephrocalcinosis and the development of urinary calculi.

In young children, an initial dose of 1 mEq/kg/day in liquid form divided into three doses should be instituted. The dose should be increased based on urinary citrate excretion.

In older children and adults, potassium citrate tablets can be started at a dose of 10 mEq/3x/day. Citrate use should be monitored as it can cause hypertension and life-threatening hyperkalemia in affected individuals with renal impairment. Sodium levels should also be monitored.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as captopril are used to treat microalbuminuria, an early indicator of renal dysfunction.

Kidney transplantation can be performed for ESRD.

Hepatic adenomas can be treated with surgery or other interventions including percutaneous ethanol injections and radiofrequency ablation.

Liver transplantation can be considered when other interventions have failed.

Human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can be used to treat recurrent infections:

G-CSF may increase the number and improve the function of circulating neutrophils.

G-CSF may improve the symptoms of Crohn's-like inflammatory bowel disease in individuals with GSDIb.

G-CSF should be administered subcutaneously starting at 1.0 μg/kg given daily or every other day. The G-CSF dose should be increased stepwise at approximately two-week intervals until the target absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of greater than 500 to up to 1.0 x 109/L is reached.

Standard management of individuals with platelet dysfunction/von Willebrand disease include antifibrinolytics and deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP), which acts by stimulating factor VIII from endothelial cells and improving von Willebrand factor activity and the platelet release reaction. However, DDAVP should be used with caution due to the risk for fluid overload and hyponatremia.
Guidelines for the management of IOPD have been put forth by an expert panel from the American College of Medical Genetics [Kishnani et al 2006b]:

Cardiomyopathy. Medical intervention needs to be individualized as use of standard drugs may be contraindicated in certain stages of the disease process (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) [Kishnani et al 2006b].

Arteriopathy. Treatment does not differ from that in the general population.

Conduction disturbances. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are at high risk for tachyarrhythmia and sudden death [Tabarki et al 2002]; 24-hour Holter monitoring is useful in characterizing the type and severity of rhythm disturbance. Management includes avoidance of stress, infection, fever, dehydration, and anesthesia. Medical therapy, if indicated, often necessitates a careful balance of ventricular function and should be undertaken by a cardiologist familiar with Pompe disease.

Muscle weakness. Physical therapy is appropriate to maintain range of motion and assist in ambulation.

Proximal motor weakness can result in contractures of the pelvic girdle in infants and children, necessitating aggressive management including surgery [Case et al 2012].

Scoliosis is frequent, particularly in individuals with infantile- or childhood-onset disease [Roberts et al 2011].

Difficulty with communication is common, and speech therapy as well as the use of augmented communication devices may be helpful.

Nutrition/feeding. Infants may need specialized diets and maximal nutrition, with some requiring gastric feedings.

Persons with LOPD may also develop feeding concerns and are often managed on a soft diet, with a few requiring gastric or jejunal feedings.

Respiratory insufficiency. Respiratory support including CPAP and BiPAP may be required. Inspiratory/expiratory training has improved respiratory muscle strength in adults with LOPD [Jones et al 2011].

Macroglossia and severe respiratory insufficiency in the infantile form may necessitate tracheostomy.
The mainstay of management of GSD III is a high-protein diet with cornstarch supplementation to maintain euglycemia.

In infancy, feeds every three to four hours are recommended. Unlike the diet used to treat infants with GSD I, the diet used to treat infants with GSD III can include fructose and galactose, as individuals with GSD III can utilize these sugars; special formulas are not required.

Toward the end of the first year of life, cornstarch is tolerated and can be used to prevent hypoglycemia. Initially one to three doses per day may be required with typical starting dose of 1 g/kg every six hours. The doses can be titrated based on the results of glucose and ketone monitoring.

A protein intake of 3 g/kg is recommended as gluconeogenesis is intact and protein can be used as a source of glucose. For those who cannot make it through the night on cornstarch and protein, Glycosade® extended-release cornstarch can be used [Ross et al 2015].

A high-protein diet prevents breakdown of endogenous muscle protein in times of glucose need and preserves skeletal and cardiac muscles.

Periods of suboptimal metabolic control can be identified by measuring blood glucose and blood ketone several times per month.

Although hypoglycemia upon awakening is uncommon in older children and adults since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations, monitoring blood glucose concentrations between 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Elevated ketones reflect poor metabolic control as ketones are produced when glucose is unavailable and instead fatty acid oxidation is used as a source of energy. Monitoring blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended; the goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations in the normal range (<0.3 mmol/L). Additionally, morning urine ketone measurements can be monitored with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control.

Existing skeletal and cardiac myopathies can be improved with high-protein diet and avoidance of excessive carbohydrate intake [Slonim et al 1982, Slonim et al 1984, Dagli et al 2009, Valayannopoulos et al 2011, Sentner et al 2012].

Titration of protein and cornstarch in the diet is the primary treatment for elevated cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, which usually result from suboptimal metabolic control.

Emergency protocol. An emergency protocol to avoid dangerous hypoglycemia should be established. An intravenous (IV) infusion of 10% dextrose with 0.5 normal saline administered at 1.5 times the maintenance rate should be given immediately on admission to the emergency room. Serum concentrations of electrolytes, glucose, and ketones should be monitored. Efforts should be made to correct ketosis as it can induce vomiting and worsen the catabolic state.

Liver transplantation. In GSD III hepatic complications are not the main cause of morbidity. Also, modern treatment strategies and good metabolic control can prevent major complications. Liver transplantation should therefore be viewed as a treatment of last resort for individuals with GSD III. Liver transplantation will prevent hypoglycemia in both GSD IIIa and GSD IIIb; the muscular defect, however, will remain present in individuals with GSD IIIa.

Because liver transplantation does not cure the heart and muscle problems and because transplantation has been associated with worsening myopathy and cardiomyopathy, liver transplantation is only indicated in affected individuals with severe hepatic cirrhosis, liver dysfunction, and/or hepatocellular carcinoma [Davis & Weinstein 2008].
Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, medical or biochemical genetics, and child development.

Hepatic manifestations. Liver transplantation is the only treatment option for individuals with the progressive hepatic subtype of GSD IV who develop liver failure. Of the 18 individuals with GSD IV who have received a liver transplant to date, two required a second liver transplant and six died: four from sepsis, one from hepatic artery thrombosis, and one from cardiomyopathy. The prognosis in persons with GSD IV who undergo liver transplantation is poor because of the significant risk for morbidity and mortality, which is in part attributed to the extrahepatic manifestations of GSD type IV, especially cardiomyopathy [Davis & Weinstein 2008, Magoulas et al 2012].

Selecting appropriate candidates for liver transplantation can be complex. Histologic, molecular, or clinical predictors of disease progression are likely to be useful in stratifying patients prior to liver transplantation [Davis & Weinstein 2008]. Factors such as glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) activity may not be the best predictor of outcome since the level of GBE activity in different tissues can vary by disease subtype and severity.

Neurologic manifestations. Children with skeletal myopathy and/or hypotonia who experience motor developmental delay warrant developmental evaluation and physical therapy as needed.

Cardiac manifestations. For those with cardiomyopathy, care by a cardiologist is warranted. Individuals with severe cardiomyopathy secondary to glycogenosis may be candidates for cardiac transplantation [Ewert et al 1999]; however, consideration of potential contraindications to cardiac transplantation, including myopathy, liver failure, and cachexia, is essential before pursuing this treatment option.
Aerobic training (on a regular diet). In some individuals, improvement in exercise and circulatory capacity has been reported, probably caused by the increased circulatory capacity, which facilitates delivery of blood-borne fuels [Haller 2000].

In eight individuals who underwent a 14-week aerobic conditioning program in which they pedaled a cycloergometer for 30-40 minutes a day, four days a week at an intensity corresponding to 60% to 70% of maximal heart rate, an increase in work capacity, oxygen uptake, cardiac output, citrate synthase activity, and beta-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity was observed, indicating that moderate aerobic exercise improves exercise capacity in individuals with GSDV [Haller et al 2006].

Nine individuals who underwent an eight-month supervised aerobic exercise training program including five weekly sessions of walking or cycling for no more than 60 minutes, improved their peak power output, peak oxygen uptake, and ventilatory threshold with no evidence of negative outcomes, suggesting that under carefully controlled conditions individuals with GSDV may exercise safely and may respond favorably to training [Maté-Muñoz et al 2007].

A systematic review of physical training for GSDV published in the Cochrane Database concluded that there are no randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials of aerobic training in people with GSDV; however, three studies using small numbers of participants provided some evidence that aerobic training improves fitness without adverse events in people with GSDV. They suggested that it would be safe and worthwhile to conduct larger controlled trials of aerobic training in patients with GSDV [Quinlivan et al 2011].

In a subcohort of 63 patients (out of 239 registered) interviewed for their physical activity habits and whose peak oxygen uptake (and index of peak cardiorespiratory fitness and peak muscle oxidative capacity) were measured, the 32% who were physically active had higher levels of peak oxygen uptake (by 23%, p=0.003) and were more likely to improve their clinical course over a four-year period compared with inactive patients (odds ratio = 225; 95% confidence intervals 20.3 to 2496.7) after controlling for age. Moreover, for 81% of patients in the physically active cohort, clinical disease was reclassified as less severe. Mean peak oxygen uptake was very low, especially in women, where it barely reached the limit (13 mL O2/kg/min or 3.7 metabolic equivalents (METs, with 1MET equaling 3.5 mL O2/kg/min) necessary for independent living. Age also had a negative effect on peak oxygen uptake. However, the peak oxygen uptake in patients who were physically active was 1.5METs higher than in those who were not active. Seven patients (6 physically active) had a peak oxygen uptake of 8 METs, which is the minimum threshold for optimal health.

Three daily habits recommended by Haller [2000] to improve the quality of life:

Avoid intense isometric exercise and maximal aerobic exercise, which triggers cramps and, potentially, myoglobinuria (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Avoid a totally sedentary life, which induces deconditioning.

Engage in regular, moderate aerobic exercise, which improves cardiorespiratory capacity and increases delivery of blood-borne fuels, a sort of permanent "second wind" (i.e., decrease in heart rate and perceived exertion during exercise) effect [Ollivier et al 2005].

Pharmacologic and Nutritional Treatments

Two systematic reviews of pharmacologic and nutritional treatments for GSDV were published in the Cochrane Database [Quinlivan & Beynon 2004, Quinlivan et al 2008]. The authors' conclusions:

There is no evidence of significant benefit from any specific nutritional or pharmacologic treatment for GSDV.

Low-dose creatine supplementation demonstrated a statistically significant benefit, albeit modest, in ischemic exercise in a small number of individuals.

Ingestion of oral sucrose immediately prior to exercise reduces perceived ratings of exertion and heart rate and improves exercise tolerance. This treatment does not influence sustained or unexpected exercise.

A carbohydrate-rich diet was of benefit.

Because of the rarity of GSDV, multicenter collaboration and standardized assessment protocols are needed for future treatment trials.

Pharmacologic treatments

Creatine monohydrate in a placebo-controlled crossover trial with nine affected individuals improved symptoms and increased their capacity for ischemic, isometric forearm exercise [Vorgerd et al 2000]. This positive effect did not result from increased levels of phosphocreatine in muscle. Rather, creatine may have a quenching effect on the potassium-mediated changes in membrane excitability. A subsequent clinical trial with high doses of creatine monohydrate in 19 individuals lowered exercise intolerance [Vorgerd et al 2002]. Thus, the indication for symptomatic therapy with creatine monohydrate needs to be strengthened.

Ramipril, an ACE inhibitor, used in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial in eight persons with GSDV, decreased disability and improved exercise physiology only in those individuals with the ACE D/D genotype (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [Martinuzzi et al 2008].

Nutritional treatments

In a single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study in 12 individuals with GSDV, Vissing & Haller [2003b] found that ingestion of 75 g of sucrose markedly improved exercise tolerance.

Ingesting simple carbohydrates (adult dose: 30-40 g glucose, fructose, or sucrose, or ~440 mL of most commercially available sport drinks; pediatric dose: 20 g) about five minutes before engaging in strenuous exercise such as brisk walking (or physical education classes in the younger individuals) can be helpful [Perez et al 2007, Andersen et al 2008]. In addition to increasing exercise capacity and sense of well-being, the treatment may protect against exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis.

Ingestion of sucrose before exercise combined with an aerobic conditioning program is reasonable [Amato 2003].

Individuals with GSDV can also benefit from adopting a diet rich in complex carbohydrates (i.e., with a high proportion (65%) of complex carbohydrates such as those found in vegetables, fruits, cereals, bread, pasta, and rice) and a low proportion (20%) of fat [Andersen & Vissing 2008].
Some individuals with glycogen storage disease type VI (GSD VI) may not require any treatment, but most have better growth and stamina with therapy.

For hypoglycemia, frequent small meals and uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) given one to three times a day may normalize blood glucose concentration and avoid ketosis.

For children and adults with no hypoglycemic episodes, a bedtime dose of cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) can improve energy and well-being [Nakai et al 1994].

When on cornstarch therapy, children have improved growth and bone density and decreased liver size — findings that may be significant when considering lifestyle-related issues [Author, personal observation].
Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia

can be prevented with frequent daytime feedings that are high in complex carbohydrates and protein.

The dose of cornstarch can range from 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg every six hours based on clinical symptoms.

Protein should be given as 15% to 25% of total calories (tailored to the patient’s age) as long as renal function is normal. Protein provides an alternative source of glucose via intact gluconeogenesis.

For signs of

hypoglycemia or ketosis, Polycose® or fruit juice should be given orally (if oral intake is tolerated) followed by a snack high in complex carbohydrates and protein. Blood glucose and ketone concentrations should be monitored periodically to ensure that they return to normal. If oral intake is not tolerated, an IV should be started. An initial glucose bolus (D50, or D10 if D50 not available) may be needed to maintain blood glucose concentrations above 70 mg/dL. The bolus can then be followed by 10% dextrose by IV.

Symptomatic management of liver manifestations such as cirrhosis, liver failure, portal hypertension is appropriate.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Signs and symptoms should be managed as with other muscle GSDs, such as GSD III [Kishnani et al 2010].

Physical therapy evaluation and intervention based on physical status and function

Coordination with a metabolic nutritionist regarding monitoring and optimizing blood glucose concentrations based on levels of exercise and activity
Neurologic. Medically refractory epilepsy typically requires multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Spasticity can be treated with physical and occupational therapy and bracing. Muscle relaxants may be used to treat moderate or severe spasticity. Surgery may be required.

Hypothalamic involvement

Central diabetes insipidus may require treatment with desmopressin.

Temperature dysregulation can be managed by modifying the environment.

Disturbance of sleep-wake cycles can be managed with good sleep hygiene and, if needed, with use of melatonin or other sleep aids such as clonidine.

Skeletal. Surgery of hand and foot defects can improve dexterity.

Other

Tethered cord may require surgical intervention.

Cleft lip and palate: reparative surgery is needed in most.

Some children may require a gastrostomy and/or tracheostomy.
Acute Attacks

Further details on the treatment of acute porphyria are available in published reviews [Anderson et al 2005, Stein et al 2013].

In an individual presenting with acute abdominal symptoms:

Identify and discontinue any medications that are thought to induce attacks (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Discontinue all nonessential medications.

Evaluate those with nausea and vomiting for dehydration and hyponatremia, which is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

Provide glucose-containing IV solution to reverse the fasting state.

Note: Caution is indicated in patients with hyponatremia, as aggressive administration of dextrose in water may cause the serum sodium concentration to drop to a critically low level.

Treat seizures with a short-acting benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) or with magnesium, which has been used for eclamptic seizures [Sadeh et al 1991].

Note: A number of the commonly used anti-seizure medications, including phenytoin and sodium valproate, are contraindicated because of the risk of further exacerbating an attack (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Intravenous hematin is the treatment of choice in moderate to severe acute attacks. Order hematin at the time that an acute attack requires hospitalization. Although hematin is not stocked by most hospital pharmacies, it can be obtained by overnight express from the manufacturer (Panhematin®, Recordati, 1-888-575-8344). An alternative in Europe and elsewhere is heme arginate (Normosang®; not yet approved in the US).

Some individuals recover with a glucose infusion only; those who do not respond in 24 to 48 hours should receive intravenous hematin.

When signs of a motor neuropathy are present, hematin is given as soon as possible. Hematin given at the initial signs of motor neuropathy may halt its progression; however, it has no effect on established motor deficits, which are the result of axonal degeneration.

Hematin is reconstituted at the bedside as described in the package insert. Human albumin may be used in place of water (132 mL of a 25% albumin solution) to reduce the risk of a chemical phlebitis, which is the main side effect of hematin administration [Anderson et al 2006].

The infusion is started without delay, as hematin in solution decays rapidly [Goetsch & Bissell 1986].

The preparation is given into a large peripheral vein or via central line over 10-15 minutes so as to minimize the risk of phlebitis. The dose is weight based at 3-4 mg/kg; 200 mg once daily is appropriate for most individuals.

The following responses to hematin infusion can be expected:

Decrease in the urine concentration of PBG, the first sign, occurs after two doses.

Clinical improvement is seen after a total of three or four doses, and typically is dramatic, with no further need of narcotic analgesia [Bissell 1988].

The motor neuropathy of acute attacks, when it occurs, does not respond to hematin administration. Return of function requires axonal regeneration and takes many months. Although it can be complete, some individuals have residual wrist drop or foot drop.

Liver transplantation. The experience with liver transplantation in acute porphyria is growing, with accumulating evidence that transplantation is curative in selected severe cases [Singal et al 2014]. The status of the disease in candidates for liver transplantation must be well-documented biochemically: they must not have responded to multiple courses of hematin and must be demonstrating neurologic complications.

Chronic (Cutaneous) Manifestations

For low-grade chronic or seasonal cutaneous symptoms, the only effective current treatment is avoidance of sun/light, whether direct or through window glass. Damage is caused by blue light and long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA), both of which pass through window glass:

Sun protection using protective clothing such as long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats

Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to blue light. Grey or smoke colored filters provide only partial protection.

Note: Topical sunscreens are not helpful because they block UVB light, not the blue light that causes porphyrin-related skin injury.

The association of cutaneous manifestations with severe attacks (in which porphyrins as well as ALA and PBG are markedly increased) suggests that the cutaneous, as well as the neurovisceral, symptoms could respond to hematin administration. Indeed, this is the finding of a recent case report of an individual with severe HCP who was given ‘maintenance’ hematin [Ma et al 2011].

Other. For more prolonged control of seizures, the combination of gabapentin and propofol is effective and safe.
Treatment is symptomatic and based on the treatment for HD and other neurodegenerative disorders.

Pharmacologic agents may suppress abnormal movements. The most common choices are low-dose neuroleptic agents, such as fluphenazine or haloperidol.

Tremor in one individual was suppressed with clonazepam. However, clonazepam, levodopa/carbidopa, anticholinergics, and typical and atypical neuroleptics were not found helpful in treating the abnormal movements of other affected individuals.

Based on experience with Huntington disease, antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood stabilizers (lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine, and lamotragine), and occasionally stimulants may be effective in treating the psychiatric manifestations of HDL2.

In the only report specifically related to HDL2, depression partially responded to sertaline in one individual and to nortriptyline in another individual [Walker et al 2003b].

The affected individual, other family members, and care providers should be educated regarding the likely course of the disease. Assurance that cognitive decline, depression, apathy, and irritability are manifestations of the disease rather than the "fault" of the individual can decrease stress and guilt.

Environmental interventions (establishing regular schedules, easing of expectations to maintain the family finances, encouraging the use of lists to assist with memory) may help.

Families often need help in obtaining social services (see Resources).
No specific therapy is currently available for ALSP.

Management is supportive and includes: attention to general care, nutritional requirements, antiepileptic drugs for seizures, and antibiotic treatment for general and recurrent infections such as pneumonia or urinary tract infections.

Other:

L-dopa or other dopaminergic therapies have not been beneficial in individuals with ALSP or in those with an atypical parkinsonian phenotype, but may be worth trying.

Antidepressant medications may be prescribed for depression but reports to date have demonstrated no long-term benefit.

Antipsychotics are in general not recommended due to extrapyramidal side effects, but may be used in aggressive individuals.

Anti-seizure medications should be initiated in any individuals with seizures and are reported to be beneficial.
The World Federation of Hemophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center. (Individuals in the USA see National Hemophilia Foundation; individuals worldwide see World Federation of Hemophilia for locations).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor VIII for bleeding episodes within an hour of noticing symptoms:

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers should be identified, as frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia A should be trained to administer the infusions. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia A include the following [Chalmers et al 2011, Srivastava et al 2013]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, is treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered preferably subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor VIII requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

DDAVP®

(desmopressin acetate). For individuals with mild hemophilia A, including symptomatic females, immediate treatment of bleeding can be achieved with DDAVP®. A single intravenous dose often doubles or triples factor VIII clotting activity. Alternatively, a multi-use nasal formulation of DDAVP® Nasal may be more convenient.

Note: Hemophilia genotype influences DDAVP® response [Castaman et al 2009, Nance et al 2013].

Immune tolerance therapy. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor VIII greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Fogarty & Kessler 2013]. High titer inhibitors can often be eliminated by immune tolerance therapy [Hay & DiMichele 2012]. Individuals with large gene deletions are less likely to respond to immune tolerance than individuals with other types of variants [Coppola et al 2009].
The World Federation of Hæmophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center (for locations in the USA: see National Hemophilia Foundation; elsewhere worldwide: see World Federation of Hæmophilia).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor IX for bleeding episodes should be initiated within an hour of noticing symptoms.

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Identify staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers because frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia B should be trained to administer the infusions as soon as is feasible. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia B include the following [Chalmers et al 2011]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia B should not be circumcised unless hemophilia B is either excluded or, if present, treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor IX requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

Inhibitors. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor IX, seen in 1%-3% of persons with severe hemophilia B, greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Hay et al 2006]. Their onset can be associated with anaphylactic reactions to factor IX infusion and nephrotic syndrome [DiMichele 2007, Chitlur et al 2009]. Immune tolerance can be challenging and long-term bypassing therapy may be needed for treatment.
The American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD) has published practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis [Bacon et al 2011] (full text). The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) published Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of hemochromatosis [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Clinical 

Therapeutic phlebotomy is indicated in the presence of symptoms of iron overload or evidence of end-organ damage (e.g., advanced cirrhosis, cardiac failure, skin pigment changes, or diabetes):

Periodic phlebotomy is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective treatment.

Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

Each mL of packed red blood cells contains 1 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is removal of the excess iron by weekly phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) until the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or lower. Twice-weekly phlebotomy may be occasionally useful to accelerate iron depletion.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the hematocrit is 75% of the baseline hematocrit.

At this point, if the serum ferritin concentration is ≥50 ng/mL despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, the interval at which phlebotomy is performed needs to be spaced further apart. Once the serum ferritin concentration is ≤100 ng/mL, serum ferritin concentration should be quantified in all affected individuals after each additional one or two treatments [Barton et al 1998].

The serum ferritin concentration is the most reliable and inexpensive way to monitor therapeutic phlebotomy.

Maintenance therapy is aimed at maintaining serum ferritin concentration <50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation <50%. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women. Subsequent phlebotomies to prevent reaccumulation of iron can be carried out approximately every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. However, this is uncommon in individuals with HFE-HH.

Therapeutic phlebotomy improves fibrosis except in cases of cirrhosis [Powell et al 2006].

Orthotopic liver transplantation is the only treatment for end-stage liver disease from decompensated cirrhosis. However, the post-transplant survival among untreated individuals with HFE-HH is poor [Crawford et al 2004, Kowdley et al 2005]. Although one study suggested that outcomes may have improved, this report did not enroll persons with documented HFE-HH but rather used a database [Yu & Ioannou 2007].

Biochemical 

Both the EASL and AASLD guidelines recommend therapeutic phlebotomy for persons with biochemical HFE-HH (i.e., those who have increased body iron stores in the absence of clinical evidence of iron overload). See European Association for the Study of the Liver [2010] (full text) and Bacon et al [2011] (full text). The exact serum ferritin concentration at which therapeutic phlebotomy should be initiated is not clear, the European Association for Study of Liver suggests performing phlebotomy once serum ferritin concentration is higher than 500 ng/mL.

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

These individuals do not have iron overload and thus do not need phlebotomy.
There are no effective treatment regimens to restore enzyme levels in individuals with HEP. Hence, treatment recommendations at this time are similar to the ones for familial porphyria cutanea tarda (F-PCT): the avoidance of sunlight, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass.
There is no known treatment for the underlying defect in CHF: no therapies can repair the primary ductal plate malformation or reverse the fibrosis or biliary tree abnormalities. Therapies based on extrapolations from other forms of liver disease, anecdotal reports, and deductive reasoning are used to manage the complications of the underlying defect [Shneider & Magid 2005].

The most important manifestations of CHF are variceal bleeding, hypersplenism, cholangitis and, to a lesser extent, biliary stones, cholangiocarcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Variceal bleeding. The management of varices has been reviewed [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008, Ling et al 2011, Shneider et al 2012]. Care should be provided by those experienced in the management of PH.

Primary prevention (prior to any variceal bleeding) entails screening for varices and treating medium or large varices with nonselective beta blockers with the dose titrated to pulse and blood pressure. If beta blockers are not tolerated, variceal banding should be considered. Management in children is not as well defined as in adults. Affected children should be referred to tertiary centers with experience in the management of varices in children.

Standard procedures for management of variceal bleeding include obtaining adequate initial intravenous access, resuscitation, transfusion without over transfusion, octreotide, antibiotic prophylaxis, proton pump inhibition, and endoscopy when stabilized.

Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding (once bleeding has already occurred) consists of banding of esophageal varices, histacryl injection of gastric varices, and continued use of nonselective beta blockers. Because banding devices do not fit on the smallest endoscopes, small children with variceal bleeding often undergo sclerotherapy instead.

Individuals who have had repeated variceal bleeding (especially if gastric varices are present) should be considered for surgical portosystemic shunting rather than repeated variceal ligation [Shneider & Magid 2005, Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Such intervention is best performed in a center experienced with this procedure.

Although controversial, consideration of a surgical shunt in an individual with CHF who has never had variceal bleeding may be reasonable if PH is likely to progress and liver transplantation is unlikely given the intact hepatic synthetic function in certain settings. For example, a surgical shunt would be a strong consideration in an individual with large varices that have never bled if appropriate expert care is not available for emergent management of variceal bleeding.

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) are widely available. However, it is the authors’ opinion that use of TIPS is not indicated outside of an emergency; because of their intrinsic occlusion rate, particularly when considered over long periods of time, TIPS may require repeated procedures to maintain adequate patency. Furthermore, the intravenous contrast often utilized to assess and perform TIPS revisions is potentially nephrotoxic – a serious consideration given the typical association of CHF with ARPKD.

Hypersplenism. Hypersplenism usually does not result in clinically significant sequelae. Individuals with significant splenomegaly are fitted with spleen guards to wear when playing contact sports or performing activities that could result in splenic injury.

Splenectomy is contraindicated because it does not treat the underlying PH and often exacerbates it.

Abnormalities of the biliary tree. Cholangitis should be considered and investigated in individuals known to have biliary dilatation who develop unexplained fever or right upper-quadrant pain with or without jaundice [Shneider & Magid 2005].

Cholangitis is best treated with rapid institution of appropriate antibiotics.

Segmental resection of the liver is a controversial option for individuals with segmental bile duct abnormalities who have had repeated episodes of cholangitis [Ulrich et al 2008] even though cysts may form in other areas of the liver after the resection.

Recurrent cholangitis with or without more widespread bile duct abnormalities is best treated with liver transplantation. If cysts in the extrahepatic bile duct are complicated by recurrent infection and/or the presence of stones, excision of the common bile duct with a Roux-en-Y hepatojejunal anastomosis has been recommended.

Biliary stones. The treatment of biliary stones depends on their location, number, and size. Care is best provided in a tertiary care facility with expertise in managing biliary stones.

Cholangiocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. These should be managed by a multidisciplinary team.

Patient education. Patients are taught the manifestations of variceal bleeding (hematemesis, melena, and hematochezia) and cholangitis (fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice) and instructed to seek appropriate care when such manifestations occur.
Urologic referral is indicated. Appropriate treatment includes surgical correction of bladder outlet abnormalities and ureteric implantation.

Gynecologic referral is indicated. Surgical removal of longitudinal vaginal septum is rarely indicated, even in anticipation of labor. Surgery for removal of a uterine septum or reunification of a bicornuate uterus is likewise exceptional in the absence of recurrent mid-trimester pregnancy losses. Hymenectomy may be necessary for tight constriction ring.

Usually, extremity surgery is not necessary, although repair of hallux varus and tarsal fusion [Verp et al 1983] have been reported.
Acute presentations should be managed symptomatically in a hospital setting, including intravenous glucose (dextrose) administration, supportive treatment of hepatic insufficiency (including fresh frozen plasma or exchange transfusion), and treatment of metabolic acidosis, if present.

Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is the cornerstone of HFI treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). During acute episodes of intoxication, including at the time of initial diagnosis, immediate and absolute elimination of fructose (by substitution of fructose with other carbohydrate sources including glucose, maltose, and cornstarch) rapidly reverses symptoms and should result in normalization of related metabolic disturbances.

Ongoing education for children and adults concerning the need for dietary restriction is recommended, and should ideally be handled by nutritionists with specific experience in treating HFI and other inherited metabolic diseases.

Individuals with HFI are advised to wear a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace at all times.

Hepatomegaly with steatosis and lipid vacuolization may remain a persistent complication despite fructose restriction and resolution of initial fibrosis. This includes individuals ascertained by family history and treated from birth [Odièvre et al 1978]. The reason for this remains to be determined, but may be related to insufficient fructose restriction as well as lower tolerance of fructose early in life [Froesch et al 1963].

Chronic renal insufficiency, specifically proximal tubular dysfunction, may also persist despite fructose restriction. Typically resolution of renal disease occurs shortly after starting fructose restriction [Odièvre et al 1978]. In rare historical instances, dietary modification did not affect renal dysfunction [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968]. This may be a result of earlier, incomplete attempts at restriction, as reported patients tended to manage themselves with self-restriction alone. It may also be in part due to primary defects in aldolase function and ATPase interaction within the proximal tubule, leading to dysfunctional acid-base regulation, renal tubular insufficiency (manifesting as glucosuria, aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia), and nephrocalcinosis [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968, Lu et al 2001, Steinmann & Santer 2011].
Dermatologic

Avoidance of excessive sun exposure and use of sunscreens with both UVA and UVB protection

Pulsed dye laser can be discussed in older individuals as an option for cosmetic management of the telangiectatic component of the rash; however, no data on its use are available.

Avoidance of excessive heat exposure and control of fever, especially in the first years of life to prevent overheating

Lymphedema management (manual lymphatic drainage, compression)

Topical treatment for eczema-like lesions (emollients, topical steroids)

Muscle

Physical therapy and exercise to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Calcium and vitamin D supplements may also be warranted in individuals with muscle weakness to prevent osteopenia.

Lung

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device if needed

Noninvasive ventilation if needed

Pancreas. Treatment of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency with pancreatic enzyme supplementation

Liver. Treatment of cholestasis with ursodeoxycholic acid

Growth. Enteral feeding as needed

Cataract. Surgical removal of visually significant cataracts
Care by a multidisciplinary team comprising those with expertise in clinical genetics, gastric surgery, gastroenterology, pathology, and nutrition is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010] (see full text and Figure 1 therein).

H. pylori infection (if present) is treated in the standard manner.

The primary curative treatment of gastric cancer is surgical resection. Regardless of the surgical procedure used for the treatment of gastric cancer, the effectiveness of surgical resection is poor if the ultimate goal is increased cure rate: studies have shown that surgery alone is less than satisfactory in the management of early gastric cancer, with cure rates approaching only 40%. The role of adjuvant therapy was indefinite until three large, randomized controlled trials showed the survival benefit of adjuvant therapy over surgery alone [Macdonald et al 2000, Cunningham et al 2006, Sakuramoto et al 2007].

Numerous randomized clinical trials have failed to show consistent survival benefits from adjuvant radiation therapy or chemotherapy alone in the treatment of gastric cancer.
A complete, system-based management guide is available from the Progeria Research Foundation.

No evidence that a low-cholesterol, low-fat, or other special diet influences the course of progeria exists. Thus, a regular diet is indicated unless the lipid profile becomes abnormal, at which point appropriate treatment includes exercise, diet modification, and medication as warranted. Frequent small meals tend to maximize caloric intake.

Stiffened peripheral vasculature may be less tolerant to dehydration; therefore maintaining optimal hydration orally is recommended.

Shoe pads are recommended, as lack of body fat leads to foot discomfort.

Use of sunscreen on all exposed areas of skin, including the head, is recommended for outdoor activities.

Prior to decline in cardiovascular or neurologic status (resulting from strokes, angina, or heart attacks), children should be encouraged to be as physically active as possible, taking into account possible limitations related to restricted range of motion of joints and hip problems including osteoarthritis and hip dislocation.

Because intellect and maturity are normal, age-appropriate schooling is usually indicated.

Infections are generally handled as for unaffected children.

Medications. Dosages should be based on body weight or body surface area and not on age. Anesthetics should be used with particular caution.

Nitroglycerin is frequently of benefit if angina develops.

Routine anticongestive therapy is appropriate if congestive heart failure is present.

Statins are recommended for their putative effect on farnesylation inhibition.

Anticoagulation is warranted if vascular blockage, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, angina, or myocardial infarction occur.

Injuries. Wound healing is normal.

Fracture rate is equivalent to the general pediatric population. When children do fracture, treatment and healing are routine.

Hips. Conservative management of hip dislocation with physical therapy and body bracing and avoidance of surgical procedures on bones are recommended when possible.

Teeth. Extraction of primary teeth may be required to avoid crowding and development of two rows of teeth. Since secondary teeth may erupt slowly or not at all, pulling primary teeth to make room for secondary teeth should be performed after secondary teeth have fully or almost fully or almost fully descended. Once the primary tooth has been extracted, the secondary tooth often moves into the appropriate position with time.

General anesthesia and intubation should be performed with extreme caution, ideally with fiberoptic intubation, if possible. Individuals with HGPS may have a narrow and unusually shaped airway; additionally, they may exhibit an extreme sensitivity to alterations in blood pressure due to vascular stiffness.

Physical therapy. Routine physical and occupational therapy is recommended to help maintain range of motion in large and small (i.e., finger) joints; see Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy in Progeria (pdf). Active stretching and strengthening, along with hydrotherapy, are recommended.

Podiatric evaluation is indicated to determine if shoe inserts are needed

Eye care. Corneal dryness, clouding or ulceration should be fully evaluated by an ophthalmologist. Exposure keratitis primarily caused by nocturnal lagophthalmos can be treated during daytime with ocular lubication and during sleep with moisturizing ointment or by closing eyelids with skin tape.

Hearing loss. Hearing aids can be used, when clinically necessary.
Of primary importance in the management of individuals with HHH syndrome is rapid control of the hyperammonemic episodes that may result from changes in diet (e.g., protein intake), infection, fasting, or injury, or have no apparent cause. Long-term management of affected individuals focuses on the prevention of episodes of hyperammonemia and attempts to lower the level of plasma ornithine concentration.

It is critical that the acute and long-term management of individuals with HHH syndrome be performed in conjunction with a metabolic specialist.

Treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes. Assess plasma ammonia concentration, complete chemistry panel, arterial blood gases (ABGs), CBC and differential (to evaluate for an infectious process), urinalysis, urine and plasma amino acids, and urine orotic acid.

Plasma ammonia concentrations ≥100-125 μmol/L (~2 times control values) should be treated immediately.

Discontinue all oral intake until the patient’s condition is stabilized because vomiting may be induced by hyperammonemia and/or some of the drugs given intravenously to promote ammonia removal (e.g., as part of nitrogen scavenging therapy). This approach also stops all protein intake.

Initial intravenous infusion should be 10% dextrose (with 1/4 normal saline and 20mEq/liter KCl) at twice maintenance; ammonia and glucose/Na/K/Cl/CO2 concentrations should be monitored every two hours or when neurologic status changes. It is important to note that patients respond neurologically differently to rising ammonia concentrations: an individual with HHH syndrome is more likely to respond to the initial IV infusion of dextrose and to normalize his/her plasma ammonia concentration when compared to an individual with a urea cycle disorder such as OTC deficiency or ASS deficiency. If clinical status does not improve, infusion of supplemental arginine and ammonia removal drugs is added to the regimen.

Follow published protocols for treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes similar to those instituted for OTC deficiency [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]. These protocols consist of arginine supplementation and use of intravenous bolus and maintenance infusions of the ammonia removal drugs sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate. The New England Consortium of Metabolic Programs has a complete set of treatment protocols and algorithms that are freely available and easily accessible.

An initial priming dose of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate is given (see Table 3).

Table 3. 

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group

Infusion 1

Infants and Children

Adolescents and Adults

10% arginine HCl

210 mg/kg/day

4.0 g/m2

Sodium benzoate

250 mg/kg/day

5.5 g/m2

Sodium phenylacetate

250 mg/kg/day

5.5 g/m2

1. 

Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution.

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group

Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution.

If ammonia levels stabilize, the same arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate solution is infused over 24 hrs.

Note: All preparations of arginine and ammonia removal drugs should be double- or triple-checked given the potential for drug intoxication if high doses are given or continued CNS ammonia toxicity if low doses are given. If sodium benzoate or sodium phenylacetate solutions are not available, infusion of arginine should be started.

Table 4. 

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia

Drug

Action

Glucose

Raises insulin levels

Induces anabolic state

Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids

Arginine 1

Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder

Stimulates secretion of insulin

Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2

Sodium benzoate 3

Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4

Eliminates one amino group in the urine

Sodium phenylacetate 3

Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4

Eliminates two amino groups in the urine

1. 

A non-essential amino acid in humans

2. 

Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals.

3. 

Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase

4. 

Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia

Raises insulin levels

Induces anabolic state

Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids

Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder

Stimulates secretion of insulin

Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2

Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4

Eliminates one amino group in the urine

Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4

Eliminates two amino groups in the urine

A non-essential amino acid in humans

Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals.

Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase

Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]

Hemodialysis. If the patient fails to respond to the above treatment of hyperammonemia, if the plasma ammonia concentration increases, and/or if the neurologic status deteriorates, hemodialysis should be started promptly to remove ammonia from the circulation. Infusion of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should continue during hemodialysis.

Dialysis may be prolonged if the catabolic state persists.

Nutrition. Twenty-four to 36 hours after initial admission the patient should start receiving intravenous alimentation including daily doses of only essential amino acids, carnitine, vitamins, and lipids to help avoid a catabolic state which will prolong hyperammonemia. Note: Non-essential amino acids (i.e., glutamine, proline, and glycine) should be avoided since they increase the nitrogen load to an already compromised urea cycle.
Nosebleeds

It is appropriate to consider intervention for nosebleeds in the case of anemia attributable to the nosebleeds or if an individual feels that the frequency or duration interferes significantly with normal activities.

Humidification and the daily application of nasal lubricants may be helpful.

Hemostatic products (gauze, sponge or powder products) available over the counter help individuals self-manage significant nosebleeds.

Laser ablation typically done under general anesthesia may be the most effective intervention for control of mild to moderate nosebleeds. Office-based sclerotherapy was shown to be a potentially safe and useful alternative in an uncontrolled Spanish study [Morais et al 2012] and a small retrospective US pilot study [Boyer et al 2011].

Young's nasal closure is a consideration for severe epistaxis which has proven unresponsive to the above methods [Richer et al 2012]. Surgical treatment for severe epistaxis in persons with HHT should be performed by surgeons who treat people with HHT regularly.

Oral drug therapy. A meta-analysis of studies of hormonal and anti-hormonal treatment concluded that estrogen-progesterone at doses used for oral contraception may eliminate bleeding in symptomatic HHT and is a reasonable initial option to consider for fertile women [Jameson & Cave 2004]. An anti-estrogen, tamoxifen, was reported to decrease nosebleeds in one series [Yaniv et al 2009]. Antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron®) have been used with some success in selected individuals; the associated risks are not well established [Fernandez-L et al 2007]. Thalidomide, an angiogenesis inhibitor, reduced the severity and frequency of nosebleeds in six of seven affected individuals in a small series [Lebrin et al 2010]. Oral propranolol has also been suggested as a potential treatment [Albiñana et al 2012].

Topical drug therapy. Current evidence and experience suggest that the simple humidification and moisturizing effects of medicated sprays and ointments are more helpful than the particular medication. A multi-HHT center randomized, cross-over, placebo controlled trial (NOSE Trial) to study the efficacy of several medicated nose sprays (bevacizumab, estriol, and tranexamic acid) in the treatment of epistaxis concluded that all groups, including the placebo group using saline spray, had a significant improvement in epistaxis. None of the three topical therapies was any better at decreasing epistaxis frequency than twice-daily saline spray [Whitehead et al 2016]. Another randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled clinical trial of three doses of bevacizumab nasal spray was published simultaneously with the NOSE Trial. Here again, topical bevacizumab had no effect on epistaxis [Dupuis-Girod et al 2016]. Case reports or small series suggest that these and other topically administered agents (e.g., timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution) may help reduce the duration or frequency of nosebleeds in those with HHT [Flanagan et al 2012, Guldmann et al 2012, Olitsky 2012, Reh et al 2013].

Case reports and a small series [Bose et al 2009, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012, Thompson et al 2014] suggest that IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab may be efficacious in those with severe, intractable nosebleeds.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Treatment is unnecessary unless aggressive iron therapy has been ineffective in maintaining hemoglobin concentration in the normal range.

Endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, mesenteric and celiac angiography, and radionuclide studies may be used to localize the source of bleeding and its type [Grève et al 2010].

Endoscopic application of a heater probe, bicap, or laser is the mainstay of local treatment.

Small bowel bleeding sites and larger vascular malformations can be removed surgically after they are identified by nuclear medicine studies.

For severe GI bleeding associated with intractable iron deficiency anemia, various pharmacologic agents have shown promise based on case reports or small uncontrolled series. Treatment with oral estrogen-progesterone or tranexamic acid has decreased transfusion needs [Proctor et al 2008]. A number of single cases of dramatic reduction in GI bleeding after IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab have been reported [Flieger et al 2006, Fodstad et al 2011].

Anemia

Treatment of anemia with iron replacement and red blood cell transfusion, if necessary, is appropriate.

Persons with iron deficiency who are intolerant of or do not respond to oral iron benefit from parenteral administration of iron.

Pulmonary AVMs

Treatment of pulmonary AVMs is indicated for dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and hypoxemia, but is most important for prevention of lung hemorrhage and the neurologic complications of brain abscess and stroke, even in those who are asymptomatic with respect to pulmonary function and oxygen saturation. Any pulmonary AVM with a feeding vessel that exceeds 1.0 mm in diameter requires consideration of occlusion [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010]. Transcatheter embolotherapy (TCE) with coils, occluder devices (Amplatzer®), or both is the treatment of choice. Occasionally, a small lesion cannot be reached because of its location or the size of the feeding vessel. Multiple coils may be needed to occlude AVMs with large or multiple feeding arteries.

Long-term follow up by chest CT and/or contrast echocardiography is indicated after transcatheter occlusion of pulmonary AVMs because of reported recanalization and development or growth of untreated pulmonary AVMs [Cottin et al 2007]. Usually a follow-up CT is done six to 12 months post-occlusion, and if no recanalized or new PAVMs are noted, follow-up CT is done at five-year intervals thereafter [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010, Faughnan et al 2011].

Hepatic AVMs

Treatment of cardiac failure or liver failure secondary to hepatic AVMs is currently problematic. Embolization of hepatic AVMs, which is successful for treatment of pulmonary AVMs, has led to lethal hepatic infarctions. Most individuals with symptomatic hepatic AVMs can be satisfactorily managed with intensive medical therapy [Buscarini et al 2011].

Liver transplantation has been the standard treatment for those (usually older) individuals whose symptoms of hepatic failure do not respond to medical management [Buscarini et al 2006, Lerut et al 2006, Dupuis-Girod et al 2010, Lee et al 2010, Chavan et al 2013].

Bevacizumab administered intravenously has been reported to decrease cardiac output and symptoms of heart failure in affected individuals with severe symptoms secondary to hepatic AVMs in case reports and one series [Mitchell et al 2008, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012].

Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Cerebral AVMs

Cerebral AVMs greater than 1.0 cm in diameter are usually treated using neurovascular surgery, embolotherapy, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery.

Note: Before proceeding with treatment for any visceral AVM, individuals and their doctors are encouraged to contact the nearest multidisciplinary HHT clinic, which can be located through the support group, Cure HHT, to assure that appropriate diagnostic and treatment plans are in place.

Intestinal Polyps

Any individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis (JP) should be screened for manifestations of HHT, and the family should be screened for polyps. Any person with HHT who has gastrointestinal polyps, especially at an early age, should be evaluated for JP and managed accordingly (see Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome).
Initial treatment. Once initial diagnostic blood samples are obtained, the hypoglycemia must be corrected immediately using intravenous glucose at a dose sufficient to prevent further hypoglycemia and irreversible brain damage. The dose of glucose may be high (>15 mg/kg/min) and frequently requires central venous access. The definition of adequate glucose control has been the subject of discussion. Most investigators recommend maintaining all glucose levels above 3.3 mmol/L (60 mg/dL), a level that leaves a sufficient margin to prevent frequent episodes of neuroglycopenia (i.e., transient or permanent brain dysfunction caused by inadequate glucose supplies) [Burns et al 2008, Inder 2008].

Long-term medical management. The next phase of treatment, designed to decrease and stop parenteral glucose requirement, is empiric and involves a combination of medical therapies, which may include the following:

Diazoxide, which binds to the ABCC8 subunit of the KATP channel, increases the channel's probability of being open, resulting in membrane hyperpolarization and inhibition of insulin release. Some evidence suggests that diazoxide binding to mutated channels may correct abnormal protein folding and thus facilitate the transit of more channels to the membrane. The effective therapeutic dose varies but may be as high as 20 mg/kg/day in divided doses. A thiazide diuretic is always given along with diazoxide to prevent fluid retention, which may be severe [Hussain et al 2004].

Somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide or lanreotide) suppress insulin secretion by binding to specific beta-cell receptors and initiating a number of intracellular signaling pathways. The clinical efficacy of these analogs may be limited by the relatively short duration of inhibition of insulin secretion after subcutaneous bolus injection (~3 hours) and by the fact that these drugs also inhibit glucagon and growth hormone secretion, thus impairing hepatic glucose production. Careful attention to dosage (typically 10/40 μg/kg/day for octreotide) as well as the use of continuous subcutaneous injection using a portable pump greatly enhances clinical efficacy [Glaser et al 1989, Hussain et al 2004]. Simultaneous treatment with glucagon or growth hormone may enhance efficacy.

Nifedipine, which acts as an inhibitor of the voltage-dependent calcium channels present in the beta cell, inhibits insulin secretion by decreasing calcium influx [Hussain et al 2004]. In vitro, this drug effectively suppresses insulin secretion depending on the pathogenic variant; however, in vivo side effects are usually dose limiting, and the drug is only rarely clinically effective.

Glucagon, which increases hepatic gluconeogenesis, helps prevents hypoglycemia. The drug can be used acutely to treat severe hypoglycemia, or chronically as replacement therapy to counteract suppression by somatostatin analogs [Mohnike et al 2008b].

Recombinant IGF-I has been shown to suppress insulin secretion in individuals with FHI [Katz et al 1999]; however, therapeutic success has not been confirmed.

Glucocorticoids induce resistance to endogenous insulin and correct the inadequate cortisol response sometimes seen in affected individuals. Their use in the treatment algorithm of FHI is, however, very limited.

Growth hormone may be given in combination with somatostatin analogs in order to counteract GH suppression by the analogs.

Novel treatment approaches, such as the use of a GLP1 receptor antagonist, have been attempted, but their therapeutic efficacy and safety have yet to be determined [Calabria et al 2012].

Dietary intervention:

Frequent high-carbohydrate feedings, including formula supplemented with glucose polymer

Night-time continuous gastric drip containing glucose or glucose polymer

Feeding gastrostomy to simplify the process of continuous night-time feeding and to provide access for emergency home treatment of hypoglycemia

Some individuals, particularly those with FHI-GLUD1, FHI-HADH, FHI-GCK, or dominant pathogenic variants in either ABCC8 or KCNJ11, respond very well to medical therapy. Individuals with severe FHI-KATP may also respond to medical therapy; however, these individuals often require aggressive medical management, including a combination of several of the above-mentioned drugs along with dietary intervention to maintain plasma glucose concentration in a clinically safe range without the use of parenteral glucose administration. This management protocol may be extremely demanding and, even if successful in the hospital setting, may not be appropriate for many families on an outpatient basis. The overall success of medical management in FHI-KATP as reported by different groups is extremely variable [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009]. The discrepancy may result from different pathogenic variants being common in various populations, or by differences in physician and patient expectations and willingness to invest time and effort in achieving success using medical management.

If medical treatment can be safely maintained, glycemic control usually becomes easier with time, and most individuals treated medically enter clinical remission after several months or years of treatment [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009]. It is generally accepted that those individuals who respond well to medical treatment can be treated chronically without undue risk for long-term complications. Long-term follow up of medically treated individuals shows that some eventually develop glucose intolerance, which can be effectively managed with mild dietary restrictions [Mazor-Aronovitch et al 2009].

Surgical management. Once an individual is stabilized, a decision must be made as to the need for surgical intervention and the extent of such intervention. In some severe cases, even the most aggressive medical management fails to maintain plasma glucose concentration consistently within the safe limits (>60 mg/dL). In such individuals, surgery must be considered. Prior to surgical intervention, differentiation between focal and diffuse disease using one of the following techniques is important, as the surgical approach and the clinical outcome are quite different:

Note: None of the techniques described is 100% accurate and more research is needed to develop tools to diagnose and localize focal FHI more accurately without the need for invasive testing.

Genetic studies, in certain circumstances, can be useful in differentiating focal from diffuse disease:

Finding two recessive pathogenic variants or a single dominant pathogenic variant is diagnostic of diffuse disease.

Finding a single recessive pathogenic variant on the maternal allele suggests diffuse disease; it is assumed that the other pathogenic variant on the paternal allele was missed because of technical limitations of the molecular genetic testing.

Finding a single recessive pathogenic variant on the paternal allele is consistent with and highly suggestive of focal disease, although it cannot be considered diagnostic, as molecular genetic testing methods could have failed to detect a pathogenic variant on the maternal allele. In such individuals, further testing diagnose and localize focal disease is indicated. Because of the large size of ABCC8 and KNCJ11, complete sequencing and analysis of all variants discovered is expensive and time-consuming and may not be completed in time to aid in clinical decision making for a severely ill individual. With the incorporation of modern sequencing techniques, rapid complete sequencing of all relevant genes is becoming feasible. In contrast, for a person from an ethnic group with a known founder variant (e.g., Ashkenazi Jews), targeted analysis for pathogenic variants can provide rapid and inexpensive clinically useful information.

Transhepatic percutaneous pancreatic venous sampling (TPPVS) was the first effective method for diagnosing and localizing focal lesions, but has now been largely replaced by F-DOPA-PET scanning, which is easier and considerably safer to perform.

Intraoperative histologic evaluation of a pancreatic biopsy in very experienced hands can be used to differentiate between diffuse FHI and a normal, suppressed pancreas in an individual with a focal lesion. Since interoperative identification of the focal lesion can be very difficult or impossible, resection of the lesion is usually only possible if its location is determined preoperatively.

Acute insulin response to calcium, tolbutamide, and glucose can be used to diagnose the focal FHI [Grimberg et al 1999, Ferry et al 2000, Grimberg et al 2001, Huopio et al 2002], while selective arterial calcium infusion may be useful in localizing the lesion [Abernethy et al 1998, Stanley et al 2004]. The former, however, will not help to localize the lesion, and the latter is invasive and not without potentially serious side effects.

Fluoro-DOPA positron emission tomography (F-DOPA-PET) has been used successfully for the preoperative localization of focal lesions [Otonkoski et al 2006, Mohnike et al 2008a] (see Diagnosis). While the scan itself is relatively easy to perform, the radiopharmaceutical is not readily available in many centers and the scan can be difficult to interpret, requiring extensive experience to obtain reliable results.

Individuals with diffuse disease require extensive (80%-95%) pancreatic resection and are at risk for persistent hypoglycemia postoperatively and/or insulin-requiring diabetes mellitus later in childhood. Individuals with focal disease can be cured by localized resection of the hyperplastic region. Although the apparent risk for postoperative diabetes appears to be very low after limited pancreatectomy, very long-term follow up is not yet available on these individuals [Beltrand et al 2012]. Since focal lesions can only rarely be identified grossly at the time of surgery, perioperative diagnosis and localization of focal lesions is needed.
Currently, there is no cure or targeted treatment for AD-HIES, and the mainstay of therapy is prevention of staphylococcal abscesses and pneumonias with anti-staphylococcal prophylactic antibiotics as well as early aggressive treatment of infections. It is important to institute antibiotic therapy at the earliest sign of infection. Many affected individuals progress from minor to major infection rapidly, and systemic signs of infection may be minimal.

Prophylactic antibiotics targeting Staphylococcus aureus and other pyogenic bacteria are primarily used to prevent the pneumonias and their complications.

If structural damage to the lungs (e.g., bronchiectasis and/or pneumatocoeles) occurs, the breadth of antimicrobial coverage is usually extended, as these structural abnormalities become secondarily infected with Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas) or fungi (e.g., Aspergillus).

The combination of prophylactic antimicrobials and aggressive diagnosis and treatment of pneumonias helps to diminish these secondary lung parenchymal abnormalities.

Continued use of antifungal agents to control mucocutaneous candidiasis and to prevent pulmonary disease may be necessary.

The skin disease of eczema and recurrent boils is usually well controlled with antiseptic therapies such as diluted bleach baths (~1/2 - 1 cup of bleach per bath tub of water for 15 minutes 3 times weekly) or frequent swimming in a chlorinated pool.

Adequate skin lubrication is needed with frequent bleach baths.

Medications such as histamine-1 antagonists to control pruritus are helpful for more significant eczema.

Intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin is used with anecdotal improvement for some individuals, especially those who fail to make protective levels of specific antibodies following vaccination challenge; but prospective, randomized controlled studies of immunoglobulin supplementation have not been performed.

There is no known treatment or prevention for the non-immunologic characteristics.

As many individuals have osteopenia and minimal trauma fractures, optimizing of calcium and vitamin D intake is prudent. The role of medications such as bisphosphonates for persons with AD-HIES with osteoporosis is largely unexplored.

Optimal blood pressure management seems appropriate in light of the arterial abnormalities.

Anti-platelet or anticoagulation therapies may be considered for individuals with significant coronary artery aneurysms to prevent myocardial infarction related to clotting with aneurysm.

However, any anti-clotting therapies need to be weighed against the risk of hemoptysis, a recognized complication of fungal or bacterial lung disease in individuals with AD-HIES.

The role of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HSCT) in AD-HIES remains unknown. An adult treated for lymphoma with HSCT had improvement of many of the clinical features of HIES and decreasing IgE concentrations, but then died of transplant-related complications [Nester et al 1998]. A young girl with recurrent infections had full engraftment and reduction of serum IgE concentration that rebounded with the cessation of immunosuppression [Gennery et al 2000]. Recently, two unrelated affected teenagers who received HSCT for non-Hodgkin lymphoma were reported. Their immunologic and non-immunologic features, such as osteoporosis and course facial skin, were corrected [Goussetis et al 2010].
Resection of the aganglionic segment and anastomosis of proximal bowel to the anus ("pull-through") is the standard treatment for HSCR and can be performed as a single procedure or in stages. A variety of surgical anastomoses have been developed with the general goal of eliminating obstruction while preserving continence.

An effort is generally made to resect a variable length of gut just proximal to the aganglionic zone since this transitional area may have altered pathologic properties (e.g., hypoganglionosis) and physiologic properties that are not conducive to normal intestinal motility [Coran & Teitelbaum 2000]. However, persistent intestinal dysmotility (usually constipation but sometimes diarrhea) after a pull-through procedure occurs frequently and may reflect an underlying abnormality of ganglionic gut that is not understood [Engum & Grosfeld 2004]. Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis can be a post-surgical complication with significant morbidity [Engum & Grosfeld 2004].

Individuals with extensive intestinal aganglionosis who develop irreversible intestinal failure may be candidates for intestinal transplantation [Bond & Reyes 2004].For a detailed explanation of treatment for HLH, see Jordan et al [2011] (full text).

HLH-1994. To improve survival, in 1994 the Histiocyte Society initiated a prospective international collaborative therapeutic study. It combined chemotherapy and immunotherapy (etoposide, corticosteroids, cyclosporine A, and intrathecal methotrexate for individuals with CNS diseases), followed by HSCT in persistent, recurring, and/or familial disease. Although HLH-94 was primarily designed for the treatment of FHL, it was also open to all individuals with non-familial HLH.

HLH-2004. The HLH-2004 protocol was opened on January 1, 2004, and was designed for individuals with FHL and non-familial HLH. This protocol was based on the HLH-94 protocol with minor therapeutic modifications such as initiation of cyclosporine from onset of induction therapy.

The two protocols developed by the Histiocyte Society are available from the Histiocyte Society website.

Given the poor prognosis of individuals with HLH without prompt and effective treatment, it is recommended that treatment be initiated when clinical suspicion is high, even if all recommended studies are incomplete. In general, treatment involves the following:

Chemotherapy and immunotherapy to achieve a clinically stable resolution prior to hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Antibiotics or antiviral agents to treat or prevent infections that may have triggered the exaggerated inflammatory response

Allogeneic HCT, the only curative therapy, which should be undertaken in children with confirmed FHL as early in life as feasible:

Presymptomatically if status is confirmed by family history of clinical HLH, or

After achievement of clinical remission in simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family)

Use of HCT has improved survival significantly [Henter et al 2002]. Initially, three-year-survival in children who received HLH-94 therapy was approximately 64% [Horne et al 2005a]. More recently, reduced intensity regimens prior to HCT have diminished the early transplant mortality and increased three-year-survival rates to 92% [Marsh et al 2010c]. Long-term follow up reveals that after HCT most children treated early in the disease course return to normal or near-normal quality of life. Brain atrophy secondary to steroid therapy often identified on neuroimaging studies during the acute phase of HLH gradually resolves after HCT [Shuper et al 1998]. However, children who experienced serious CNS involvement may have irreversible neurologic problems and learning disabilities despite adequate disease control following HCT.
Cutaneous lesions. Cutaneous leiomyomas should be examined by a dermatologist. Treatment of cutaneous leiomyomas is difficult:

Surgical excision may be performed for a solitary painful lesion.

Lesions can be treated by cryoablation and/or lasers.

Several medications, including calcium channel blockers, alpha blockers, nitroglycerin, antidepressants, and antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), have been reported to reduce pain [Ritzmann et al 2006].

Uterine fibroids should be evaluated by a gynecologist. The uterine fibroids of HLRCC are treated in the same manner as sporadic fibroids. However, most women with HLRCC may require medical and/or surgical intervention earlier than the general population. Medical therapy (currently including gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists [GnRHa], antihormonal medications, and pain relievers) may be used initially to treat uterine fibroids, to decrease the size of fibroids in preparation for surgical removal, and/or to provide temporary relief from the symptoms of fibroids. When possible, myomectomy to remove fibroids while preserving the uterus is the treatment of choice. Hysterectomy should be performed only when necessary.

Renal tumors. Early detection of kidney tumor in HLRCC is important. Surgical excision of these malignancies appears to require earlier and more extensive surgery than other hereditary kidney cancers. Further studies may demonstrate that even small tumors have a high grade of malignancy on pathologic review. Kidney tumors associated with HLRCC have an aggressive disease course. Therefore, these tumors must be managed with caution until more is known about the natural history. Because of the aggressive nature of renal cancers associated with HLRCC, total nephrectomy should be strongly considered in individuals with a detectable renal mass.
Chelation Therapy with Disodium Calcium Edetate

Regular chelation therapy with intravenous disodium calcium edetate can stabilize blood manganese levels, improve neurologic symptoms, and halt liver disease [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012].

Short term. The response of an individual to disodium calcium edetate is determined by a single five-day course of twice-daily disodium calcium edetate at 20 mg/kg/dose (made up in 250 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 1 hour) and daily measurement of plasma manganese concentration and 24-hour urine manganese levels. Other monitoring includes: serum concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, and magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium.

Note: To avoid hypocalcemia, disodium calcium edetate infusions need to be administered slowly over at least one hour. If the calcium level (corrected for albumin concentration) is low, infusions should be administered over a longer time span (i.e., >3 hours).

Long term. If chelation therapy proves to be effective in the short term, monthly five-day courses of disodium calcium edetate (intravenous 20 mg/kg/dose 2x/day) are expected to lower blood manganese levels and normalize hemoglobin concentration and iron indices [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012]. Chelation therapy should be continued lifelong. While on treatment, monitoring once every two months includes: serum concentration of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Iron Therapy

Iron is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal manganese uptake; hence, supplementation with iron given orally (despite normal serum iron levels) can reduce blood manganese levels and resolve polycythemia [Tuschl et al 2008, Tuschl et al 2012]. The high serum transferrin levels seen in affected individuals are thought to reduce the risk of manganese toxicity.

Note: Iron indices need to be monitored frequently (every ~3 months) in those receiving iron supplements (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Liver Transplantation

Liver transplantation should be considered in individuals with end-stage liver disease; however, it has not been attempted in individuals with this disorder and, hence, no data are available.

Other

Dystonia can result in physical deformities and pain. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy should be provided. Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications and L-dopa has been attempted with limited success.
At present no disease-modifying therapy exists. Management is supportive.

For distal leg weakness, use of ankle-foot orthoses can optimize independent ambulation. Later in the disease course other mobility aids such as canes, walkers, or wheelchairs may be required.

Exercises and activities suggested by physiotherapy consultation may be helpful to prevent continued loss of physical function due to inactivity.

Noninvasive ventilation with bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may be indicated for nocturnal hypoventilation initially, followed by mechanical ventilatory support as needed.

Patients have increased susceptibility to respiratory tract infections and, therefore, influenza vaccination should be prioritized.

Given the gradually progressive nature of this disease, occupational therapy and social services support are important.
Currently, no effective therapy is proven to abort or shorten an HNA attack.

Treatment of acute episodes of pain and weakness with corticosteroids has been proposed based on retrospective analysis of cases [van Alfen et al 2009, van Eijk et al 2009]. These reports summarize retrospective, anecdotal evidence that corticosteroids can have a favorable effect on pain and recovery. Additional immunomodulatory treatments with such agents as corticosteroids and immune globulin may be considered, but no prospective trials have been performed [van Alfen et al 2009, Johnson et al 2011].

Pain management is the primary goal of therapy:

In the acute stage, a combination of a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as ketorolac and a narcotic such as controlled-release morphine are used.

In the second phase of chronic pain resulting from damaged, hypersensitive nerves, co-analgesics such as gabapentin, carbamazepine, and amitryptiline may be used.

In the third chronic phase, persistent pain in the neck and shoulder region usually points to strain of the paretic or compensating muscles or to a complication in the glenohumeral joint, such as rotator cuff pathology. As the weakness has to recover by itself, therapy focuses on arm support in a sling, rest, physical therapy, range of motion stretching, and modification of activities. This rehabilitation and prevention of further injury is best managed by a physiatrist.

For persistent paresis, physical therapy is recommended to maintain exercise tolerance and prevent joint or ligament contractures. Care must be taken to avoid post-exercise pain in the affected area, as this is often a sign of strain. In this case, exercise should be temporarily deferred, or at least be without extra added weights and with fewer repetitions per set. The patient must find his or her personal level of exercise tolerance; in practice, this is often much lower than estimated (or desired) by the patient or therapist.

For severe paresis of the serratus anterior muscle persisting more than one year, corrective surgery can be considered to increase scapular stability, for example by a split pectoralis major muscle transfer.

Patients with phrenic nerve palsy need consultation with a respiratory specialist and can benefit from noninvasive nocturnal positive pressure ventilation.

For a clinical overview of neurologic and rehabilitative management, see van Alfen [2007].

Cleft palate is best managed by a local craniofacial team.
Management of colon cancer in a person with Lynch syndrome. If colon cancer is detected, full colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is recommended rather than a segmental/partial colonic resection because of the high risk for metachronous cancers [Lynch et al 1988, Aarnio et al 1995, Church & Simmang 2003]. A study of 296 individuals (253 with partial resection, 43 with colectomy anastomosis) from families meeting Amsterdam Criteria found that with a median follow up of 104 months, 22% of affected individuals treated with a partial resection developed a high-risk adenoma and 25% developed a second primary colon cancer, while only 11% and 8% of affected individuals developed adenomas and colon cancers respectively [Kalady et al 2010]. Note: Because the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome is often not considered until after treatment of an initial cancer, many individuals diagnosed with Lynch syndrome have previously had their cancer treated with a limited colonic resection.

Although timing may be difficult, evaluating the tumor biopsy specimen by MSI and IHC (and, if indicated, the MHL1 promoter methylation status) may help determine the optimal surgical approach. A study suggests that persons with colon cancer are open to being approached about genetic testing at the time of their diagnosis [Porteous et al 2003].

The other tumors seen in Lynch syndrome are managed as in the general population.
Transient bracing, such as with a wrist splint or ankle-foot orthosis (AFO), may be useful. Some individuals with residual foot drop may permanently use an AFO.
Treatment should be managed by a biochemical geneticist and metabolic dietician and aimed at prevention of primary manifestations of homocystinuria. For published management guidelines, see Morris et al [2017].

Complications should be managed appropriately (e.g., surgery for ectopia lentis) [Neely & Plager 2001].
Management at all ages focuses on supportive therapy to minimize disease-related complications.

Multidisciplinary management at various ages may include:

Endocrinology to optimize bone homeostasis and avoid exacerbating treatments

Nephrology to monitor calcium homeostasis and examine for nephrocalcinosis

Neurology to prophylactically or prospectively treat seizures and manage myopathy

Neurosurgery or craniofacial team to manage pseudocraniosynostosis

Orthopedics to manage primary and secondary skeletal manifestations

Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R), physical therapy, and occupational therapy to optimize mobility and autonomy

Pain management

Psychological support

Pediatric and adult dentistry to manage tooth loss

The involvement of multiple specialists treating complex interrelated medical issues mandates case management and social work support.

Enzyme Replacement Therapy

The emergence of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with asfotase alfa (Strensiq™) has altered the natural history of severe perinatal and infantile HPP cases; the long-term effects of treatment are not fully known. A new phenotype of “treated perinatal and infantile HPP” is emerging, and the prior designation of “perinatal lethal HPP” may no longer universally apply in the developed world.

In October 2015, the FDA approved asfotase alfa for treatment of patients with perinatal, infantile, and juvenile onset HPP [Alexion –10-23-2015].

Perinatal/infantile HPP study outcomes. In two prospective, single-arm studies (with historical controls used for survival analysis), 68 individuals with severe, perinatal/infantile-onset HPP (age at treatment onset: 1 day – 78 months) completed at least 24-weeks of TNSALP ERT (≤9 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously) [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Survival. Of those requiring respiratory support (n = 26), 21 (81%) survived through the last date of assessment (median age 3.2 years), in comparison to 1:20 (5%) in historical controls.

In the mixed cohort of 68 patients with perinatal/infantile onset HPP receiving asfotase alfa ERT, 54 required mechanical ventilation and of these, 91% survived and 85% were ventilator free at last contact, in comparison to 27% overall survival and 25% ventilator free in the 48 historical controls [Whyte et al 2016] (final data). Clinical trials with ERT have shown improvement in developmental milestones and pulmonary function [Whyte et al 2012].

Bone findings. Radiographs from 64 of these individuals, and four from a third prospective open-label study of juvenile-onset HPP, were evaluated for HPP-related rickets using the 7-point Radiographic Global Impression of Change (RGI-C) scale. Radiographic change of at least +2 (defined as “responders”) were seen in 50/68 (74%) of those treated (see Figure 2), at last assessment (historical comparative data does not exist). Eighteen individuals with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP experienced fractures during the course of treatment; the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures remaining unclear [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

Juvenile-onset HPP study outcomes. One prospective open-label, single arm study included eight patients with juvenile-onset HPP and five patients with perinatal/infantile-onset HPP; age at treatment onset was six to 12 years. The patients with juvenile-onset HPP completed at least 48 months of TNSALP ERT (6 mg/kg weekly, administered subcutaneously). The eight juvenile-onset patients were compared with 32 historical controls. By the RGI-C rating of radiographs, all eight patients were deemed responders; two (6%) of the historical controls were rated responders with an improvement of +2 or more at month 54. Gait, assessed using a modified Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment Gait (MPOMA-G), six-minute walk test (6MWT), and step length improved in patients treated with asfotase alfa. 6MWT improved to the normal range in six of six patients assessed by month 48, from none at baseline. The data are at present insufficient to assess the effect of asfotase alfa on fractures in juvenile-onset HPP [Whyte et al 2016] (final data).

When Enzyme Replacement Therapy is Not Available or Not Typically Used

Perinatal types. Limited experience exists for asfotase alfa ERT treatment of perinatal HPP in the immediate newborn period, and this therapy may not be readily available. In the immediate perinatal period, if multidisciplinary assessment identifies the perinatal severe type, comfort care and supportive management of infant and family remain an option.

Infantile type. The infantile phenotype has high mortality, with 50% of individuals succumbing to respiratory failure caused by undermineralization of the ribs. In the absence of ERT, supportive management remains.

Calcium homeostasis. Management can further be complicated by recalcitrant hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria, and optimal management of this issue remains unclear: hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria is typically resistant to hydration and furosemide treatment, and bisphosphonates would be contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). In the absence of ERT, calcitonin and steroids could be attempted short term, with limited efficacy [Deeb et al 2000].

Seizures. When present, seizures may respond to treatment with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), one of the natural substrates of alkaline phosphatase, is the active compound by which pyridoxine mediates essential enzyme activity; PLP deficiency in the central nervous system may reduce seizure threshold by reducing neurotransmitter (GABA) synthesis.

Craniosynostosis in those with the infantile phenotype is variable. When identified, involvement of a neurosurgeon to monitor for complications is prudent. Increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis is an indication for surgical release.

Dental care beginning at age one year is important to preserve primary dentition (to support nutrition) and to preserve or replace secondary dentition.

Childhood (juvenile) and adult hypophosphatasia

Osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs.

Bone pain and osteomalacia are managed supportively: NSAIDs appear beneficial [Girschick et al 2006]. Hypophosphatasia is a relative contraindication to treatment with bisphosphonates (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Pseudofractures and stress fractures are difficult to manage; internal fixation has been suggested as the optimal orthopedic management. Foot orthotics may help in management of tarsal fractures and pseudofractures in adults.
The management of individuals with HOS optimally involves a multidisciplinary team approach with specialists in medical genetics, cardiology, and orthopedics, including a specialist in hand surgery.

A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation. Pharmacologic treatment for affected individuals with pulmonary hypertension may be appropriate. Individuals with pulmonary hypertension and/or structural heart malformation may require tertiary care center cardiology follow up. Cardiac surgery, if required for congenital heart defect, is standard.

The orthopedic team may be able to guide individuals in decisions regarding surgery for improved upper-limb and hand function as well as physical and occupational therapy options. Those individuals born with severe upper-limb malformations may be candidates for surgery to improve function, such as pollicization (creation of a thumb-like digit by moving another digit into the thenar position) in the case of thumb aplasia/hypoplasia [Vaienti et al 2009]. Children with severe limb shortening may benefit from prostheses as well as from physical and occupational therapy.

Individuals and families are also likely to benefit from programs providing social support to those with limb anomalies.
Treatment for HPE varies according to the brain malformations and associated anomalies [Levey et al 2010]. Most affected children benefit from a multidisciplinary team approach with clinicians very familiar with HPE.

Hormone replacement therapy has been successful in some children with pituitary dysfunction.

Antiepileptic drugs can help decrease the frequency and intensity of seizures.

Feeding difficulties and failure to thrive may be managed with gastrostomy tube placement and Nissen fundoplication if gastroesophageal reflux and vomiting are issues. Thickening of feeds and upright positioning after feeding may be helpful to alleviate gastroesophageal reflux. To achieve the best growth in the child with HPE, the quality of the feeds is more important than the quantity.

Accommodations for oral feeding with cleft lip and/or palate may require specific nipples, cups, and parental training. Early surgical repair may improve feeding.

Placement of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt may be necessary in children with HPE and hydrocephalus.

In older children, surgical repair of cleft lip and/or palate may be indicated.

For children with cleft lip and/or palate, referral to a specialized cleft or craniofacial clinic is recommended.

Onset of new neurologic findings or deterioration warrant evaluation for seizures and/or hydrocephalus and/or shunt malfunction. Such evaluation would include vital sign monitoring, neurologic examination, EEG, and MRI.

A major aspect of treatment is support and counseling of the parents [Mercier et al 2010].
For a comprehensive summary of the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, see Levitt [2008] (full text). The principles of treatment are summarized in Table 7.

Table 7. 

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Goal

Means

Practical Details

To avoid triggering or aggravating factors for paralytic attacks

Avoid:

Strenuous effortProlonged immobilityCarbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggersProvide dietary review/counseling

Treatment of paralytic attack:

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episodeNormalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassiumOral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvementIV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Preventive treatment for paralytic attacks

Daily K+ supplementation

Slow-release forms of potassium may be used

Diamox (acetazolamide)

K+-sparing diuretics

Preventive treatment for late-onset myopathy

Diamox (acetazolamide)?

Medical precautions

Avoid corticosteroids if possibleUse alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Other elements of management

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficitAdaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP

Strenuous effort

Prolonged immobility

Carbohydrate-rich diet

Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggers

Provide dietary review/counseling

Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episode

Normalize kalemia

Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low)

Avoid glucose intake

Do not use slow-release forms of potassium

Oral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvement

IV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h

Avoid corticosteroids if possible

Use alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology

Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficit

Adaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting

Paralytic crisis. Treatment of the paralytic crisis is far from perfect, as the only tool is the administration of potassium by mouth or IV, which addresses the hypokalemia directly, but the weakness only indirectly. Resolution of muscle weakness and normalization of the serum concentration of potassium are not strictly parallel. The serum concentration of potassium may normalize before weakness begins to resolve.

During a paralytic attack, there is usually no true potassium depletion in the body (unless digestive or renal losses from another cause are associated), but there is a reversible transfer of potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular space. The global potassium pool (and especially the intracellular pool of the body) is conserved, and the goal of the treatment is to raise the blood potassium level just enough to trigger the shift to repolarization of skeletal muscle membrane, and the liberation of intracellularly sequestered potassium.

Mild to moderate paralytic episodes

Treatment may occur in a familial or non-medical setting if the diagnosis is well-established and the affected individual is able to manage paralytic episodes.

Rapid recovery is typically possible with oral intake of chloride potassium salts, either as capsules or liquid-containing vials. Aqueous potassium contained in vials may act more rapidly.

An initial intake of 1mEq/kg potassium chloride is often used (60 mEq; i.e., 4.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60-kg person).

A response (at least partial) should be seen after 30 minutes. If no improvement occurs after 30 minutes, an additional 0.3 mEq/kg can be administered (20 mEq; i.e., 1.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60 kg person).

Note: (1) Slow-release forms of potassium should be avoided during a paralytic attack. (2) Potassium ingesting should be followed by oral intake of water (e.g., 100 mL (4 oz) of water for each 20 mEq of potassium). (3) Liquids containing high sugar or sodium content should be avoided.

Severe paralytic episodes. If an affected individual has followed the instructions above for a mild to moderate attack and either no improvement or further aggravation is observed after an additional 30 minutes, medical supervision with measurement of serum potassium level should be considered.

The total dose of potassium taken over a 24-hr period for the treatment of an acute attack should not exceed 200 mEq.

During severe paralytic episodes or attacks associated with respiratory, swallowing, or speaking difficulties, or with signs of arrythmia, the affected individual must be transferred to hospital.

In the case of very low serum potassium and severe symptoms (airway compromise with ictal dysphagia, accessory respiratory muscle paralysis, arrhythmia associated with hypokalemia), intravenous potassium treatment should be initiated. Note the following critical points:

The concentration of intravenous potassium chloride solution should not exceed 40 mEq/L because of the risk for thrombophlebitis (the use of a central catheter is rarely necessary).

The solution should be given as a continuous infusion that does not exceed 0.3 mEq/kg/h of potassium (i.e., 18 mEq/h for a 60-kg person) because of the high risk for arrhythmia or cardiac arrest associated with faster infusions.

The physician should be aware that hyperkalemia may occur, as there is no true potassium depletion; a reverse shift of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular space occurs during the resolution of paralytic episode.

A Y-branched peripheral venous line containing potassium chloride should be branched to a perfusion of mannitol or normal saline (avoid glucose-containing solutions, which may enhance hypokalemia).

To prevent cardiac arrhythmias, it is important to monitor the electrocardiogram (ECG) before, during, and after treatment and to perform repeat assessments of blood potassium concentration:

A prominent increase in the amplitude of the U wave, triggered by hypokalemia, is associated with a higher susceptibility to the ventricular arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Some individuals exhibit serious arrhythmias with only mild hypokalemia.

Large and sharp T waves are a marker of hyperkalemia and may occur during and after recovery; they are associated with a risk for cardiac arrest.

Monitoring of ECG and blood potassium concentration must be continued some hours after normalization of the serum potassium concentration, in order to detect a relapse of hypokalemia or the development of hyperkalemia secondary to excessive potassium load.

Administration of supplemental potassium must be discontinued when the serum potassium concentration is normalized, even if weakness persists.

Attempting to abort paralytic attacks when they begin. Affected individuals are advised to keep a sufficient dose of potassium in various places (at the bedside, in pockets or handbags, in the car) so that when warning symptoms appear, the person can take potassium and possibly avoid a full-blown attack, which would usually occur within minutes [Levitt 2008]. It is also acknowledged that maintaining mild physical activity may abort attacks in some cases.

Myopathy. No curative treatment is known for fixed myopathy in HOKPP. The effects of muscle weakness are managed as in other disorders with similar manifestations.

Physiotherapy may help to maintain strength and motor abilities, especially after 40 years of age, when permanent muscle weakness is more often seen.

The physiotherapist must be aware of the following peculiarity of periodic paralysis: that sustained effort results in exacerbation of weakness. Therefore, self-managed exercise should be preferred to superimposed physiotherapy [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].
Eyes

The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia (far-sightedness) or myopia (near-sightedness), and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors can improve visual acuity.

Strabismus surgery is usually not required but can be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus is marked or fixed. The surgery is not always successful.

Aids such as hand-held magnifying devices or bioptic lenses are helpful adjuncts in the care of visually impaired individuals with HPS.

Preferential seating in school is beneficial, and a vision consultant may be useful.

Skin. Treatment of skin cancer does not differ from that in the general population.

Bleeding

Humidifiers may reduce the frequency of nosebleeds.

Oral contraceptives can limit the duration of menstrual periods. Menorrhagia has been treated with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system [Kingman et al 2004] and with recombinant factor VIIa [Lohse et al 2011].

Treatment of minor cuts includes placing thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® over an open wound that fails to clot spontaneously.

For more invasive trauma, such as wisdom tooth extraction, DDAVP (1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, 0.2 µg/kg in 50 mL of normal saline) can be given as a 30-minute intravenous infusion just prior to the procedure. The use of DDAVP may or may not improve the bleeding time [Cordova et al 2005]. For extensive surgeries or protracted bleeding, platelet or red blood cell transfusions may be required.

Pulmonary fibrosis

When the pulmonary disease becomes severe, oxygen therapy can be palliative.

One individual with HPS-1 remains well after undergoing lung transplantation [Lederer et al 2005]. The authors know of several additional successful lung transplantations.

Colitis. The granulomatous colitis of HPS resembles Crohn's colitis and, as such, may respond to steroids and other anti-inflammatory agents [Mora & Wolfsohn 2011]. Remicade® has also been used with benefit [Erzin et al 2006, Felipez et al 2010].

Immunodeficiency. When present, immunodeficiency is typically responsive to granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF).
Primary hyperparathyroidism. While the preferred treatment for sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism is parathyroidectomy by a high-volume parathyroid surgeon (most of whom prefer a minimally invasive or targeted approach), the optimal surgical approach to primary hyperparathyroidism in HPT-JT syndrome has not yet been established. However, because many individuals with HPT-JT syndrome present with a single parathyroid tumor, a minimally invasive approach to remove the parathyroid tumor followed by close monitoring for recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism has been suggested. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy requires the use of:

Preoperative imaging (e.g., ultrasound examination, 99mTc-sestamibi scanning [often with concomitant SPECT/CT], CT, and/or MRI to localize the abnormal parathyroid gland); AND

Intraoperative measurement of iPTH (IOPTH) to ensure an adequate resection of all hyperfunctioning tissue.

IOPTH involves measurement of serum iPTH at the initiation of the surgery and again at five minutes and ten minutes following excision of the presumed parathyroid tumor. An IOPTH that drops more than 50% in the first five minutes is highly suggestive of cure. The success rate of such a measurement is over 95%. If the IOPTH does not drop more than 50% in five minutes, residual hyperfunctioning tissue likely remains in situ and further exploration is recommended to look for other abnormally hyperfunctioning glands. Standard cervical exploration to visualize all four parathyroid glands is generally not recommended unless it appears that residual hyperfunctioning tissue remains.

If there is any suggestion of adherence of the parathyroid gland to the thyroid parenchyma, a concomitant thyroid lobectomy should be considered. In the past, prophylactic total parathyroidectomy was suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma in HPT-JT syndrome; however, given the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not widely accepted. Because the disease usually involves a single gland, a multigland resection increases the risk for hypoparathyroidism with no true benefit of reducing disease recurrence. Therefore, subtotal parathyroidectomy (the standard surgery in MEN1) is not recommended.

Regardless of the surgical approach, the risk of recurrent and/or new metachronous disease exists; therefore, regular lifelong serum testing for biochemical evidence of hyperparathyroidism is recommended (see Surveillance).

Parathyroid carcinoma is suspected in those with extremely elevated serum calcium and iPTH levels, more profound symptoms, and clear radiographic evidence of parathyroid neoplasia. In this situation, an en bloc resection including the ipsilateral thyroid lobe should occur. Care to prevent fracture of the tumor, which could seed the local area, is critical. Experienced surgeons can usually distinguish typical benign parathyroid tissue from carcinoma. Benign tissue is peanut butter in color, soft, small, and non-adherent to surrounding structures. Benign tumors are usually oval, round, or kidney-shaped in appearance. In contrast, parathyroid carcinoma is usually hard, firm, white-grey, large, and intimately attached to surrounding structures [Author, personal experience].

Cinacalcet hydrochloride (Sensipar®), a calcimimetic that binds to the calcium-sensing receptor, has been approved for the treatment of severe hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism in individuals who are unable to undergo parathyroidectomy and for the treatment of parathyroid carcinoma-related hypercalcemia [Messa et al 2011]. Its use in CDC73-related disorders has not been reported, but cinacalcet has proven effective in cases of inoperable parathyroid carcinoma [Silverberg et al 2007].

Jaw tumors. Jaw tumors should be treated surgically as indicated based on the size, location, and symptoms of the lesion. Treatment of choice is complete resection, which may not be possible in all cases. There are no well-defined medical approaches to unresectable jaw tumors. Patients should be followed closely because of the possibility of recurrence.

Renal manifestations. No treatment guidelines for renal manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Management guidelines are available for other polycystic kidney diseases, such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; however, the natural history and likelihood of ESRD is likely to be different in HPT-JT syndrome-associated renal disease. Individuals with evidence of cystic kidney disease should be managed by nephrologists on a case-by-case basis.

Uterine tumors. No treatment guidelines for uterine manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Individuals with evidence of a uterine tumor should be managed by a gynecologist on a case-by-case basis.
Treatment is symptomatic and often involves a team including neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physiotherapists.

Training in the care of the sensory-impaired limb is important and includes self-examination especially of the feet for any signs of trauma. A diabetic clinic is a good source of advice. Appropriate shoes and socks are recommended.

It is best to prevent callous formation in neuropathic skin; once present, calluses should be treated with hydration and lipid-based unguents to prevent cracking and may require medical consultation.

Cleaning and protection of wounds on neuropathic limbs in combination with antiseptic treatment to eradicate infections help prevent osteomyelitis and amputations.
Treatment is supportive and is best provided by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology.

It is important to provide assistance and encourage therapies for behavioral, developmental, and motor delays that are appreciated during infancy and early childhood as well as to provide educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents.

Hyperthermia or hypothermia. Monitoring of the body temperature helps to institute timely measures to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia. Hyperthermia responds to direct cooling in a bath or cooling blanket; hypothermia responds to warming by a blanket as necessary.

Control of environmental temperatures is essential to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia.

Orthopedic. Bone fractures of weight-bearing bones and joints can lead to failure of bone union and hypertrophic osseous callous formation, as well as neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) [Szöke et al 1996, Schulman et al 2001, Bar-On et al 2002, Kim et al 2013, Feldman et al 2009]. Because such injuries and their sequelae are difficult to treat, the goal of orthopedic management is to prevent severe articular destruction and the need for surgical amputation.

Although the parents and caregivers of an affected child are advised to modify the child’s activities to prevent injuries, it is often very difficult due to the child’s inability to perceive pain. While protective appliances, such as braces to prevent injury to the lower limbs can be tried, they are associated with a high risk of secondary skin injury and, thus, infection.

Careful daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury is important for early detection and treatment of injuries.

Appropriate footwear and periods of non-weight-bearing are important in the prevention and early treatment of ulcerating foot lesions [Bar-On et al 2002].

In the treatment of various injuries the absence of pain perception makes immobilization difficult, often resulting in delayed healing. Additionally, infection is a serious potential complication of any invasive procedure, such as treatment of bone fractures with an external fixator [Kim et al 2013].

Of note, longstanding infections require wide surgical debridement.

Bone and joint deformities can be managed by corrective osteotomy; leg length discrepancy can be managed by shoe lifts and/ or epiphysiodesis [Bar-On et al 2002]; however, the value of surgical intervention needs to be weighed against non-surgical approaches including close monitoring [Kim et al 2013]. Joint dislocations are best treated conservatively.

Dental. Early and routine preventative oral/dental care and timely treatment of the dental and oral conditions associated with CIPA can help reduce the characteristic oral and dental manifestations [Amano et al 1998, Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Bodner et al 2002, Ikeda et al 2004].

In infants, the incisal edges of newly erupted mandibular primary incisors traumatize the ventral surface of the tongue with sucking and nursing. This ulceration of the tongue can lead to bleeding and infection of the tongue, and halitosis, as well as systemic problems such as poor weight gain and failure to thrive.

The oral self-mutilation (i.e., the severe biting injuries [and resultant scarring] of the fingertips and/or oral soft tissues [tongue, lip, and buccal mucosa]) is found in most affected individuals. Although self-mutilation appears to decrease with age and with intellectual, social, and/or emotional development, such behaviors cannot be completely eliminated.

Methods used to prevent injuries to the lips, buccal mucosa, tongue, and teeth include tooth extraction, and/or filing (smoothing) of their sharp incisal edges [Bodner et al 2002], and/or use of a mouth guard, a protective plate of thermoplastic resin ~0.6-0.8 mm thick [Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Ikeda et al 2004]. Mouth guards must be refashioned as new teeth erupt and the jaw grows. Although use of a mouth guard is a reasonable approach, mouth guards can be difficult to prepare and/or retain.

The high rate of missing teeth and untreated carious teeth observed in individuals with CIPA suggests that dental examination and/or care is underutilized or that tooth decay may be overlooked because of the insensitivity to pain. Serious tooth decay can cause osteomyelitis that can lead to mandibular bone fracture.

Eye. Care for dry eyes, prevention of corneal infection, and daily observation of the ocular surface are crucial for maintaining good visual function [Amano et al 2006]. Of note, surgical treatment of neurotrophic keratitis has not been successful as poor outcomes of lateral tarsorrhaphy, corneal patch graft, and penetrating keratoplasty have been reported [Yagev et al 1999].

Skin. Daily care with a skin moisturizer is recommended to prevent or reduce skin cracking which can lead to bruising, and skin infections, which can progress to more significant infections such as cellulitis or osteomyelitis.

Parents or guardians should practice skin care to prevent serious infections, including daily observation of the whole skin surface and early treatment of even minor skin lesions.

Behavior. Interventions for behavioral, developmental and motor delays as well as educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents are important.

Although irritability, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and acting-out behaviors typically improve with age, medications for antipsychotic and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in conjunction with behavior modification may be beneficial. The advantages and disadvantages should be weighed for each individual with CIPA.
Wounds on neuropathic limbs heal if they are clean and protected and the limb is rested. Principles of treatment are the same as for leprosy surgery; see Warren & Nade [1999].

Foot drop can be treated with ankle/foot orthotics (AFOs), but these need sleeving with stockings or some form of second skin to prevent skin abrasion.

Charcot joints may require arthrodesis.

Shooting pains are difficult to treat and only partial relief can be obtained with carbamazepine, gabapentin, or amitryptiline, or a combination of an antiepileptic and an antidepressant. Opiates are contraindicated as HSN1A is a chronic disorder.
At present, there is no specific treatment to prevent or reverse nerve degeneration in HSP. Treatments are directed at reducing symptoms and improving balance, strength, and agility. Current recommendations:

Daily regimen of physical therapy directed toward improving cardiovascular fitness, maintaining and improving muscle strength and gait, and reducing spasticity is recommended.

Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics are often used.

Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., Lioresal® [oral or intrathecal], tizanidine, dantrolene, Botox® injections) and reduce urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin)
Patient management guidelines have been published [Scarpa et al 2011].

At this time, treatment of complications in MPS II is symptomatic.

The involvement of specialists for each affected organ system is required to monitor and treat specific problems (see Clinical Description). Commonly required interventions include the following:

Shunting for hydrocephalus

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy

Positive pressure ventilation (CPAP or tracheostomy)

Carpal tunnel release

Cardiac valve replacement

Inguinal hernia repair

Hip replacement

Developmental, occupational, and physical therapy are often necessary.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) has shown encouraging results in possibly modifying/correcting the non-CNS manifestations; as confirmed in a long-term study [Lampe et al 2014b].
Pharmacologic therapy is limited to symptomatic treatment [Mestre et al 2009, Killoran & Biglan 2014].

Choreic movements can be partially suppressed by typical and atypical neuroleptics such as haloperidol and olanzapine respectively, benzodiazepines, or the monoamine-depleting agent tetrabenazine [de Tommaso et al 2005, Bonelli & Wenning 2006, Huntington Study Group 2006]. However, there is ongoing discussion regarding the best practices for the treatment of chorea [Armstrong & Miyasaki 2012, Reilmann et al 2014].

Anti-parkinsonian agents may ameliorate hypokinesia and rigidity, but may increase chorea.

Psychiatric disturbances such as depression, psychotic symptoms, and outbursts of aggression generally respond well to psychotropic drugs or some types of antiepileptic drugs.

Valproic acid has improved myoclonic hyperkinesia in Huntington disease [Saft et al 2006].

Supportive care with attention to nursing, diet, special equipment, and eligibility for state and federal benefits is much appreciated by individuals with HD and their families. Numerous social problems beset individuals with HD and their families; practical help, emotional support, and counseling can provide relief [Williams et al 2009].
Eculizumab has been shown to induce remission of acute episodes of aHUS refractory to plasma therapy and is now widely used as a first-line therapy to treat aHUS. Eculizumab should be considered as a first-line therapy when the diagnosis of aHUS is unequivocal, since this treatment has the potential to rescue renal function when administered early after onset of the disease [Zuber et al 2012a, Fakhouri et al 2013].

For further information about eculizumab, click here.

Plasma infusion or exchange guidelines have been published for children [Ariceta et al 2009] and adults [Taylor et al 2010]. Cohort data show that response to plasma therapy was in part related to the genetic background of the treated patient [Noris et al 2010]. Despite the variability in response to therapy, plasma therapy is the only therapy with near-complete global availability and therefore it remains an important treatment for aHUS. Plasma therapy should be started as soon as aHUS is suspected and continued until resolution of thrombotic microangiopathy. In individuals who respond, plasma exchange can be gradually withdrawn, although a significant proportion will require continued plasma exchange to maintain remission. There is minimal evidence to suggest the superiority of either plasma exchange or plasma infusion, and instead the selected option should be based on individual tolerance, local expertise, and resources (e.g., a neonatal benefit from infusion vs exchange) [Nester et al 2015].

Plasma exchange usually involves exchanging 1-2 plasma volumes (40 mL/kg) per session in adults and 50-100 mL/kg in children. Typically, plasma exchange is undertaken daily initially; the duration and frequency of treatment is then determined by the clinical response.

Treatment can be intensified by increasing the volume of plasma replaced. Twice-daily exchange of one plasma volume is probably the treatment of choice for those with refractory disease in order to minimize the recycling of infused plasma.

Plasma infusion is the first-line therapy when plasma exchange or eculizumab therapies are not available. In plasma infusion 30-40 mL/kg of plasma is administered initially, followed by 10-20 mL/kg/day. Plasma infusion should be used to treat or prevent recurrent episodes.

Platelet count and serum LDH concentration are the most sensitive markers for monitoring response to plasma therapy. Plasma treatment should be continued until platelet count and serum LDH concentration remain normal after therapy is discontinued. Discontinuation of plasma therapy is the only way to know if complete remission has been achieved. Immediate exacerbation of disease activity, principally manifested by falling platelet count that requires the resumption of daily plasma therapy, occurs in 29%-82% of individuals after treatment is discontinued. Thus, many cycles of stopping and resuming plasma therapy may occur, in which case therapy with eculizumab should be considered.

Genetic characterization of persons with aHUS has the potential to optimize the treatment:

C3. Response to plasma treatment in persons with C3 pathogenic variants was comparable (57%) to that in persons with CFH pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. It is hypothesized that plasma exchange could remove mutated hyperactive C3 and also provide regulatory plasma proteins to counteract complement activation induced by mutated C3.

CFB. Limited data are available on response of individuals with CFB pathogenic variants to treatment with plasma. Remission with plasma exchange or infusion has been reported in five individuals [Goicoechea de Jorge et al 2007, Roumenina et al 2009, Tawadrous et al 2010, Funato et al 2014].

CD46. The rationale for using plasma in individuals with CD46 pathogenic variants is not so clear, since the CD46 protein (also known as MCP) is a transmembrane protein and, theoretically, plasma infusion or plasma exchange would not compensate for the MCP defect. Published data indicate that the majority (80%-90%) of individuals undergo remission following plasma infusion or exchange [Richards et al 2003, Caprioli et al 2006]; however, complete recovery from the acute episode was also observed in 100% of individuals not treated with plasma [Noris et al 2010]. The decision whether or not to treat with plasma should be based on the clinical severity of the acute episode.

CFH. Plasma infusion or exchange has been used in individuals with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants with the rationale of providing normal CFH to compensate for the genetic deficiency, as CFH is a circulating plasma protein. In published studies, some individuals with CFH pathogenic variants did not respond at all to plasma therapy and died or developed ESRD. Others required infusion of plasma at weekly intervals in order to raise CFH plasma levels enough to maintain remission [Landau et al 2001].

Stratton and Warwicker [2002] were able to induce sustained remission in a patient with a CFH pathogenic variant by three months of weekly plasma exchange in conjunction with intravenous immunoglobulins. One year after discontinuation of plasma therapy, the patient remained disease free and dialysis independent.

A dozen case reports showed that early plasma therapy, generally consisting of daily plasma exchange followed by maintenance plasma exchange/infusion, could prevent relapses and preserve renal function at follow up for up to six years [Loirat et al 2016].

In the authors' series [Caprioli et al 2006, Noris et al 2010], approximately 60% of individuals with CFH pathogenic variants treated with plasma underwent either complete or partial remission (hematologic normalization with renal sequelae). However, the remaining individuals did not respond at all to plasma and 20% died during the acute episode.

In the French cohort [Frémeaux-Bacchi et al 2013] progression to ESRD during the first episode of aHUS was similar in children and adults with CFH pathogenic variants who received high-intensity plasma therapy compared to those who did not.

CFH autoantibodies. In individuals with anti-CFH autoantibodies, plasma treatment induced complete or partial remission (normalization of hematologic parameters with renal sequelae) of 75% of episodes [Noris et al 2010]. Persons with anti-CFH autoantibodies benefit from treatment with steroids or other immunosuppressants in conjunction with plasma exchange.

CFI. Theoretically one should expect a good response to plasma therapy in individuals with CFI pathogenic variants because CFI (like CFH) is a circulating protein; the results, however, suggest that a larger quantity of plasma is required to provide sufficient wild-type CFH or CFI to compensate for the genetic deficiency [Caprioli et al 2006]. Indeed, remission was achieved in only 25% of episodes treated with plasma in persons with CFI pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

DGKE. Absence of evidence linking DGKE deficiency to the complement cascade and relapses of acute aHUS in affected individuals with pathogenic variants in DGKE while receiving plasma therapy suggest that this treatment may not benefit individuals with DGKE pathogenic variants [Lemaire et al 2013].

THBD. Plasma treatment induced disease remission in about 80% of acute episodes in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

Treatment with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists helps to reduce renal disease progression to end-stage renal failure, while at the same time controlling blood pressure levels.

Bilateral nephrectomy may serve as rescue therapy in selected individuals with extensive microvascular thrombosis at renal biopsy, refractory hypertension, and signs of hypertensive encephalopathy, in whom conventional therapies including plasma manipulation are not adequate to control the disease (i.e., persistent severe thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia). Follow up has been excellent in some individuals [Ruggenenti et al 2001].

Renal transplantation outcome is determined largely by the underlying genetic abnormality. An important advance has been the development of transplant protocols integrating eculizumab treatment [Nester et al 2011]. Eculizumab therapy may be used to treat post-transplantation aHUS recurrence, as reported in individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFH, and CFI [Zuber et al 2012b]. Eculizumab prophylactic therapy may also prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Molecular genetic testing can help to define graft prognosis; thus, all affected individuals should undergo such testing prior to transplantation.

C3, CFB, and CFI. Graft failures secondary to recurrences occurred in one individual with a CFB pathogenic variant and in70% of individuals with CFI pathogenic variants. The percentage of graft failure was slightly lower (50%) in individuals with C3 pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

CD46. Four individuals with isolated

CD46 pathogenic variants have undergone renal transplantation with no disease recurrence [Noris & Remuzzi 2005, Noris et al 2010]. The strong theoretic rationale is that because the CD46 protein (MCP) is a transmembrane protein that is highly expressed in the kidney, transplantation of a kidney expressing normal MCP corrects the defect.

CFH. In individuals with CFH pathogenic variants the graft outcome is poor. Recurrence ranges from 30% to 100% and is significantly higher than in individuals without CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2010]. As CFH is mainly produced by the liver, kidney transplantation does not correct the CFH genetic defect in these individuals.

Simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation has been performed in two young children with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2005]. However, following transplantation both children experienced premature irreversible liver failure. The first child recovered after a second uneventful liver transplantation. This child, who had had monthly recurrences of aHUS before transplantation, had no symptoms of aHUS for more than two years following transplantation. The second child expired after primary non-function of the liver graft followed by multiorgan failure.

In six other individuals with CFH pathogenic variants and in one child heterozygous for pathogenic variants in two genes (CFH and CFI) who received simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation [Saland et al 2006, Saland et al 2009, Noris et al 2010], good renal and liver function were recorded at two-year follow up. In these individuals, extensive plasma exchange was given prior to surgery to provide enough normal CFH to prevent damage to the liver graft.

DGKE. Three individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE received cadaveric renal transplantation at ages 2, 19, and 21 years [Lemaire et al 2013]. Two allografts have survived two years and four years, till last observation, whereas the other failed after six years due to chronic rejection. Importantly, there were no aHUS recurrences after transplantation. On the basis of these findings, it appears that renal transplantation can be efficacious and safe in individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE.

THBD. One individual with THBD pathogenic variants had disease recurrence in the kidney graft – an unexpected occurrence, as thrombomodulin (like CD46) is an endothelial transmembrane protein. However, a soluble thrombomodulin form circulates in plasma and has functional activities similar to those of membrane-bound thrombomodulin. It is possible that the grafts were not sufficiently protected against complement activation because of dysfunctional soluble thrombomodulin in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].
Treatment by physicians experienced in diagnosis and management of persons with HCM improves survival and quality of life. Treatment modalities include pharmacologic therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy, and pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibrillators. Cardiac transplantation may be necessary for patients who progress to advanced heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

No treatments currently exist to prevent or decrease disease development or to reverse established manifestations.

Medical management used for symptom palliation typically relies on the following:

Beta blockers

L-type calcium channel blockers

Disopyramide (its negative inotropic effects can reduce obstructive physiology)

Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for treatment of atrial fibrillation and/or ventricular arrhythmias

Note: Direct vasodilators (e.g., ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) should be avoided in patients with obstructive physiology as they may exacerbate obstruction.

Diastolic dysfunction, a common feature of familial HCM that may contribute significantly to symptoms of exertional dyspnea and volume overload independent of obstruction, is typically challenging to treat:

Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers can be used to slow heart rate and increase diastolic filling time.

Diuretics may be considered judiciously to relieve symptomatic volume overload with the caveat that patients may be preload-dependent to maintain adequate cardiac output, particularly if obstructive physiology is present.

When symptomatic obstruction is refractory to medical therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy may be considered to alleviate symptoms:

Surgical myectomy (removal of a section of muscle from the interventricular septum) has a long and established track record for reducing or eliminating symptoms.

Alcohol septal ablation is a more recently developed catheter-based procedure in which ethanol is injected through a septal perforator vessel to induce focal myocardial infarction targeting the portion of the septum that is primarily responsible for obstructive physiology.

For atrial fibrillation (AF), rate control and medical or invasive attempts at rhythm control may be required, based on symptom burden [Gersh et al 2011]. Because of high thromboembolic risk from atrial fibrillation (AF) in HCM, anticoagulation is recommended, even with paroxysmal occurrences.
Anemia may be reversed by treatment with erythropoietin [Zivná et al 2009], a medication that is given subcutaneously and managed by hematologists or pediatric nephrologists. Dose is based on response to therapy. There is no clear target at this time and it is left to the discretion of the hematologist or nephrologist. Many children have relatively mild anemia with hemoglobin levels of 10 to 11 g/dL, and can be safely followed off of erythropoietin.

Note: The dose of erythropoietin will need to be reduced as hemoglobin concentration increases during adolescence.

Hyperuricemia/gout. Gout typically responds well to prednisone or colchicine. One should not use of nonsteroidal agents in individuals with ADTKD-REN because the combination of nonsteroidal agents and the low renin state in patients with ADTKD-REN can lead to acute kidney injury; prednisone is the preferable alternative.

Prevention of future gout attacks with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered in individuals with gout. With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented. Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required. In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in REN-associated kidney disease are available.

Hypotension and mild hyperkalemia may be present in children and young adults with this condition. As chronic kidney disease progresses to stage III chronic kidney disease, hypertension may develop, and hyperkalemia is due not to low plasma renin activity but rather to decreased elimination of potassium by the kidneys.

Therefore, treatment of low plasma renin activity/plasma concentration of aldosterone may be indicated prior to the development of stage III chronic kidney disease. Such treatment may include liberal sodium intake if the patient has mild hypotension and hyperkalemia but preserved kidney function. Dietary sodium intake of 3-4 g/day may prevent hypotension. Note: A low-sodium diet should not be used in persons with ADTKD-REN.

If hyperkalemia is present, treatment with fludrocortisone or potassium restriction may be indicated [Bleyer et al 2010b]. Fludrocortisone treatment (0.1 mg orally/day) of one affected child with low plasma renin activity resulted in a mild rise in blood pressure, correction of mild hyperkalemia, and a significant improvement in estimated glomerular filtration rate that may have been hemodynamically mediated [Bleyer at al 2010b]. The use of fludrocortisone may also prevent hypotension that could result from volume depletion such as that associated with viral syndromes or vigorous activities associated with excessive perspiration. Note: Fludrocortisone treatment in two adults with advanced kidney disease had no clinical effect [Author, personal observation].

Fludrocortisone could have the advantage of decreasing renin production (through negative feedback), and thus the production of the abnormal renin deposits. However, since blockade of the renin angiotensin system and aldosterone production has been a general treatment of chronic kidney disease, it is possible that increased serum concentration of aldosterone may increase progression of renal disease. Thus, while the use of fludrocortisone may potentially be beneficial in this condition, at present its use is at the discretion of the clinician.

Mineralocorticoid replacement. Recommendations regarding treatment are not evidence based due to the small number of individuals with this disorder and the limited experience treating affected individuals.

Renal disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs.

Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-REN. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.
Treatment for hyperPP is symptomatic and not curative.

Attacks can often be prevented or aborted by continuing mild exercise and/or oral ingestion of carbohydrates at the onset of weakness (e.g., 2 g glucose per kg body weight).

Attacks occur more frequently on holidays and weekends when people rest in bed longer than usual

Individuals are advised to rise early and have a full breakfast.

In some individuals attacks can be aborted or attenuated by intravenously injected glucocorticoids or the inhalation of two puffs of 0.1 mg salbutamol.

Both mild exercise and treatment with β2-stimulating agents appear to work by stimulating the Na+K+-pumps [Clausen et al 2011].

Calcium gluconate (0.5-2 g taken intravenously) may terminate attacks in some individuals [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].
Adults with FH

All individuals with FH should be considered “high risk” for coronary artery disease (CAD) and should be treated actively to lower cholesterol levels. Note that standard Framingham or other risk classification schemes are not applicable [Goldberg et al 2011, Hopkins et al 2011, Stone et al 2014]. The most current recommendations (summarized here) for the management of FH used in the United States are from the American Heart Association [Gidding et al 2015] (full text) and largely reflect earlier recommendations from the National Lipid Association (NLA).

For adults, treatment should begin as soon as possible after diagnosis. All adults with FH require diet/lifestyle management, and almost without exception will also require cholesterol-lowering drug therapy.

Risk factors (e.g., smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension) are the same in FH as in the general population; aggressive management is required to reduce CAD risk, with special attention to smoking cessation.

Regular physical activity, a healthy diet (reduce saturated fat intake, increase intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day), and weight control should be emphasized.

Blood pressure should be treated to 140/90mm Hg (or 130/80 mm Hg in those with diabetes mellitus).

Low-dose aspirin (75-81 mg/day) should be considered in those at high risk for CAD or stroke.

Consider referral to a lipid specialist with expertise in FH if LDL-C concentrations are not reduced with maximal medical therapy (Note: Although it has not been specified, this recommendation generally pertains to LDL-C levels that cannot be reduced by ≥50% with maximal medical therapy over a 6-month period.)

Testing of first-degree and second-degree relatives should be recommended to all individuals with FH (see Evaluation of Relatives at Risk).

For adults with FH age 20 years or older, treatment with statins should be initiated to reduce the LDL-C level ≥50% or to <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) [Hopkins et al 2011, Nordestgaard et al 2013]. Many guidelines suggest a target LDL-C of <100 mg/dL even in those without known CAD as individuals with FH have had a lifelong burden of high LDL-C [Gidding et al 2015].

For persons with FH with any of the following CAD risk factors, drug treatment may need to be intensified (see *Note) to achieve more aggressive treatment goals (LDL-C <100 mg/dL [<2.6 mmol/L] and non-HDL-C <130 mg/dL [<3.4 mmol/L]). Risk factors:

Clinically evident CAD or other atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; the goal is LDL-C level of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L)

Diabetes mellitus or metabolic syndrome

Family history of very early CAD (men age <45 years; women age <55 years)

Current smoking

High lipoprotein(a) (≥50 mg/dL [≥1.3 mmol/L] using an isoform insensitive assay)

The second-line agent for individuals with FH who do not achieve acceptable LDL-C levels is generally ezetimibe. Treatment options for intensification of therapy after ezetimibe or for those intolerant of statins include: bile acid sequestrants and/or PCSK9 inhibitors. Although niacin has been used as an adjunctive therapy in individuals with FH, given recent data, niacin is generally not favored before the other options have been exhausted [Guyton et al 2013, FDA 2016] (see Table 3).

In persons with FH without any of the CAD risk factors listed above, intensification of drug therapy (see *Note) should be strongly considered if 50% reduction in LDL-C is not achieved after six months on maximum statin therapy. For adults, some guidelines call for intensification of treatment if the goal LDL-C of <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L) is not achieved [Nordestgaard et al 2013].

*Note: (1) The lipid-lowering therapy should initially be statin-based with titration of doses every few months in order to use the highest tolerated dose of a potent statin, followed by addition of other drugs if the targeted LDL-C level is not achieved. (2) The potential benefit of multi-drug regimens should be weighed against the increased cost and potential for adverse effects and decreased adherence.

Table 3. 

Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH

Class

Primary (1O) and Secondary (2O) Mechanism of Action

LDL-Lowering Response

Statins

↑ LDLR activity (1O)

>35% 1, 2

Cholesterol absorption inhibitors (ezetimibe)

↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

15% 1, 3

Mipomersen (APOB antisense) 4

Blocks APOB production in the liver

50% 5

MTP inhibitor(lomitapide) 4

↓ microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity (1O)inhibition of LDL production (2O)

50% 5

PCSK9 inhibitors(alirocumab, evolocumab)

↓ LDL-receptor degradation

50% 6

Bile acid sequestrants(cholestyramine, colesevelam)

↓ Bile acid re-absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

15% 1, 3

Stanol esters

↓ Cholesterol absorption (1O)↑ LDLR activity (2O)

10% 1, 3

Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.

1. 

Often ineffective in HoFH

2. 

Kastelein et al [2008]

3. 

Rader et al [2003]

4. 

Approved only for adults with HoFH

5. 

Cuchel et al [2014]

6. 

Raal & Santos [2012]

Current Recommended Drug Therapies for Adults with FH

Some guidelines call for the addition of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or fibrates if triglycerides remain elevated after the LDL-C is controlled.

Often ineffective in HoFH

Kastelein et al [2008]

Rader et al [2003]

Approved only for adults with HoFH

Cuchel et al [2014]

Raal & Santos [2012]

Children with FH

Guidelines for the management of children and individuals up to age 21 years have been published by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (full text). Children should be considered for drug treatment with statin-based regimens when:

LDL-C levels are ≥190 mg/dL (≥4.9 mmol/L).

LDL-C levels are ≥160 mg/dL (≥4.1 mmol/L) and at least two other risk factors are present.

US-based guidelines from the NLA (full text):

Consultation or referral to a lipid specialist is recommended.

Management of diet and physical activity is recommended at an early age.

Statins are the preferred initial pharmacologic treatment in children. Consideration should be given to starting statin treatment at age eight years or older. In special cases, such as children with homozygous FH, drug treatment needs to be initiated prior to age eight years.

The goal of lipid-lowering therapy in children with FH is a ≥50% reduction in LDL-C or LDL-C <130 mg/dL (<3.4 mmol/L). Note: More aggressive lowering of LDL-C levels should be considered for children with additional CAD risk factors (e.g., family history of CAD, high blood pressure, unhealthy diet or exercise behaviors, obesity).

Children and Adults with Homozygous FH (HoFH)

NLA guidelines for homozygous FH (full text):

Referral to a lipid specialist is indicated.

Early initiation of therapy and monitoring are recommended.

Multiple drug therapy is usually needed. Several different classes of medications are currently being used to treat HoFH (see Table 3).

Since many cholesterol-lowering medications target the LDL receptor, effectiveness in persons with FH with biallelic loss-of function LDLR pathogenic variants can be limited [Cuchel et al 2014]. Statins are often relatively ineffective in the treatment of HoFH because their efficacy largely depends on the upregulation of functional LDL receptors in the liver. In HoFH, both copies of the LDL receptor have absent or greatly reduced activity [Raal & Santos 2012].

High-dose statins, ezetimibe, and bile-acid binding resins may be effective in some persons with HoFH, especially those with some residual LDLR activity.

For HoFH, evolocumab is a PCSK9 inhibitor that showed a 40% mean reduction in LDL-C compared with placebo; however, individuals with two loss-of-function variants saw no response [Raal et al 2015]. PCSK9 inhibitors have not been formally approved in children with FH.

HoFH-specific medications (lomitapide and mipomersen) are effective even with complete loss of LDL receptor function and – though not formally FDA approved for children – should strongly be considered.

Despite these options, many individuals with HoFH (especially those with complete loss of LDL receptor function) will require ongoing LDL apheresis. LDL apheresis (≤2x/week) is often required starting from a young age. Apheresis can lower LDL-C levels by 80% acutely and 30% chronically (weekly or biweekly). Apheresis is offered at a limited number (~40-50) of centers in the United States; many states do not have an apheresis center.

Liver transplantation is also being used in rare circumstances in some centers [Martinez et al 2016]
Clonazepam appears to be the most effective treatment for HPX [Tijssen et al 1997, Tsai et al 2004]. In adults the initial dose is 0.5 mg twice a day. The dose can be increased up to 2.0 mg three times a day. The stiffness in the neonatal period and stiffness related to startle diminish with the treatment.

Other drugs, mostly described in case reports, have shown variable results; they include carbamazepine, phenytoin, diazepam, valproate, 5-hydroxytryptophan, piracetam, and phenobarbital. For an overview see Bakker et al [2006].

Physical and cognitive therapy to reduce the fear of falling and thereby improve walking can be considered; no randomized trials have assessed the effectiveness of such treatment.

Attacks of tonic neonatal cyanosis can be stopped by the Vigevano maneuver, consisting of forced flexion of the head and legs towards the trunk [Vigevano et al 1989].
Cataract extraction, usually in the first months of life, is indicated.

Supportive therapy includes the following:

Physical therapy to improve motor function

Special education

Antiepileptic drugs if epileptic seizures are present
Management of short stature is influenced by parental expectations and concerns. Final adult height in hypochondroplasia is considerably greater than that achieved in achondroplasia and therefore, functional limitations in society (e.g., operating an elevator, driving a car, using an automatic teller machine) are generally less severe or not an issue. One reasonable approach is to address the parents' expectations and prejudices regarding the height of their child rather than attempting to treat the child.

Developmental intervention and special educational input are appropriate, as indicated by deficiencies.

The usual neurosurgical approach to spinal stenosis is laminectomy. Thomeer & van Dijk [2002] determined that about 70% of symptomatic individuals with achondroplasia experienced total relief of symptoms following decompression without laminectomy. The L2-3 level most commonly required decompression.

Making the family aware of support groups, such as the Little People of America Inc. (LPA), can result in assistance with adaptation of the affected individual and the family to short stature through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs. The LPA offers information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children of short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting through local meetings, workshops, seminars, and a national newsletter.

Seizure disorders should be treated in the standard manner.
Treatment includes the following:

Management of blisters in a standard manner (i.e., not opening them, avoiding trauma); topical treatment (e.g., medications, oatmeal baths) to relieve discomfort. Significant skin involvement may benefit from dermatology management.

Treatment of infections as for any other cellulitis

For retinal neovascularization that predisposes to retinal detachment, cryotherapy and laser photocoagulation [Wong et al 2004]

Standard treatment for retinal detachment

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for evaluation if microcephaly, seizures, spasticity, or focal deficits are present

Brain MRI in any child with functional neurologic abnormalities or retinal neovascularization [Wolf et al 2005, Pascual-Castroviejo et al 2006]

Referral to a pedodontist at age six months or when teeth erupt, whichever comes first. Dental implants have been performed as early as age seven years (as in children with ectodermal dysplasia, who have similar dental problems (see Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia).

Referral to a speech pathologist and/or pediatric nutritionist if delayed or inadequate eruption of primary teeth interferes with chewing and/or speech development

Appropriate developmental stimulation and special education as indicated for developmental delay
The following are appropriate:

Physical and occupational therapy to promote mobility and independence

Aids for mobility and limb function

Use of computer technologies and devices adapted to facilitate writing and voice communication
Treatment is symptomatic only:

Individuals with GNE-related myopathy may benefit from consultation with physiatrists, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists.

Foot drop bracing and other mechanical aids may improve the function of individuals with GNE-related myopathy.

Consultation with a pulmonologist to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation or sleep apnea may be considered in symptomatic individuals.

All affected individuals should consult their physician before beginning an exercise program.
Individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team that includes: a neurologist, endocrinologist with expertise in Paget disease, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and geneticist/genetic counselor.

Myopathy. Management should be tailored to the individual. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999].

Weight control to avoid obesity

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Occupational therapy and use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed for ambulation and mobility

Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Use of respiratory aids when indicated

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in individuals with these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998]

Assisted living arrangements as necessitated by muscle weakness and/or dementia

Paget disease of bone. Treatment with the following potent bisphosphonates can reduce the alkaline phosphatase concentration and relieve pain and disability:

Actonel®/risedronate

Fosamax®/alendronate

Aredia®/pamidronate
Treatment has been aimed at reducing the inflammatory state [Okumura et al 2009, Bergamino et al 2012].

During an acute episode of encephalopathy, early administration of corticosteroids has been associated with improved outcomes in patients with sporadic ANE [Okumura et al 2009]. Although this treatment course is also advocated for IIAE3, no specific studies have been performed to support that.

Anecdotally, treatment has mirrored that of acute demyelinating encephalomyelopathy (ADEM) with the use of steroids, IVIg, and plasmapheresis. TNFα antagonists have also been used. Because the diagnosis of ANE is usually made days into the encephalopathy, initiation of therapy occurs after the onset of damage. Thus, anecdotally, these interventions have shown varied, but overall limited, therapeutic effects.

Repeat episodes of encephalopathy presumably result in cellular damage and, thus, outcomes become progressively worse [Neilson et al 2003], prompting the need for close attention to new febrile events and early intervention as follows:

Prior identification of an RANBP2 pathogenic variant in an affected individual allows early recognition of an ANE episode and prompt steroid therapy, which may result in a reduction in disease severity.

With behavioral changes during febrile episodes, early evaluation by a neurologist with prompt hospitalization, CNS imaging, and initiation of steroid therapy may provide the best chance to terminate an ANE episode before damage occurs.
Adrenal insufficiency. Management of adrenal insufficiency in IMAGe syndrome is similar to management of adrenal insufficiency from other causes and should be under the supervision of an endocrinologist.

Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency require close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Treatment with IV saline, glucose, and cortisol are utilized. If the serum electrolytes do not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of cortisol is increased.

Once the acute episode has been managed, replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and oral supplements of sodium chloride are given. Dosages must be increased with stress, such as intercurrent illness, surgery, or trauma. Steroid doses need to be managed to enable optimal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) therapy. Although information regarding anticipated adult height in IMAGe syndrome is limited, assessment for GH deficiency should be considered, as one child showed poor GH response to glucagon stimulation [Pedreira et al 2004] and other children with normal GH secretion have demonstrated a response in growth with growth hormone therapy [Lienhardt et al 2002, Kato et al 2014].

Genitourinary abnormalities. Routine surgical management of cryptorchidism and hypospadias by a urologist is indicated.

Males with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are likely to need increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty. Long-term adrenal steroid replacement and testosterone replacement should be managed by an experienced endocrinologist.

Orthopedic intervention as necessary for skeletal complications, including scoliosis and hip dysplasia, is appropriate.

Occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed is appropriate, particularly with the hypotonia that often accompanies the syndrome.

Neurologic evaluation is indicated if developmental delay and/or hypotonia are present.
The following treatments for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and atypical NAD are palliative:

Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures

Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with atypical INAD who have significant dystonia (see Dystonia Overview)

Deep brain stimulation has been successfully utilized in one individual with atypical NAD who had intractable dystonia [Cif et al 2014].

Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation that is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions

Measures such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia

Treatments for PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism are also palliative but differ somewhat:

Treatment with dopaminergic agents is likely to be beneficial for the motor symptoms of parkinsonism and dystonia and may initially produce a dramatic response. In individuals treated to date, this response diminished over time, and affected individuals often developed prominent early dyskinesias, complicating medical management. Despite the dyskinesias, treatment with dopaminergic agents may still be indicated, as affected individuals typically experience benefit for a period of time and the dyskinesias are expected to decline after discontinuation of treatment. In one case report, an individual age 32 years with dystonia-parkinsonism developed episodes of non-painful, fixed upward gaze with neck extension that started shortly after levodopa administration and persisted until the drug wore off [Virmani et al 2014]. The use of deep brain stimulation for PLA2G6-associated dystonia-parkinsonism has not been reported.

Treatment by a psychiatrist for neuropsychiatric symptoms is indicated.

Evaluation by physical therapy may guide the management of postural instability and gait difficulties.

Occupational therapy may offer tools to assist with activities of daily living.

Interventions such as a gastric feeding tube or tracheostomy may be needed to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
While there is experience with treating pituitary adenomas in symptomatic persons with FIPA, there is little experience in the management and treatment of persons identified prospectively through clinical screening due to family history of FIPA and/or presence of a heterozygous AIP germline pathogenic variant. The following recommendations are based on those of Biller et al [2008], Jaffe [2006], Katznelson et al [2011], and Melmed et al [2011].

Pituitary adenomas can be treated by surgery, medical therapy, and/or radiotherapy.

Adenomas in persons with FIPA, especially those with AIP-related FIPA, are aggressive. Surgery is usually performed, but often does not fully control the tumor. Transsphenoidal surgery has been performed for large adenomas, while microadenomas with normal clinical and biochemistry findings are monitored closely [Chahal et al 2011]. Large tumors, especially those recurring after surgery, may require radiotherapy when the tumor invades neighboring anatomic structures (such as the cavernous sinus).

Somatotropinomas, particularly in persons with a germline AIP pathogenic variant, often do not respond to medical therapy with somatostatin analogs. Daly et al [2010] showed no tumor shrinkage in AIP-related adenomas and significantly lower reductions in GH secretion (40% vs 75%) and IGF-1 secretion (47% and 56%); in these instances growth hormone receptor antagonist therapy could be initiated [Leontiou et al 2008, Daly et al 2010].

Radiotherapy (conventional or radiosurgery) is an option for treating growing adenomas, for which repeat surgery is unlikely to control hormone levels.

Prolactinomas are usually treated with dopamine agonist therapy (cabergoline being the drug of choice), which can result in tumor regression or in some cases disappearance of detectable lesions. No data suggest that FIPA-associated prolactinomas would respond less favorably to dopamine agonist therapy than do sporadic tumors; however, Daly et al [2010] suggested that prolactinomas in AIP-related FIPA appear to be aggressive and difficult to treat. Persons with AIP-related FIPA and a macroprolactinoma (diameter >10 mm) often undergo surgery.

NFPAs are treated with surgery and, if necessary, radiotherapy. They usually do not respond to traditional somatostatin analogs despite the presence of somatostatin receptors and an often good response in vitro. Dopamine agonist therapy has been tried in some cases. Timely diagnosis, prediction of long-term outcome, and treatment of NFPAs remain a challenge for endocrinologists [Korbonits & Carlsen 2009].

Temozolomide has been successfully used for the treatment of a few aggressive pituitary adenomas; however, there is no experience with its use in persons with AIP-related FIPA.

The increased burden of GH secretion and IGF-1 secretion (defined as the level and duration of increased hormone levels) observed in those with acromegaly is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and metabolic complications [Jayasena et al 2011]. Individuals with long-standing acromegaly often have cardiovascular and rheumatologic/orthopedic complications, which need to be treated accordingly.
Monitor fluid intake to assure adequate intravascular volume.

Use of nutritional support, including TPN or elemental or low-carbohydrate-containing formula if necessary, can be beneficial [Sherman et al 2004].

Follow the standard treatment protocols for diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease.

The most effective treatment for the enteropathy of IPEX syndrome is T cell-directed immune suppression (i.e., cyclosporin A and FK506) either alone or in combination with steroids [Di Rocco & Marta 1996]. Toxicity, tachyphylaxis, and increased susceptibility to infection related to chronic use of these agents reduce their potential for long-term amelioration of symptoms in most individuals.

Sirolimus (rapamycin) has been successfully used in patients for whom FK506 was either ineffective or toxic [Bindl et al 2005, Yong et al 2008]. The ability of sirolimus to suppress effector T cell function while allowing Treg cells to continue to develop and function offers some theoretic advantages for its use [Strauss et al 2007].

In persons with autoimmune neutropenia, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF, filgrastim) may be beneficial.

In one person who developed pemphigus nodularis, use of rituximab improved pemphigus and other IPEX syndrome-associated symptoms [McGinness et al 2006]. It has also been effective in controlling autoimmune hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoimmune neutropenia in persons with IPEX syndrome [Torgerson, unpublished results].

In persons with severe disease in whom other therapies have failed and symptoms remain severe, cytotoxic drugs or biologic agents that target T cells may be beneficial, as demonstrated by complete remission of symptoms during a bone marrow transplantation conditioning regimen of anti-thymocyte globulin, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide [Baud et al 2001].

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers the only potential cure for IPEX syndrome. Early attempts at BMT using myeloablative conditioning regimens met with only limited success because of transplant-related mortality and other complications related to the underlying disease [Baud et al 2001]. Recent approaches using non-myeloablative conditioning regimens have markedly improved outcomes and survival [Burroughs et al 2007, Lucas et al 2007, Rao et al 2007]. While generally less toxic, these reduced-intensity conditioning regimens still appear to generate long-term, stable engraftment of a regulatory T cell population [Burroughs et al 2010] and, if performed early, can prevent the development of irreversible diabetes mellitus or thyroiditis.
To date, no definitive treatment for ISOD has been identified. Symptomatic management by a multidisciplinary team consisting of specialists in neurology, nutrition, gastroenterology, pulmonary medicine, physiotherapy, and orthopedics is recommended. Management includes the following:

Appropriate medications for management of seizures and spasticity

Early consideration of gastrostomy tube placement to manage difficulties with swallowing to assure adequate caloric intake and reduce the risk of aspiration.

Appropriate management of vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and aspiration pneumonia

Chest physiotherapy to prevent respiratory complications

Sleep studies to assess nocturnal hypoventilation and institute appropriate interventions

Assessment for scoliosis

The following treatment modalities have been tried with minimal success:

Dietary. A low-protein diet restricted in cysteine and methionine has been tried in a few individuals with ISOD. Clinical and biochemical improvement were reported in two patients with late-onset ISOD [Del Rizzo et al 2013]. No clinical benefit has been noted in those with classic ISOD. The value of these diets in presymptomatic individuals has yet to be established.

Medical. No medical treatment that improves the neurologic outcome or prevents the development of neurologic manifestations in individuals with ISOD has been identified. The following agents have been tried on an experimental basis with minimal clinical effect:

Betaine has been used to increase the remethylation of homocysteine back to methionine, which reduces cysteine and leads to reduction in sulfite levels.

Thiamine replacement has been attempted (given that the accumulation of sulfite leads to depletion of thiamine).

Use of cysteamine and penicillamine (chelating agents used to chelate sulfite) resulted in no beneficial clinical effects.
The medical and psychosocial management of individuals with free sialic acid storage disorders is symptomatic and supportive.

Management focuses on rehabilitation to optimize mobility and communication.

Programs to foster normal development and assure adequate nutrition should be implemented.

Treatment of seizures follows standard management principles.
Management and treatment recommendations for juvenile hemochromatosis stated here are based on the established HFE-associated hemochromatosis recommendations when specific juvenile hemochromatosis information may not exist.

Treatment of iron overload. Phlebotomy is the therapy of choice in juvenile hemochromatosis and follows the same principles as the treatment of classic HFE-associated hemochromatosis. It is simple, safe, and effective. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow a regimen of phlebotomy of one unit of blood once or twice weekly [Tavill 2001]. Approximately 200 mg of iron are removed per unit of blood depending on the individual's hematocrit. Because individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis are usually severely iron overloaded, a therapeutic regimen of one to two weekly phlebotomies may take up to two to three years to reduce iron stores to desired levels.

The hematocrit should be monitored prior to phlebotomy; phlebotomy should be postponed if the hematocrit drops more than 20% of its initial value [Tavill 2001]. Systematic administration of erythropoietin has been successful in maintaining the hematocrit in individuals who failed to mount an adequate bone marrow response to the phlebotomy regimen [De Gobbi et al 2000].

Serum ferritin concentration reflects body iron stores and is used to monitor the progress of therapy; it is expected to fall progressively, along with iron mobilization. Measuring serum ferritin concentration every 10-12 phlebotomies is reasonable; however, once serum ferritin concentration is below 100 ng/mL, it should be measured more often, ideally prior to each phlebotomy. Achievement of serum ferritin concentration below 50 ng/mL and restoration of normal transferrin-iron saturation indicates the end point of the intensive phlebotomy treatment.

Maintenance therapy. The frequency of phlebotomies is adjusted to maintain normal serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation. When iron removal is not urgent, phlebotomies could be spaced further apart according to the responsiveness of the bone marrow to restore adequate hematocrit. Usually four to six phlebotomies annually are sufficient. The individual should permanently continue on this schedule of phlebotomy maintenance therapy.

Iron chelators such as parenteral deferoxamine (Desferal®) are used to treat individuals with secondary iron overload. They are not recommended in the treatment of juvenile hemochromatosis unless the disease is complicated by concomitant anemia or severe cardiac failure. In the latter situation, administration of deferoxamine alone or in combination with deferiprone can reduce mortality by improving left ventricular ejection fraction [Kelly et al 1998, Fabio et al 2007].

Treatment of secondary complications. Treatment does not essentially differ from the conventional treatment applied in other situations:

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is generally considered irreversible, despite adequate iron removal. However, reversal of hypogonadism has been observed in some young individuals who have been successfully treated with phlebotomy or iron chelation [Angelopoulos et al 2005]. For the majority of individuals with hypogonadism, testosterone or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is required to improve symptoms and prevent the development of secondary osteopenia or osteoporosis [Angelopoulos et al 2006].

Transdermal preparations (i.e., patches) deliver testosterone or estradiol at a controlled rate into the systemic circulation, avoiding first-pass hepatic metabolism; therefore, this approach may be useful for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis, eliminating the risk of potential liver complications.

Administration of gonadotropins has restored fertility and has led to a twin pregnancy in a woman with juvenile hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy is not modified by treatment. Individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis have to cope with persistent arthralgia presenting at a young age. Painful joints may require treatment with salicylates or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) [Vaiopoulos et al 2003].

Severe cardiac failure is treated with ACE inhibitors, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, and possibly deferoxamine. If left untreated, cardiac disease progresses rapidly and becomes refractory to treatment, leading to death in most cases. Orthotopic heart transplantation has been used on occasion [Caines et al 2005].

Liver steatosis and fibrosis are treated with appropriately early phlebotomy [Camaschella et al 2002]; however, it is uncertain whether these features are reversible. Reversibility of liver fibrosis has been reported in individuals treated for HFE-associated hemochromatosis [Falize et al 2006].

Cirrhosis is thought to be irreversible despite iron removal. Individuals with cirrhosis should undergo endoscopic evaluation to document the presence of varices and should be treated with propranolol or nadolol, as indicated. In advanced disease, orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) could be considered. Of note, individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis undergoing OLT display an overall lower survival than individuals undergoing OLTs for other causes of liver disease. Because most post-transplantation deaths occur in the perioperative period from cardiac disease or infection, it is advisable to remove as much of excess iron stores as possible before OLT even though the effect of excess tissue iron on survival post-OLT is not known [Tavill 2001].

Diabetes mellitus may require insulin administration; successful iron removal may improve its course [Angelopoulos et al 2007].
Hearing loss in JLNS may be treated successfully with cochlear implantation, an intervention that does not interfere with bipolar pacemakers [Green et al 2000, Chorbachi et al 2002] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). To date, the cumulative published experience includes approximately 20 individuals with JLNS who have received cochlear implantation. Of note, the diagnosis of JLNS was only verified with molecular genetic testing in four Norwegian individuals, all of whom had pathogenic variants in KCNQ1. An increase in sound-related syncopal episodes was noted after cochlear implantation in one child [Al-Aama et al 2015].

Note: Although cochlear implantation appears to be safe, special precautions are necessary during anesthesia because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008]. One affected individual died during a perioperative cardiac arrest [Broomfield et al 2010].

Cardiac issues. The main goal in management of JLNS is prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. Note that efficacy of beta-blocker treatment is only partial: 51% of treated individuals had cardiac events and 27% had cardiac arrest or sudden death. Even with additional therapies (e.g., pacemaker, implantable cardioverter/defibrillator, left sympathetic denervation), 18 (56%) of 32 individuals experienced additional symptoms, including sudden death in seven [Schwartz et al 2006].

Administration of beta-adrenergic blockers has been the traditional first-line medical therapy for cardiac events, but more aggressive, immediate treatment may be appropriate. Cardiac events in JLNS frequently occur despite beta blockade [Schwartz et al 2006]. Goldenberg et al [2006] demonstrated markedly increased mortality in individuals with JLNS treated exclusively with beta blockers in comparison to individuals with Romano-Ward syndrome. A mortality rate of 35% over five years was observed for individuals receiving beta blockers exclusively; 86% of individuals treated exclusively with beta blockers experienced a cardiac event. The interactions of beta blockers with other medical conditions (e.g., asthma, diabetes mellitus, depression) should also be considered. Propranolol and nadolol have been shown to be more effective than metoprolol in suppressing cardiac events [Chockalingam et al 2012, Winbo et al 2014]. A recent consensus statement advocates use of nadolol as the preferred beta blocker for drug therapy of individuals with long QT syndrome [Ackerman et al 2017].

Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) should be considered in individuals with a history of cardiac arrest or failure to respond to other treatments [Goel et al 2004]. More recent recommendations have strongly urged ICD placement for high-risk individuals, defined by the following criteria [Schwartz et al 2006]:

QTc interval >550 msec

Syncope before age five years

Male gender, age >20 years with KCNQ1 pathogenic variant

The risk for sudden cardiac death appears to be low in individuals younger than age five years, but medical therapy should be administered early in these high-risk individuals and ICD placement considered after age five years [Richter & Brugada 2006].

In certain cases, the availability of automated external defibrillators in the home, workplace, or school may be applicable, as is appropriate CPR training of family members and those who have regular contact with individuals with JLNS.

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation has been effective for some individuals.

Iron deficiency anemia. The treatment of iron deficiency anemia should follow standard guidelines.
Respiratory

Infants and children with abnormal breathing patterns should be considered for apnea monitoring if the abnormality is severe. Supportive therapy may include stimulatory medications such as caffeine or supplementary oxygen, particularly in the newborn period.

Anesthetic management during surgical procedures for infants with significant respiratory disturbance may be accomplished in some cases by the use of:

Regional anesthesia without opioids to avoid exacerbation of apneic episodes [Vodopich & Gordon 2004];

Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine or dexmedetomidine to avoid respiratory depression and other complications of opioids while achieving motion-free images [Sriganesh et al 2014].

In rare cases, mechanical support and/or tracheostomy may be considered in a child with severe respiratory dysfunction.

Aggressive treatment of middle ear infections is indicated to avoid conductive hearing loss.

Hypotonia and therapeutic interventions

Appropriate management and therapy of oromotor dysfunction by a speech therapist

Nasogastric feeding tubes or gastrostomy tube placement for feeding in children with severe dysphagia

Occupational, physical, and speech therapy through early intervention programs

Individualized educational assessment and support for school-aged children to maximize school performance

Periodic neuropsychologic and developmental testing at appropriate ages

Other CNS malformations

Neurosurgical consultation is indicated for those with evidence of hydrocephalus (rapidly increasing head circumference and/or bulging fontanel). Note: When hydrocephalus occurs in JS, it rarely requires shunting.

Posterior fossa cysts and fluid collections rarely require intervention.

Encephalocele may require primary surgical closure.

Seizures should be evaluated and treated by a neurologist using standard antiepileptic drugs.

A variety of psychotropic medications have been used to treat the behavioral complications in Joubert syndrome; no single medication has been uniformly effective for all children.

Ophthalmologic

Surgery as needed for symptomatic ptosis, strabismus, or amblyopia

Corrective lenses for refractive errors

Possible vision therapies for oculomotor apraxia, although specific studies are lacking in this disorder

Interventions for the visually impaired when congenital blindness or progressive retinal dystrophy are present

Renal disease

Consultation with a nephrologist is indicated.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) resulting from nephronophthisis frequently requires dialysis and/or kidney transplantation during the teenage years or later.

Hypertension, anemia, and other complications of ESRD require specific treatment.

Hepatic fibrosis

Consultation with a gastroenterologist is indicated.

Liver failure and/or fibrosis should be managed by a gastroenterologist with arrangements for surgical intervention such as portal shunting for esophageal varices and portal hypertension, as appropriate.

Some individuals have needed orthotopic liver transplantation.

Skeletal

Surgical treatment for polydactyly

Appropriate medical management by an orthopedic specialist for scoliosis

Other

Orofacial clefting is treated by standard surgical interventions.

Tongue tumors that impair normal swallowing or cause respiratory obstruction may require surgical resection.

Symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea and/or tongue hypertrophy in older individuals may require evaluation with a polysomnogram and/or by an otolaryngologist for consideration of adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy, or surgical tongue reduction. Some children have used BiPAP or C-PAP at night.

Consultation with an endocrinologist for menstrual irregularities and for pituitary hormone deficiency (with hormone replacement as indicated) is appropriate.

Obesity should be managed with appropriate measures, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies

Congenital heart defects and situs abnormalities should be treated by conventional therapies.

Surgical correction of Hirschsprung disease (if present) is indicated.
To date, the treatment of parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease. No specific guidelines are currently available.

The motor impairment usually responds very well to low doses of dopaminergic medication and is typically sustained even after long disease duration.

The most relevant treatment-related problem is the early occurrence of levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and motor fluctuations. The management of treatment-related complications is not different from the strategies applied in idiopathic Parkinson disease and includes deep brain stimulation in selected cases [Moro et al 2008].
JPS. The most effective management is routine colonoscopy with endoscopic polypectomy. Early endoscopic polypectomy may reduce morbidity by reducing the risk for cancer, bleeding, or intestinal obstruction.

In some individuals, removal of all or part of the colon or stomach may be necessary to alleviate symptoms and/or reduce cancer risk when a large number of polyps are present. The preferred procedure is debated: some experts prefer subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis, whereas others prefer proctocolectomy with an ileoanal pouch. The number of colonic or rectal polyps does not appear to correlate with the need for proctectomy [Oncel et al 2005].

JPS/HHT. Treat manifestations of HHT as needed; see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
Thickened feedings and appropriate positioning after meals may improve reflux symptoms.

Gastrostomy tube placement is typically considered in those with severe feeding difficulties, especially if a poorly coordinated suck and swallow are noted.

Thorough psychoeducational testing is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Special education services are tailored to address strengths and weaknesses for each child with KS since no characteristic pattern of disabilities has been identified.

Formal evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or psychiatrist may be helpful in those children who exhibit features suggestive of autism spectrum disorders, since educational interventions may be influenced by the result.

Standard antiepileptic treatment is efficacious in treating seizures in individuals with KS.

Evidence of sensorineural hearing loss is typically followed up with referral to an otorhinolaryngologist and imaging to screen for inner ear anomalies.

Persistent, unexplained head and neck pain or other evidence of intracranial abnormality could be secondary to Chiari I malformation and is a clear indication for brain imaging in affected individuals.

Monitoring for nocturnal lagophthalmos by parents or caregivers is recommended. If present, evaluation by an ophthalmologist is indicated.

A dental evaluation as a toddler is indicated in every child with KS. Referral for orthodontic assessment should be arranged if abnormalities such as hypodontia or significant malocclusion are noted at any point in childhood.

Individuals with documented immunoglobulin deficiency may benefit from scheduled intravenous immunoglobulin infusions.

Treatment of premature thelarche is not warranted unless other signs of premature puberty are apparent.

At least one individual has shown no change in linear rate of growth when treated with human growth hormone [Kawame et al 1999].
The following are appropriate:

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay

Skeletal features

Referral to an orthopedist for consideration of surgical release of contractures

Early referral to physical therapy to help increase joint mobility

Genital anomalies. Orchiopexy in males with undescended testes

Anal anomalies. Surgery as required

Renal anomalies. Referral to an urologist or nephrologist as indicated

Heart defects. Routine management

Facial features. In SBBYSS, ptosis surgery and cleft palate repair if present

Other features

Hearing aids as needed for hearing loss

Thyroid hormone replacement as needed

Intervention for respiratory and feeding issues as needed in the neonatal period

Referral to a gastroenterologist for evaluation and treatment of feeding difficulties and bowel malrotation
No specific management guidelines have been developed. Management is mostly supportive.

A multidisciplinary team of specialists in clinical genetics, plastic surgery, ophthalmology, pulmonology, gastroenterology, feeding, endocrinology, and neurology is recommended depending on the affected individual’s manifestations.

Table 4. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Lacrimal duct obstruction

Tear duct massage; consider lacrimal duct stent placement

Cleft palate, bifid uvula, or velopharyngeal insufficiency

Management by a cleft/craniofacial team; retrognathia & underdevelopment of the mandible may require mandibular distraction osteogenesis.

Obstructive sleep apnea

CPAP or BiPAP; ENT evaluation for tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy

Pulmonary consultation; consider treatment w/mefanamic or flufenamic acid (see Therapies Under Investigation)

Feeding difficulties or signs of aspiration

Use of a special nipple or bottle with cleft palate; short-term nasogastric feeding tube; consideration of gastrostomy tube

Gastroesophageal reflux disease

Standard positioning & pharmacologic treatment

Musculoskeletal findings (i.e., contractures, scoliosis)

Ankle-foot orthoses or other assistive devices; standard treatment for scoliosis

Physical therapy and/or occupational therapy evaluation; consultation w/an orthopedist

Seizure disorder

Evaluation of blood sugar & electrolytes; standard treatment for seizures

Consider EEG and referral to a neurologist

Unexplained hypoglycemia or suspected hyperinsulinism

Consideration of diazoxide therapy

Consider referral to an endocrinologist

Developmental delay

Early referral for developmental support/special education, which may include physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and/or cognitive therapy

Consider referral to a neurodevelopmental specialist and/or neuropsychiatric testing

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome
Benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE). The seizures of BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants (e.g., levetiracetam and topiramate) are often used in neonates with refractory seizures, despite limited data and off-label use [Tulloch et al 2012]. However, refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ3-related BFNE.

A recent study has been performed to evaluate treatment responses in a small cohort of 19 individuals presenting with clinical features suggestive of BFNE. All but three had family histories of neonatal seizures. Of the 19 individuals, pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 were found in 14; pathogenic variants in KCNQ3 were present in two. Seventeen (88%) of 19 individuals were seizure free within hours of receiving oral carbamazepine (CBZ) or oxcarbazepine (OXC). Earlier initiation of CBZ was associated with shorter hospitalization. No side effects of CBZ were reported. All individuals had normal development and remain seizure free at a mean follow-up period of six months to 16 years (mean: 7.8 years). The authors concluded that CBZ is safe and rapidly effective in neonates with BFNE, even in status epilepticus, and that CBZ should be the drug of choice in benign familial neonatal seizures [Sands et al 2016].

Interictal EEG is generally normal and does not influence treatment duration.

Antiepileptic drugs are usually withdrawn at age three to six months.

Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE). The seizures of BFIE are usually completely controlled with the AEDs phenobarbital, carbamazepine, or valproate. If adequately treated, very few individuals show recurrent seizures; seizure recurrence is often caused by a low starting dose of AEDs.

Antiepileptic medication is usually withdrawn after one to three years with no relapses.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Issues

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.
Physical therapy and rehabilitation approaches, including the use of braces and walkers, offer the best prospect for remaining ambulatory as the disease progresses.

Some individuals with SBMA have breast reduction surgery for gynecomastia [Sperfeld et al 2002].
No established treatment for Kindler syndrome exists. The goals of care are to treat manifestations and prevent complications.

When possible, children with KS should be managed by a multidisciplinary team in a center experienced in caring for children with skin fragility. When possible, the team should include a dermatologist, pediatrician, ophthalmologist, dentist, gastroenterologist, urologist, nurse specialist, and dietitian.

Skin. The following are recommended:

Standard blister care in childhood. If a blister is not painful, it should be kept intact. Otherwise alleviate blister-related pain by draining the fluid using a sterile needle, leaving the overlying skin in place. Apply an ointment to the blister and cover it with nonstick gauze bandage. Antibiotics may be used to treat an infected blister.

Protection from trauma, for example, by use of soft and protective clothing and avoiding contact sports to prevent physical trauma

Use of moisturizers for dry, pruritic skin

Sun-safety education, including use of high sun protective factor (>30 SPF) sunscreens, use of sun-protective clothing (hats and long-sleeve shirts) and avoidance of sun exposure as much as possible

Pseudosyndactyly is usually relatively mild and does not require surgical treatment.

Mucosal involvement

Eyes. Lubrication of the cornea by artificial tears and eye drops and prevention of infections by use of local antibiotics; surgical correction of corneal scarring as needed by an ophthalmologist

Mouth and periodontium. Regular dental care to ensure optimal oral hygiene to reduce periodontal disease

Gastrointestinal tract

Esophageal dilatation may be indicated for those with dysphagia.

Esophageal strictures and stenosis may require fluoroscopically guided balloon dilations [Sadler et al 2006].

Temporary parenteral nutrition may be necessary when esophageal dysfunction is severe.

Anal stenosis and bleeding requires regular laxatives.

Severe colitis may require surgical bowel resection in some cases.

Urethra. Meatal stenosis may require dilatation. Strictures may require stenting and/ or surgical intervention.

Phimosis. Most males require circumcision [Penagos et al 2004].
The following are indicated:

Ongoing routine pediatric care by a pediatrician or neurologist, psychiatrist, and/or (for adults) specialist in the care of adults with intellectual disability

Depending on the age of the affected individual, referral to an early childhood intervention program, ongoing special education programs, and/or vocational training

Speech/language therapy, physical and occupational therapy, and sensory integration therapy

Specialized neurologic and psychiatric care for individuals with extreme behavior problems and/or movement disorder. Behavioral therapies include special education techniques that may help minimize behavioral outbursts in the school setting by emphasizing individualized instruction, structure, and a set daily routine.

Therapeutic management of the sleep disorder. No well-controlled treatment trials have been reported

Specialized neurologic care for individuals with epilepsy; management of seizures in accordance with standard practice

Standard treatment for cardiac, renal, urologic, and other medical issues

Auditory amplification if hearing loss is identified
An expert European consensus statement on the management of IGD has recently been published [Boehm et al 2015] (full text).

Typically, a definitive diagnosis of IGD is made around age 18 years. Occasionally, however, a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty or in an infant with microphallus and cryptorchidism.

Males with IGD Age ≥18 Years

Treatment options include sex steroids, gonadotropins, and pulsatile GnRH administration. Choice of therapy in adults is determined by the goal(s) of treatment (i.e., to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and/or to induce and maintain fertility). The selection of hormone replacement therapy is also based on the preference of the individual being treated; however, when fertility is not immediately desired, replacement with testosterone therapy is the most practical option. As the majority of individuals with IGD have not progressed through puberty at the time of diagnosis, initial therapy should be started at low doses and gradually increased to adult doses once the development of secondary sexual characteristics is achieved.

Hormone replacement therapy for males not desiring fertility

Testosterone therapy in the form of injectable and transdermal routes of testosterone administration is typically used to both induce puberty and maintain adult levels of testosterone. Recently nasal testosterone has become available but use has not been reported in patients with IGD.

The injectable testosterone preparations have a “roller-coaster” pharmacokinetic effect, with peak and trough levels that can go to extraphysiologic levels; thus, the transdermal preparations have the added benefit of offering a more favorable pharmacokinetic profile. A typical adult dose of testosterone replacement is 200 mg of testosterone ester injection every two weeks or 5 g of a 1% testosterone gel every day. Doses do vary with newer testosterone preparations; manufacturer’s instructions should be followed for individual testosterone preparations.

Men using topical androgen replacement must take care to avoid exposing other individuals to treated skin. Anecdotal reports suggest that the transmission of clinically effective levels of testosterone from the patient to other family members (including women and children) is possible with undesirable side effects.

Once puberty is initiated, testosterone replacement therapy is usually required indefinitely to ensure normal sexual function and maintenance of proper muscle, bone, and red blood cell mass.

However, in approximately 10% of males, reversal of IGD may occur; thus, if clinical evidence shows endogenous activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-axis (e.g., testicular growth on testosterone, maintained testosterone levels despite missing/withholding therapy), a brief washout of testosterone therapy should be done with monitoring of testosterone levels. If testosterone levels fall, therapy should be reinitiated. If levels are normal, no further testosterone therapy will be required; serial monitoring of levels should be undertaken, as some individuals may require reinitiation of therapy.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). An alternative to testosterone therapy, hCG injections promote testicular growth, normalize serum concentration of testosterone, and induce development of secondary sexual characteristics.

In adults, treatment with hCG is usually initiated at 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day to normalize serum testosterone concentrations. Dose should be increased by increments of 250 IU if serum testosterone levels remain low.

Treatment with hCG must be weighed against the increased risk of developing gynecomastia (resulting from the estrogen produced by stimulation of the testes with hCG). To some extent the risk of gynecomastia can be minimized by gradually reducing the dose of hCG to the minimum required to sustain a serum testosterone concentration in the mid-normal range (~500 ng/dL).

Male Infants/Adolescents with Suspicion of IGD

If IGD is clinically suspected (e.g., low testosterone levels with low/normal gonadotropins) low-dose testosterone or hCG therapy can be given in early infancy to boys with microphallus to increase penile length [Bin-Abbas et al 1999, Young 2012].

Since a definitive diagnosis of IGD may not be possible until age 18 years, after infancy these boys do not generally need to be treated until around the time of puberty. At this time, if a high suspicion of IGD remains (e.g., associated anosmia and delay in onset puberty), these subjects may benefit from early initiation of hormonal replacement therapy with either testosterone or hCG treatment early in the pubertal period. A suggestive puberty induction regimen in adolescents is to start a long-acting testosterone ester at a dose of 25-50 mg, given intramuscularly every two weeks. The doses can be gradually increased by 25-50 mg every two to three months until full virilization is achieved. Once adult doses (~200 mg/2 weeks) are reached, further adjustments are based on serum testosterone levels.

Hormone replacement therapy for males desiring fertility (fertility induction in males). As testosterone replacement therapy suppresses spermatogenesis in the testes, gonadotropins or pulsatile GnRH therapy is usually required to realize the fertility potential in males.

Gonadotropin therapy. In most males with IGD, a combination of gonadotropins (hCG along with either human menopausal gonadotropins [hMG] or recombinant FSH) is used to stimulate spermatogenesis. In males with very low testicular volumes (≤~8 mL) the initiating dose of hCG is usually 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day; FSH is added at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or recombinant formulation. Trough serum testosterone concentrations (target: mid-normal range [~500 ng/dL]), trough serum FSH levels (target: mid-normal reference range), and sperm count are monitored to assess response. Recent trials show that in those with lower testicular volumes, priming with FSH prior to combination therapy may improve spermatogenic outcomes [Dwyer et al 2013].

In males with higher baseline testicular volumes, treatment with hCG alone may be sufficient to achieve spermatogenesis and conception [Burris et al 1988]. However, if after six to nine months, semen analysis reveals persistent azoospermia or marked oligospermia, FSH is added to the regimen at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or a recombinant formulation.

In either treatment, testicular volume must be tracked, as this is one of the primary determinants of successful spermatogenesis. In fact, sperm are rarely seen in the semen analysis until testicular volume reaches 8 mL [Whitcomb & Crowley 1990]. In most males without a history of cryptorchidism, sperm function is usually normal and conception can occur even with relatively low sperm counts. Note: Liu et al [2009] have noted that previous treatment with gonadotropins may reduce the period of subsequent gonadotropin treatment required for initiation of spermatogenesis.

If a pituitary defect exists, gonadotropin therapy becomes the treatment of choice.

Pulsatile GnRH stimulation vs. gonadotropin therapy. While either gonadotropin therapy or pulsatile GnRH stimulation can induce spermatogenesis in approximately 90%-95% of men with IGD, some men have a better response to pulsatile GnRH stimulation than to gonadotropin therapy.

Subcutaneous administration of GnRH in a pulsatile manner through a portable pump that delivers a GnRH bolus every two hours is an efficient way of inducing testicular growth and spermatogenesis [Pitteloud et al 2002b]. As the primary defect of IGD is typically localized to the hypothalamus, the pituitary responds appropriately to physiologic doses of GnRH. Note: In the US, pulsatile GnRH therapy is not currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of infertility in men and, thus, is available for such treatment only at specialized research centers.

Females with IGD

Hormone replacement therapy for females not desiring fertility. Although a definitive diagnosis of IGD in females is usually made around age 18 years, occasionally a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty, and therapy may need to be initiated earlier (age ~14 years)

To allow optimal breast development, initial treatment should consist of unopposed estrogen replacement via oral or topical preparations. Many formulations of estrogens are available; a suggested oral regimen is using premarin 0.3 mg daily to be increased gradually to an adult replacement dose of 1-1.25 mg daily.

Once breast development is optimal, a progestin should be added for endometrial protection (e.g., cyclical Prometrium® 200 mg daily for 10-12 days).

Although preference of the individual plays an important role in choice of treatment plan, low-estrogen formulations should be considered in women with clotting abnormalities (see Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia and Prothrombin Thrombophilia).

Hormone replacement therapy for females desiring fertility (fertility induction in females). Pulsatile GnRH stimulation and exogenous gonadotropins are FDA approved for folliculogenesis in women with IGD. Either therapy should be administered with close supervision by physicians specializing in ovulation induction. Intravenous administration of GnRH at various frequencies throughout the menstrual cycle closely mimics the dynamics of normal menstrual cycles resulting in ovulation of a single follicle [Santoro et al 1986]. This therapy offers a clear advantage over the traditional treatment with exogenous gonadotropins, which results in higher rates of both multiple gestation and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. For either approach, however, the rate of conception is approximately 30% per ovulatory cycle [Martin et al 1990].

Fertility Options in Patients with IGD if Fertility Induction is Unsuccessful

In vitro fertilization. Although successful spermatogenesis can be obtained in most males with IGD through pulsatile GnRH therapy or combined gonadotropin therapy, some men with KS caused by an ANOS1 (KAL1) pathogenic variant may have an atypical response to therapy [Sykiotis et al 2010a]. In those who respond to therapy, low sperm numbers can often result in conception; however, if infertility continues despite successful spermatogenesis or if spermatogenesis fails to occur, in vitro fertilization (IVF) is an option.

Similarly, if spontaneous conception fails to occur in women with IGD who have undergone ovulation induction, IVF may be an option.
The following treatment recommendations are appropriate:

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy

Failure to thrive. Intervention for feeding problems as needed in infancy and childhood

Eyes. Cataract and ptosis surgery if indicated

Hearing loss. Hearing aids or cochlear implant if needed

Cardiac Function assessment and treatment if needed

Genital anomalies. Orchidopexy in males with undescended testes

Renal anomalies. Treatment of vesicoureteral reflux if indicated

Skeletal. Referral to an orthopedist if joint dislocations or scoliosis is present, early referral to physical therapy

Endocrine. Thyroid hormone replacement as needed

Other facial. Cleft palate repair if present
Treatment of individuals with infantile-onset Krabbe disease who are diagnosed in stage II or III is limited to supportive care to control irritability and spasticity.
The following are appropriate:

Placement of cardiac pacemaker in individuals with cardiac conduction block to reduce the risk of sudden death

Placement of eyelid slings for severe ptosis

Cochlear implants and hearing aids for neurosensory hearing loss

Hormone replacement for endocrinopathies

Dilation of the upper esophageal sphincter to alleviate cricopharyngeal achalasia

Folinic acid supplementation in individuals with KSS with low CSF folic acid

Replacement of pancreatic enzymes in Pearson syndrome

Administration of coenzyme Q10 (50-200 mg 3x/day) and L-carnitine (330 mg 3x/day)

Physical and occupational therapy

Treatment of depression

Ventilatory support for respiratory abnormalities in Leigh syndrome.
Optimal management involves a multidisciplinary team with expertise in pediatrics, child neurology, neurosurgery, rehabilitation, and medical genetics.

Hydrocephalus. Surgical treatment should be performed as needed. Shunting of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is indicated to reduce intracranial pressure. Of note, prenatal shunting procedures offer no advantage [Pinckert & Golbus 1988].

Intellectual disability. Developmental progress should be monitored and stimulated. Developmental outcome is variable and individual educational programming is important.

Adducted thumbs. Surgical intervention is not generally indicated. . A splint may help reduce the degree of adduction. In some milder cases, tendon transfer may improve thumb function.

Spastic paraplegia. Neurologic features should be monitored. Follow up and treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.
Primary treatment is not possible, but management of symptoms can improve the comfort and care of individuals with this disorder [Van Haren et al 2015].

Autonomic dysfunction

Neurogenic bladder:

Recurrent urinary tract infections should be addressed with attention to bladder regimens for managing neurogenic bladders and in rare case antibiotic prophylaxis.

Urinary urgency may require spasmolytics (e.g., solifenacine succinate).

Constipation can be managed by good hydration and dietary fiber, although sometimes stool softeners (e.g., docusate) or a laxative is needed.

Hypotensive events can be minimized by pharmacologic treatment (mineralocorticoids such as fludrocortisone or vasopressors such as hydrochloride), compressive stockings, physical therapy (to help with rising from supine positions), and increased salt in the diet.

Feeding difficulties can be managed with speech therapy and appropriate feeding interventions to assure adequate nutrition while preventing aspiration pneumonia.

Sexual dysfunction can be alleviated with sildenafil.

Anhidrosis is managed by avoiding overheating.

Intensive management of infections should include adequate antipyretic treatment, as symptoms may worsen significantly with fever.

Spasticity. Medications that can help reduce muscle tone include oral baclofen or diazepam (GABA agonists) and injectable botulinum toxin for focal muscle spasticity. A good physical therapy regimen can be beneficial in improving joint mobility and function.

Ataxia. Although ataxia is difficult to treat, frequent falls can be managed with strategies to minimize falls and increase strength and adaptive equipment such as walkers or wheelchairs.

Cognitive dysfunction can affect social interactions and financial management. A social worker and financial planner can help anticipate issues of guardianship that may accompany progressive decline.

Family and patient support/advocacy groups can help address psychosocial consequences.
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have a major effect against generalized seizures, sometimes controlling seizures for many months. Generalized seizures are rare in individuals who are treated, even years after disease onset.

Valproic acid is the traditional antiepileptic treatment for LD; because it is a broad-spectrum AED, it controls both the generalized tonic-clonic seizures and myoclonic jerks.

Clonazepam can be used as an adjunctive medication for control of myoclonus, as in other forms of PME, although the literature does not provide clear evidence for its effect on myoclonus in LD.

Zonisamide has had a significant effect on both seizures and myoclonus in a small number of individuals with Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora disease.

Both piracetam and levetiracetam have been effective, sustained, and well tolerated as add-on treatment for myoclonus in progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) [Koskiniemi et al 1998, Genton et al 1999, Fedi et al 2001, Crest et al 2004]. Levetiracetam had a significant effect on myoclonus in two sisters with LD [Boccella et al 2003]. Lohi et al [2006] reported that levetiracetam exacerbated seizures while improving myoclonus in two persons with LD.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with sebelipase alfa was approved by the FDA in late 2015.

Results from a Phase III clinical trial of 66 affected individuals demonstrated that ERT can be life saving for those with severe Wolman syndrome and life improving with prolonged survival in those who have cholesterol ester storage disease [Burton et al 2015].

ERT is administered intravenously at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight every other week.

Wolman Disease

Symptoms should generally be treated in a routine manner, while keeping in mind the limited life expectancy of infants with untreated Wolman disease.

Malabsorption and malnutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided in an attempt to limit malnutrition to the extent possible. Parenteral nutrition is offered in many instances of intractable malabsorption.

Hepatomegaly and liver disease. Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure.

Adrenal cortical insufficiency. Corticosteroid and mineralocorticoid replacement is indicated in the presence of insufficiency.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has overall had mixed results, and requires further study [Gramatges et al 2009]. While successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect [Stein et al 2007, Tolar et al 2009], HSCT can be associated with morbidity and mortality [Yanir et al 2013].

Consider discussion of comfort care options.

CESD

Hyperlipidemia. Attempts should be made to reduce cholesterol through the use of statins, cholestyramine, ezetimibe,and a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides [Gasche et al 1997, Dalgiç et al 2006, Chatrath et al 2009, Abello et al 2010].

Lipophilic vitamin supplementation may also be beneficial.

Aggressive reduction of additional cardiovascular disease risk factors should be encouraged.

Nutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided to children experiencing failure to thrive and to adults experiencing weight loss. Additionally, a nutrition team can assist individuals in the implementation of a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides.

Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. At least four case reports of successful liver transplantation for CESD have been reported, with post-operative improvement of lipid profiles and successful transplant out to five years in one individual [Ambler et al 2013].
Supportive therapy includes the following:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation to improve motor function

The following as needed:

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) if epileptic seizures are present

Special education

Speech therapy
Except for RPE65-related LCA (see Therapies Under Investigation), no substantial treatment or cure for LCA exists, and, thus, care is supportive. Parents should be referred to programs for the visually impaired child within their state or locality.

Affected individuals benefit from correction of refractive error, use of low-vision aids when possible, and optimal access to educational and work-related opportunities.
The following are appropriate:

Conservative management of symptomatic distichiasis with lubrication or epilation (plucking), or more definitive management with cryotherapy, electrolysis, or lid splitting [O'Donnell & Collin 1993]. Recurrence is possible even with more definitive treatment.

Referral to a lymphedema therapist for management of edema (fitting hosiery, massage). Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement may be possible with the use of carefully fitted hosiery and/or bandaging, which may reduce the size of the swelling as well as the discomfort associated with it.

Surgery for ptosis if clinically indicated (e.g., obscured vision, cosmetic appearance)

Referral to neurosurgery for individuals with symptomatic spinal cysts (i.e., any neurologic signs or symptoms especially in the lower limbs)

Conservative management of varicose veins if possible, as surgery could aggravate the edema and increase the risk of infection or cellulitis

Standard treatment for scoliosis
The following are appropriate:

Consideration of behavioral modification or pharmacologic adjuvant therapy for individuals with ADHD

Adjuvant therapies such as physical, speech, and occupational therapy for individuals with identified developmental delays

Individualized education plans for learning disorders and school performance issues
Specific treatment is possible for the following three nuclear gene-encoded Leigh-like syndromes:

Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease

(BTBGD) (also known as thiamine transporter-2 deficiency) (mutation of SLC19A3). Biotin (5-10 mg/kg/day) and thiamine (in doses ranging from 300-900 mg) should be given orally as early in the disease course as possible and continued lifelong. Symptoms typically resolve within days.

Biotinidase deficiency

(BTD). All symptomatic children with profound biotinidase deficiency improve when treated with 5-10 mg of oral biotin per day. Biotin treatment should be continued lifelong in all individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency.

Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis deficiency

(PDSS2). Supplementation with oral coenzyme Q10 (10-30 mg/kg/day in children and 1200-3000 mg/day in adults) should be commenced as early in the disease course as possible and continued lifelong [Rahman et al 2012]

Supportive management for any of the causes of nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome includes the following:

Acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate is appropriate for acute exacerbations of acidosis.

Seizures. Appropriate antiepileptic drugs tailored to the type of seizure should be administered under the supervision of a neurologist. Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effects on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Melegh & Trombitas 1997, Anderson et al 2002].

Dystonia

Benzhexol, baclofen, tetrabenezine, and gabapentin may be useful, alone or in various combinations; an initial low dose should be started and gradually increased until symptom control is achieved or intolerable side effects occur.

Botulinum toxin injection has also been used in individuals with Leigh syndrome and severe intractable dystonia.

Cardiomyopathy. Medical therapy may be required and should be supervised by a cardiologist.

Nutrition. Regular assessment of daily caloric intake and adequacy of dietary structure including micronutrients and feeding management is indicated.

Psychological support for the affected individual and family is essential.
Individuals with anophthalmos or extreme microphthalmos benefit from regular evaluations by an ocularist for placement of serial enlarging orbital expanders to prevent deformation of facial structures and to encourage normal development of eye lashes and lid margins.

Early intervention with physical therapy and occupational therapy helps to address disturbances of the sleep-wake cycle caused by lack of light perception and problems of delayed gross motor development often observed in children with visual impairment.

Early intervention with special education maximizes cognitive development.

Referral to services for the visually impaired is recommended.

Treatment for hearing loss and sleep disorders is dependent on the specific defect and similar to the general population.

Referral to a sleep disorder specialist may be necessary depending on the individual's history and presentation to determine the appropriate tests.

Dental examinations and cleaning should be instituted to monitor dental hygiene, especially when the affected individual has cognitive developmental delay. Missing and irregularly shaped teeth and wide spacing of teeth are common. Treatment is the same as for the general population in restoring masticatory function.
Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies and cryptorchidism is usually the same as in the general population.

Treatment of hearing loss may include the following:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration for cochlear implantation, a promising habilitation option for persons with profound deafness

Recognition that, as distinct from many clinical conditions, the management and treatment of severe-to-profound congenital deafness involves primarily the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

Any developmental disability should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

Treatment of cryptorchidism in males is usually the same as in the general population.
Although the underlying mechanisms of leukodystrophies are diverse, many manifestations are similar across this group of disorders. In the great majority of cases, primary treatment is not possible, but management of symptoms can improve the comfort and care of individuals with these complex disorders.

Ideally, the child or adult with a leukodystrophy is managed in a multidisciplinary setting by providers experienced in the care of persons with a leukodystrophy.

Spasticity. Pharmacologic agents are used to manage muscle tone and block neuronal signaling to muscle (chemodenervaton). Intensive physical therapy is used to improve mobility and function.

Extrapyramidal manifestations. Dystonia and dyskinesias may cause significant disability; pharmacologic treatment may result in significant functional improvement.

Ataxia. No specific treatment of ataxia exists, although rehabilitative measures can be of great assistance.

Seizures. Seizures should be treated with typical anticonvulsants and are rarely refractory, except on occasion at the end of life.

Cognitive developmental delay/encephalopathy. It is important to advocate for persons with a leukodystrophy in school or at work to avoid limitations related to their motor disabilities. Augmentative communication may be used to address speech deficits. Accommodations for cognitive delays and fine motor disabilities should be used as needed.

Orthopedic. Attention should be given to the prevention and treatment of orthopedic problems, such as hip dislocation and scoliosis.

Feeding. Swallowing dysfunction and pulmonary problems resulting from the increased risk of aspiration are common as the disease progresses. Decreased nutritional intake and failure to thrive may also occur. The decision to place a gastrostomy tube for nutrition is based on the overall health status of the individual, expected disease course, and family and patient wishes.
No definitive treatments for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies exist. Management should be tailored as much as possible to each individual and each specific LGMD type. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999].

Weight control to avoid obesity

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility

Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Use of respiratory aids when indicated

Referral to a cardiologist for standard supportive treatment of cardiomyopathy

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998]

Clinical genetics consultation
Appropriate management, tailored to each individual, can improve quality of life and prolong survival. The general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995], Bushby [1999], and Norwood et al [2007], and revised by the Committee of the American Academy of Neurology [Narayanaswami et al 2014]:

A passive physical therapy program [Oygard et al 2011] and stretching exercises should be instituted early after diagnosis to promote mobility, prolong walking, and slow the disease progression, in particular by maintaining joint flexibility. Individuals usually benefit from strengthening and gentle [Sveen et al 2013], low-impact aerobic exercise (swimming, stationary bicycling) with a supervised sub-maximal effort, which improves cardiovascular performance, increases muscle efficiency, and lessens muscle fatigue. Although there are no specific reports on supportive care, physical and occupational therapies are important [Eagle 2002].

Avoidance of prolonged immobility is recommended.

Technical aids can also compensate for the loss of certain motor abilities; canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs enable individuals to regain independence. The use of knee-ankle-foot orthoses at bedtime is recommended to prevent contractures. Scoliosis occurs mainly after wheelchair dependence and attention should be paid to seating [Norwood et al 2007].

Surgical intervention may be required for correction of orthopedic complications including foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures. Occasionally, scapular fixation may be required for particularly problematic scapular winging.

In the late stage of the disease, chronic respiratory insufficiency may occur and the use of respiratory aids may be indicated to prolong survival [Pollitt et al 2001, Norwood et al 2007, D’Angelo et al 2011, Richard et al 2016, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Individuals should be monitored for signs of nocturnal hypoventilation (sleep disturbances, early morning headache, daytime drowsiness).

Overnight pulse oxymetry is recommended if forced vital capacity is lower than 60% and the demonstration of nocturnal hypoventilation should lead to noninvasive nocturnal ventilation [Norwood et al 2007].

Intervention in the form of nocturnal ventilator assistance for respiratory failure (by noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, NIV, by nasal masks) may be life saving in severely affected individuals [Dirik et al 2001, Hashiguchi et al 2014, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Wheelchair-bound individuals may also develop weak cough efforts, placing them at risk of atelectasia, pneumonia, progressive mismatch, and respiratory failure.

Annual influenza vaccination and prompt treatment for chest and respiratory infections should be eventually addressed using a mechanical in-ex-sufflator [Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Social and emotional support help to improve the quality of life, to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity, and to reduce the sense of social isolation [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Clinicians should anticipate and facilitate decision-making for affected individuals and their families as the disease progresses, including decisions regarding loss of mobility and need of assistance with activities of daily living, medical complications, and end-of-life care [Narayanaswami et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

There are a number of measures that decrease disease manifestations in a symptomatic individual: control of weight gain, prevention of joint contractures by means of physical therapy and stretching exercises, and in the advanced stage, control of respiratory insufficiency. Physical therapy and stretching exercises can help to slow disease progression; therefore, a physical therapy program should be instituted early after diagnosis.
Management of affected individuals is supportive and includes provision of visual aids, occupational rehabilitation, and registration with the relevant local social services.

A minority of individuals with LHON develop neurologic features including ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, nonspecific myopathy, and movement disorders. This group of affected individuals should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of physicians and allied professionals to minimize the functional consequences of these neurologic complications.

In those individuals who are found to have pre-excitation syndrome on ECG, referral to a cardiologist can be considered; treatment for symptomatic individuals with pre-excitation syndrome is the same as in the general population.
For neonates, providing a moist environment in an isolette, preventing infection by hygienic handling, and treating infection are paramount.

Petrolatum-based creams and ointments are used to keep the skin soft, supple, and hydrated.

As the child becomes older, humidification with long baths, lubrication, and keratolytic agents such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations may be used to promote peeling and thinning of the stratum corneum. Topical salicylic acid preparations should be used very cautiously because of absorption.

For individuals with ectropion, lubrication of the cornea with artificial tears or prescription ophthalmic ointments, especially at night, is helpful in preventing dessication of the cornea.

Topical or oral retinoid therapy is recommended for those with severe skin involvement; however, side effects include bone toxicity and ligamentous calcifications from long-term use. Oral retinoid therapy should be used with great caution in women of child-bearing age because of concerns about teratogenicity. A detailed review of choice of retinoid, dosage, treatment duration, toxicity, monitoring, and disease-specific considerations for ARCI are provided by Digiovanna et al [2013].
Women with LFS who develop breast cancer are encouraged to consider bilateral mastectomies (rather than lumpectomies) in order to reduce risks of developing a second primary breast tumor and avoid exposure to radiation therapy. However, most experts recommend that treatment efficacy be prioritized above concerns about late effects after careful analysis of risks and benefits. Aside from avoiding radiation therapy, LFS-related tumors are treated according to standard protocols.
There is no curative therapy for LP.

Microlaryngoscopic excision of laryngeal deposits improves airway access and voice quality [Harper et al 1983].

Tracheostomy on occasion is required to ensure a safe airway in patients with significant airway obstruction [Richards & Bull 1973].

Seizures should be assessed and managed by a neurologist, using antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Treatments of unproven efficacy. Although several reports have described variable success in treatment of skin and vocal cord lesions with dermabrasion, carbon dioxide laser surgery, D-penicillamine, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), corticosteroids, etretinate, acitretin, carbon dioxide laser, and surgical intervention, they are not widely used and their efficacy is unproven. Click here (pdf) for further details.
Specific treatment for LMS does not currently exist. Supportive management of the clinical finding depends on the involved system as outlined below.

Lateral spinal meningoceles. Symptomatic treatment of neurologic sequelae (e.g., neurogenic bladder, paresthesias, back pain, and/or paraparesis) is as per routine.

Although rarely required, surgical intervention may be necessary for neurologic manifestations secondary to meningocele size and location. When required, surgical approach is individualized and can include laminectomy for smaller meningoceles and costotransversectomy for larger meningoceles [Kim et al 2011]. Of note, the 55-year-old woman with LMS experienced irreversible nerve damage following surgery for two lumbosacral meningoceles (to manage back and referred neuropathic pain) [Castori et al 2014].

Psychomotor development. Provide timely supportive interventions as needed to optimize development through occupational therapy and education resources.

Musculoskeletal

Management by specialists in chronic pain management or rehabilitation medicine as needed

Physiotherapy to reduce risk for joint subluxation and dislocation

Routine management of the following:

Cleft palate

Hearing loss

Congenital cardiac defects

Genitourinary abnormalities

GERD. Note that a feeding tube may be necessary if persistent feeding difficulties result in failure to thrive.
Hyperuricemia. The overproduction of uric acid must be controlled to reduce the risk for nephrolithiasis, urate nephropathy, gouty arthritis, and tophi. Overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid catalyzed by xanthine oxidase. The dose of allopurinol is adjusted to maintain the uric acid within normal limits.

Note: Control of serum concentration of uric acid from birth using allopurinol has no effect on behavioral and neurologic symptoms.

Allopurinol therapy results in the accumulation of hypoxanthine and xanthine; xanthine may also form stones. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid periods of relative dehydration that could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system. Stones that develop in allopurinol-treated patients are usually composed of xanthine. A uric acid stone is an index of too little allopurinol. Hypoxanthine is soluble. Therefore, oxypurine analysis is useful in adjusting doses to maximize hypoxanthine. The allopurinol metabolite oxypurinol is also insoluble, and oxypurinol crystalluria has been observed with dehydration. Its concentration can also be monitored by oxypurine analysis of the urine.

Renal stones that form despite allopurinol may require lithotripsy or surgery.

Neurologic dysfunction. Spasticity can be managed by the administration of baclofen or benzodiazepines.

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Currently, no uniformly effective intervention for managing the neurobehavioral aspects of the disease exists. Self-injurious and other deleterious behaviors are best managed by a combination of physical, behavioral [Olson & Houlihan 2000], psychiatric [Harris 2007], and medical interventions.

Because stress increases self-injury, behavioral management through aversive techniques (which reduce self-injury in other conditions) actually increases self-injury in individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Virtually all affected individuals require physical restraints to prevent self-injury and are restrained more than 75% of the time, often at their own request and sometimes with restraints that would appear to be ineffective as they do not physically prevent biting. Families report that affected individuals are at ease when restrained.

Sixty percent of individuals have their teeth extracted to avoid self-injury through biting. Families have found this to be an effective management technique. More conservative than tooth extraction are vital pulpotomy and coronal resection, which maintain the root portion of the tooth in the bone, an approach that may preserve alveolar bone [Lee et al 2002].

Behavioral extinction methods may be useful in a controlled setting for reducing self-injury, but seldom transfer well to the home setting [Harris 2007].
Management of LDS is most effective through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a medical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Cardiovascular

All individuals with LDS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition.

Two important considerations when managing cardiovascular features of LDS:

Aortic dissection occurs at smaller aortic diameters than observed in Marfan syndrome.

Vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root. Imaging of the complete arterial tree from the head through the pelvis by MRA or CTA is necessary.

Beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications are used to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Aneurysms are amenable to early and aggressive surgical intervention (in contrast to EDS, vascular type, in which surgery is used as a last resort because of the extremely high rate of intraoperative complications and death). Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Given the safety and the increasing availability of the valve-sparing procedure:

For young children with the most severe systemic findings of LDS, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension exceeds the 99th percentile and the aortic annulus exceeds 1.8-2.0 cm, allowing the placement of a graft of sufficient size to accommodate growth. Additional factors including family history, rate of aortic root growth and aortic valve function can influence the timing of surgery.

For adolescents and adults, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension approaches 4.0 cm. This recommendation is based on both numerous examples of documented aortic dissection in adults with aortic root dimensions at or below 4.0 cm and the excellent response to prophylactic surgery. An extensive family history of larger aortic dimension without dissection could alter this practice for individual patients.

Note: This practice may not eliminate risk of dissection and death, and earlier intervention based on family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit may be indicated.

Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary to prevent damage to the spinal cord.

Clubfeet require surgical correction by an orthopedic surgeon.

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Surgical intervention for protusio acetabulae is rarely indicated. Treatment focuses on pain control.

Orthotics are only indicated for severe pes planus. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports; others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or successful.

Craniofacial. Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team. Treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis is the same as in all other disorders with these malformations.

Eye. The ocular manifestations of LDS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk.

Optimal management of pneumothorax to prevent recurrence may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.

Counseling regarding other life-threatening manifestations including spontaneous rupture of the spleen and bowel and the risks associated with pregnancy is recommended.
Management of the varying clinical problems usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatric ophthalmology, nephrology, clinical biochemical genetics, metabolism, nutrition, endocrinology, neurology, child development, behavior, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved.

Eyes. Treatment of the eye problems usually requires an experienced (preferably pediatric) ophthalmologist; cataract surgeons and glaucoma specialists may also be needed.

Early removal of cataracts is recommended to promote proper visual stimulation and development. Postoperatively, eyeglasses or contact lenses help to improve vision. Surgical implantation of artificial lenses is not recommended because of the high prevalence of infantile glaucoma.

Despite management with medical and surgical measures, glaucoma is often difficult to control.

Special services for the visually handicapped should be included in any rehabilitation plan.

Central nervous system. In infancy, feeding and nutrition problems related to hypotonia may be substantial. Occasionally, nasogastric tube feedings or feeding gastrostomy, with or without fundoplication, may be necessary to achieve appropriate nutrition. Occupational or speech therapists who specialize in feeding problems may be of assistance.

Gastroesophageal reflux usually responds to standard anti-reflux measures such as thickened feedings and elevation of the head of the bed. Some individuals need medications to control gastric acidity and to promote gastric emptying; others require surgery.

Most seizure disorders can be controlled with anticonvulsant therapy.

Programs to promote optimal psychomotor development should be started in early infancy. Early childhood and preschool intervention programs, e.g., First Steps or Head Start, and later public or private school programs should evaluate the abilities and specific needs of the child and formulate an individualized educational plan (IEP). Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and language therapy, special education services, and services for the visually impaired are usually included in the plan.

A behavior modification plan along with antidepressant and/or antipsychotic medications may be needed for behavior control.

Kidney. Those individuals with renal Fanconi syndrome and type 2 renal acidosis should be treated with oral supplements of sodium and potassium bicarbonate or citrate to correct acidosis and hypokalemia. Doses need to be titrated to individual needs based on "trough" blood concentrations of serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, and total carbon dioxide). (Trough levels are blood concentrations measured just before a scheduled dose.)

Treatment with oral phosphate, along with oral calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3), is needed to correct hypophosphatemia and renal rickets of the Fanconi syndrome. Doses should also be titrated to individual needs based on trough blood concentration for phosphorus and serum concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, calcium, and intact parathyroid hormone.

An increased requirement for fluids, along with the electrolyte and bicarbonate requirements, places affected individuals at high risk for metabolic imbalance during illness (especially those associated with vomiting or diarrhea) or when fasting, e.g., with surgical procedures. At such times, intravenous replacement of fluids, bicarbonate, and electrolytes is important and may need to be done in anticipation of problems to prevent severe electrolyte disturbances and dehydration.

Progressive glomerulosclerosis likely results from progressive renal tubular injury, which eventually may lead to chronic renal failure and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) between the second and fourth decades of life [McSpadden 2000, Nussbaum & Suchy 2001]. Treatment of ESRD with chronic dialysis and renal transplant may be successful in selected patients [Tricot et al 2003]. Although experience is limited, at least seven adult men with Lowe syndrome and ESRD have been treated successfully over a few years, including three with chronic hemodialysis, one with chronic home peritoneal dialysis, and three with renal transplants [E Brewer, personal observation].

Other. Human growth hormone therapy has been used successfully to improve growth velocity in some boys [McSpadden 2000]. The potential benefits of such therapy must be weighed against its costs/limitations.

Most undescended testes descend with time into the scrotum; some require hormone therapy and/or surgical correction.

In older individuals, bracing or surgery may be needed to arrest or correct severe or progressive scoliosis and joint hypermobility.

Resection of fibromas and cutaneous cysts may be needed if they are painful, have recurrent infections, or limit function.
The management of individuals with LPI is similar to that described in urea cycle disorders. In LPI, the severity of hyperammonemic crises rarely requires extreme treatments such as dialysis and hemofiltration. It is recommended that individuals with LPI be cared for by a specialized metabolic team.

Treatment of Acute Hyperammonemic Crises

Pharmacologic management. Blocking the production of ammonia is accomplished by the intravenous administration of arginine chloride and of a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. An intravenous loading dose is followed by an oral maintenance dose of nitrogen scavenger drugs when the individual is stable. Depletion of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) may occur as a consequence of the therapy with sodium phenylacetate [Scaglia 2010]. Persistence of BCAA deficiency hampers protein synthesis and induces catabolism. Therefore, careful evaluation of BCAA serum levels is recommended and specific supplementation may be required. Various detailed protocols for the treatment of intercurrent hyperammonemia in individuals with urea cycle disorders and, more generally, with hyperammonemia may be adopted [Singh 2007, Häberle 2011].

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of energy supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, energy should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free formula.

Patients should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. Nasogastric tube feeding may be required to ensure adequate caloric and nutritional intake. Therapy with ondansetron can be started to decrease vomiting.

Complete restriction of protein for more than 24-48 hours is not recommended as the individual will become protein catabolic for essential amino acids.

Long-Term Treatment

Dietary protein restriction and citrulline supplementation. Current treatment consists of dietary protein restriction (0.8-1.5 g/kg/day in children and 0.5-0.8 g/kg/day in adults) and supplementation with citrulline (100 mg/kg/day, in four doses taken with meals). Nitrogen scavenger drugs such as sodium benzoate (100-250 mg/kg/day in four divided doses) should be added to keep the lowest effective dosage of citrulline. As in the management of other inherited metabolic disorders, diet must be tailored on the basis of individual tolerance for the protein charge and carefully monitored to avoid disturbances of both growth and nutritional status.

Measurement of orotic aciduria appears to be a sensitive tool for adjustment of treatment.

Lysine supplementation. As lysine deficiency may contribute to the development of pathologic signs in LPI, oral supplementation with L-lysine-HCl should be attempted. Taking into account the defective intestinal absorption of lysine in LPI, small doses of L-lysine-HCl (0.05-0.5 mmol/kg, three times per day) are given and may normalize plasma lysine concentrations [Lukkarinen et al 2003].

Carnitine supplemetation. In a recent survey of 37 Finnish patients, hypocarnitemia was found to be associated with female sex, renal insufficiency, and the use of ammonia-scavenging drugs. When documented, hypocarnitemia should be corrected (25-50 mg/kg/day) [Korman et al 2002, Tanner et al 2008].

Additional therapies. Modification of the diet and fish oil supplementation should be tried in individuals with dyslipidemia before pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia is started.

Treatment of Late Complications

While hyperammonemia can be efficiently prevented and treated, no effective therapy has been established for late complications.

Treatment of lung disease in LPI remains controversial: high-dose corticosteroid treatment was effective in a few patients when started early, whereas no response was noted in others.

In individuals with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), treatment with granulocyte/monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was shown to be ineffective or even to worsen the clinical course [Santamaria et al 2004]. Recently, increased GM-CSF and decreased bioavailability of surfactant protein D have been proposed as a part of the mechanism underlying PAP in LPI [Douda et al 2009]. Whole lung lavage still remains the best therapeutic approach for PAP in LPI [Ceruti et al 2007]; however, relapses may require serial lavage.

Heart-lung transplantation was attempted with a temporary successful result, but it did not prevent a fatal return of the lung disease [Santamaria et al 2004].

Bone marrow transplantation has been discussed as a possible treatment for PAP in LPI. The rationale of this therapeutic approach would rely on the hypothesis of a defective function of lung macrophages [Barilli et al 2010, Sebastio et al 2011].

Treatment of renal disease in LPI should follow the standard guidelines under direction of the nephrologist.

Treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/macrophagic activation syndrome in LPI should be planned under the direction of the specialist.
Medical nutrition therapy. Morbidity and mortality can be prevented by maintaining plasma triglyceride concentration at less than 2000 mg/dL; a good clinical goal is less than 1000 mg/dL [Viljoen & Wierzbicki 2012]. Restriction of dietary fat to no more than 20 g/day or 15% of total energy intake is usually sufficient to reduce plasma triglyceride concentration and to keep the individual with familial LPL deficiency free of symptoms.

Medium-chain triglycerides may be used for cooking, as they are absorbed directly into the portal vein without becoming incorporated into chylomicron triglyceride.

The success of therapy depends on the individual's acceptance of the fat restriction, including both unsaturated and saturated fat. Note: Fish oil supplements, which are effective in disorders of excess hepatic triglyceride production, are not effective in LPL deficiency and are contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

The enlarged liver and spleen can return to normal size within one week of lowering of triglyceride concentrations.

The xanthomas can clear over the course of weeks to months. Recurrent or persistent eruptive xanthomas indicate inadequate therapy.

Pancreatitis associated with the chylomicronemia syndrome is treated in the manner typical for other forms of pancreatitis.

Discontinuation of oral fat intake stops chylomicron triglyceride formation, and replacement with hypocaloric parenteral nutrition decreases VLDL triglyceride production.

Administration of excess calories, as in hyperalimentation, is contraindicated in the acute state. The intravenous administration of lipid emulsions may lead to persistent or recurrent pancreatitis.

If recurrent pancreatitis with severe hypertriglyceridemia occurs, total dietary fat intake needs to be reduced.
The treatment of individuals with LRRK2-related PD does not differ from that of idiopathic PD.

The mainstay of treatment is pharmacologic replacement of dopamine, most commonly accomplished with the precursor of dopamine, L-dopa, combined with carbi-dopa.

Dopamine agonists may also be used, as well as inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B).

The motor impairment generally responds well to dopamine therapy (agonists and levodopa).

Other medications include anticholinergics, selegiline, and amantadine [Lang & Lozano 1998a, Lang & Lozano 1998b, Hristova & Koller 2000, Marjama-Lyons & Koller 2001, Olanow & Stocchi 2004].

Neurosurgical procedures such as deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus/globus pallidus interna or pallido-pontine nucleus benefit some individuals in whom dyskinesias or gait disoders are especially problematic. Less commonly, pallidotomy (or, rarely, fetal brain transplant to the caudate nucleus) may also provide benefit [Esselink et al 2004, Schüpbach et al 2007, Gómez-Esteban et al 2008, Munhoz et al 2009].

Individuals with Parkinson disease may benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.

To date, limited effective treatment exists for non-motor findings, which can be extremely disabling.
Experience in treating patients with LTBP4-related cutis laxa is very limited. Treatment is largely symptomatic. A reasonable approach to treatment could include the following:

Pulmonary

Symptomatic treatment of pulmonary emphysema with inhaled corticosteroids, atropine, and selective β2-adrenergic bronchodilation

Oxygen supplementation if necessary

Gastrointestinal

Medical treatment of gastroesophageal reflux to reduce discomfort and reactive bronchospasms

Feeding of mother’s milk in infants to maximize passive immunization

Dietary advice, sufficient fluid intake and, if necessary, osmotic laxatives to avoid chronic constipation

Genitourinary

Education on complete bladder emptying when voiding

Antibiotic prophylaxis in case of incomplete voiding and recurrent urinary tract infections

Pelvic floor strengthening by physical therapy may help to prevent prolapse of pelvic organs

Consideration of artificial bladder implantation (performed in 1 patient)

Cardiovascular

Care by a (pediatric) cardiologist with experience in connective tissue pathology

Treatment of clinically relevant pulmonary artery stenosis (preferably by catheterization which is minimally invasive and needs a shorter period of anesthesia)

Medical treatment of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., by sildenafil)

Other

Surgical treatment of congenital diaphragmatic hernia or severe hiatal hernia

Caution in surgical treatment of cutis laxa and inguinal or umbilical hernia, as the risk of recurrence is likely to be high (i.e., similar to that observed in other cutis laxa syndromes) and mechanical ventilation used during the procedure may aggravate pulmonary emphysema

Physical therapy for muscle strength and joint stability

Psychosocial support
Short stature

For prepubertal children with short stature, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH therapy) (dose 50 µg/kg body weight/day) should be offered. The therapeutic effect is a gain in final height of 7 to 10 cm. Hand/wrist radiographs for bone age determination should be taken at the initial visit and annually during rhGH therapy to assess maturation tempo.

Treatment with high-dose rhGH augments the growth of children with SHOX deficiency to the same extent as in Turner syndrome according to a two-year randomized controlled trial [Blum et al 2007]. This effect caused a similar gain in final height as well [Blum et al 2013]. No adverse radiologic effects were noted in those who were treated.

Painful bilateral Madelung deformity (uncommon)

Conservative management consists of wrist splints and supports during periods of increased discomfort and the use of ergonomic devices, such as ergonomic computer key boards. These measures may reduce wrist discomfort, but do not alter the natural history of the deformity [Fagg 1988, Schmidt-Rohlfing et al 2001].

Different operative procedures have been attempted to decrease pain, and restore wrist function [Anton et al 1938]; although Anton et al did not recommend operating until skeletal maturity because of concern that surgery at an early age may result in further deformity, Vickers & Nielsen [1992] and Schmidt-Rohlfing et al [2001] reported encouraging results from prophylactic physiolysis of the ulnar (lateral) aspect of the distal radius and excision of the Vickers ligament during mid-to-late childhood. Their rationale for early intervention is to alter the natural history of the deformity by excising the area of dyschondrosteosis in the distal radius, thus restoring growth in the distal radius [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. They reported decreased pain, increased function, and a reduction in wrist deformity following surgery over a period of 15 months to 12 years of follow up. They also speculate that MRI may allow for the early detection and subsequent removal of the Vickers ligament, an abnormal fibro-elastic ligament that runs from the lunate to the ulna aspect of the distal radius that may play a central role in the development of Madelung deformity [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. Similar results have been reported by Carter & Ezaki [2000] when a dome osteotomy of the radial metaphysis is combined with release of the Vickers ligament [Carter & Ezaki 2000].
For optimal outcome children with CFM require timely and coordinated assessments and interventions. Ideally, children should be managed by an experienced multidisciplinary craniofacial team that includes the following (in alphabetical order):

Audiologist

Dietitian

Clinical geneticist and genetic counselor

Nurse coordinator

Ophthalmologist

Oral and maxillofacial surgeon

Orthodontist

Orthopedist

Otolaryngologist

Pediatric dentist

Pediatrician

Plastic and reconstructive surgeon

Psychosocial professionals (psychologist, social worker)

Speech pathologist

The goals of treatment for CFM are to assure adequate respiratory support and nutritional status, maximize hearing and communication, optimize development, improve facial symmetry, and treat dental malocclusion. Treatment is age dependent, with time-sensitive interventions at appropriate stages of craniofacial growth and development. Treatment plans should be individually tailored to ensure the best results.

The phenotype in CFM is quite variable (see Table 1 for associated anomalies). Details of common surgical interventions have been reviewed elsewhere [Birgfeld & Heike 2012]. The following medical issues may need to be addressed in an individual with CFM:

Feeding. Infants with significant micrognathia, macrostomia, or a cleft palate may have difficulty with feeding and may require specialized bottles designed for infants with cleft palate and/or dysphagia (e.g., Habermann feeder, Mead-Johnson Squeeze bottle, Pigeon nipple, Dr. Brown nipples), supplemental nasogastric (NG) feedings, and gastrostomy tube placement. Consultation with an infant feeding specialist and/or dietitian should be considered.

Respiratory

Infants with severe mandibular hypoplasia may have significant upper-airway compromise and require tracheostomy placement and/or early mandibular advancement. Referral to a craniofacial center or otolaryngologist is recommended.

Those children with moderate mandibular hypoplasia may develop obstructive sleep apnea and require either medical (CPAP) or surgical (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy or mandibular surgery) intervention.

Face. Surgical repair is often recommended for facial tags and macrostomia within the first year. Surgery for palatal clefts typically occurs within the first year although this may be deferred for children with respiratory compromise.

Jaw and teeth

Good oral hygiene is especially important for children with CFM. Children should have consistent primary preventative dental care.

Orthodontic evaluations are important to assess for missing teeth, dental crowding, jaw growth, and dental malocclusion. Some children may need one or more dental appliances or braces to optimize facial growth, dental appearance, and function.

Children with mandibular hypoplasia may require a bone graft and/or mandibular distraction osteogenesis to lengthen the mandible and/or create a functional TMJ. In a child without airway compromise, these options may be considered when the child is between ages five and seven years.

The use of functional dental appliances to try and influence facial growth, vertical alveolar growth, and dental eruption in the younger patient may be considered, depending on the patient. When facial and jaw growth is nearly complete (age 13 to 16 years), most children with CFM require orthodontics, and many benefit from a final orthognathic surgery to create skeletal symmetry.

Hearing

All infants with CFM should have a diagnostic hearing evaluation (brain stem auditory evoked response [BAER]) within the first six months of life (regardless of whether the child passed the newborn hearing screen). Timing and type of additional testing depend on results from this initial evaluation and the child’s medical history. Early referral to an otolaryngologist is recommended. Early intervention for infants with hearing loss is important to optimize speech and language outcome.

Children with hearing impairment should receive guidance regarding recommendations for hearing aids, appropriate academic accommodations, and avoidance of ototoxic medications to prevent further hearing loss.

Conductive hearing loss, related to aural atresia in which the ossicles may be poorly formed or absent, may be treated with hearing aids. Children with unilateral conductive hearing loss and normal hearing in the contralateral ear are frequently not treated with amplification; however, their speech and language should be monitored closely.

Prior to planning external ear surgery, the authors recommend obtaining a CT scan to assess the middle- and inner-ear structures to help determine if atresia repair is likely to improve hearing. This surgery typically occurs after age five years. The CT may also reveal cholesteatomas, which occur in a small proportion of children with aural atresia.

Children with unilateral aural atresia should have serial screening (with hearing evaluations and tympanoscopy) to ensure maximal hearing of the unaffected ear.

Individuals with eustachian tube dysfunction should continue to have hearing and otologic status monitored, with a low threshold for placing tympanostomy tube(s).

Speech. Children with CFM may have cranial nerve palsies, clefts of the palate, malocclusion, and muscular deficiencies that can contribute to abnormal speech patterns (including velopharyngeal insufficiency). The authors recommend a speech evaluation prior to age two years, and ongoing monitoring by a speech and language pathologist.

Ears. Surgical options for treating ear malformations include auricular reconstruction or creation of a prosthetic ear. Options for management of microtia include the following:

No action

Prosthetic management, either adhesive or implant-retained

Staged surgical reconstruction, using autogenous rib or a synthetic framework

Because adult ear height is achieved by age six to eight years, surgical reconstruction or prosthetic management is often considered after age six years. Ear reconstruction should be coordinated with jaw surgeries for optimal long-term outcomes.

Eyes. Individuals with congenital or acquired epibulbar dermoids (pinkish-white growth on the sclerae) should be referred to the ophthalmologist. Large epibulbar dermoids and those that interfere with vision may require excision.

Cardiac. Children with physical examination findings suggestive of a cardiac anomaly should receive a timely referral to a pediatric cardiologist.

Renal. Individuals with renal anomalies should be referred to a nephrologist.

Skeletal

Children should undergo screening with four-view cervical spine radiographs (i.e., AP, lateral, flexion, and extension) at age three years when the bones are ossified. Those with anomalies should be referred to an orthopedic surgeon.

Children should be screened for scoliosis at diagnosis with annual physical examination. The authors recommend obtaining radiographs for children with evidence of scoliosis.

Family and social support. Children with CFM may be at increased risk for psychosocial difficulties [Maris et al 1999]. Social workers can provide support and guidance to children and their families, such as accessing community resources, making decisions about surgery, and adjusting to having facial differences.
Because of the rarity of Majeed syndrome, treatment is empiric.

CRMO is treated as follows:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which provide moderate improvement. If there is an inadequate response to NSAIDs, corticosteroids are useful in controlling CRMO and skin manifestations; however, their long-term use in children is limited by side effects such as growth delay and cataracts.

Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors and bisphosphonates have been reported to improve sporadic CRMO; however, the two individuals with Majeed syndrome treated with TNF-alpha inhibitors did not improve [Herlin et al 2013]. To date, bisphosphonates have not been used to treat individuals with Majeed syndrome; thus, their efficacy in this disorder is unknown.

The same two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al who failed to improve with TNF blockade did respond to IL-1 blockade (IL-1 receptor antagonist [anakinra] and IL-1β antibody [canakinumab]) with clinical, radiographic, and laboratory evidence of improvement [Herlin et al 2013].

Physical therapy to avoid disuse atrophy of muscles or contractures

CDA is treated with periodic monitoring with complete blood count (CBC) and blood transfusion if indicated. One patient had a splenectomy, after which the anemia markedly improved. In the two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al [2013] it is unclear if the CDA completely resolved, as a repeat bone marrow biopsy was not performed.
In general, the treatment regarding gastrointestinal tumors is similar to that of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and atypical familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) (see APC-Related Polyposis).

Colon polyps and colon cancer. Colonoscopy is effective surveillance for colon cancer; suspicious polyps should be removed (polypectomy) until polypectomy alone cannot manage the large size and density of the polyps. At that point either subtotal colectomy or proctocolectomy is performed based on polyp features and location [Lipton & Tomlinson 2006, Sampson & Jones 2009].

Duodenal polyps. Management of polyps is similar to individuals with FAP. In particular, large polyps or those polyps showing dysplasia or villous changes should be excised during endoscopy.

Abnormal thyroid findings should be evaluated by a thyroid specialist to determine what combination of monitoring, surgery, and/or fine needle aspiration (FNA) is appropriate [Cleveland Clinic study: LaGuardia et al 2011].
Management is most effectively accomplished through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Eye

The ocular manifestations should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome.

Most often, eye problems can be adequately controlled with eyeglasses alone.

Lens dislocation can require surgical aphakia (removal of lens) if the lens is freely mobile or the margin of the lens obstructs vision. An artificial lens can be implanted once growth is complete. While this procedure is currently considered quite safe when performed in specialized centers, major complications, including retinal detachment, can occur.

Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Skeletal

Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required.

Pectus excavatum can be severe; in rare circumstances, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated.

Protusio acetabulae can be associated with pain or functional limitations. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated.

Pes planus is often associated with inward rotation at the ankle, contributing to difficulty with ambulation, leg fatigue, and muscle cramps. Orthotics are indicated only in severe cases. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports, while others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or fully successful.

Dental crowding may require orthodontia or use of a palatal expander.

Use of hormone supplementation to limit adult height is rarely requested or considered. Complications can include the psychosocial burden of accelerated puberty, an accelerated rate of growth prior to final closure of the growth plate, and perhaps the undesirable consequences of the increased blood pressure associated with puberty on progression of aortic dilatation. This treatment should only be considered when an extreme height is anticipated. Marfan syndrome-specific growth curves now allow accurate prediction of adult height [Erkula et al 2002].

Cardiovascular

Cardiovascular manifestations should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with Marfan syndrome.

Surgical repair of the aorta is indicated once: (1) the maximal measurement approaches 5.0 cm in adults or older children, (2) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (3) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. More aggressive therapy may be indicated in individuals with a family history of early aortic dissection. Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation.

Surgical guidelines for young children with Marfan syndrome are based upon far less clinical experience than for adults and older children, and need to be tailored to the clinical situation at hand. Aortic root surgery should be considered once: (1) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (2) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. While there is no agreed upon absolute size threshold for the aortic root, many centers use the adult guideline of 5.0 cm given the extreme rarity of aortic dissection in young children. Every effort is made to allow the aortic annulus to reach a size of at least 2.0 cm, allowing placement of an aortic graft of sufficient size to accommodate body growth. Severe and progressive mitral valve regurgitation with attendant ventricular dysfunction is the leading indication for cardiovascular surgery in children with Marfan syndrome. In this circumstance, caution is warranted when considering concomitant aortic root surgery, as the increased length and complexity of the procedure can put extra strain on the myocardium and delay or compromise postoperative recovery.

When congestive heart failure is present, afterload-reducing agents (in combination with a beta-blocker) can improve cardiovascular function, but surgical intervention may be indicated in refractory cases. Most often the mitral valve can be repaired, rather than replaced.

Other

Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist.

Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize this risk.

Pneumothorax can be a recurrent problem. Optimal management may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.
A multidisciplinary approach to manage the features and specific issues identified is recommended. Specialists in the following fields are often involved: clinical genetics, neurology, child development, behavioral therapy, nutrition/feeding, speech and language therapy, and occupational and physical therapy.

Neurologic

Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program.

School-age children benefit from an individualized educational program.

Speech therapy with early introduction of nonverbal methods of communication (e.g., sign language and computer-assisted technologies) is appropriate given the high risk for poor or absent speech.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as valproate, clonazepam, zonisamide and clobazam appear to be effective in reducing the incidence of seizures [Jaillard et al 2009, van Bon et al 2010, Williams et al 2010, Chung et al 2011, Talkowski et al 2011, Motobayashi et al 2012, Noh & Graham 2012, Bonnet et al 2013, Hodge et al 2014]. No information is available on response to specific AEDs.

Behavior

Routine management of behavioral issues associated with severe intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder is indicated.

Management of sleep disturbance through a combined approach of targeted sleep hygiene (to develop firm daily schedules) and use of daily medications such as melatonin, clonidine, and trazadone may be considered [Mullegama et al 2015b].

Routine management is necessary for constipation (which can affect behavior).
The most important aspect of treating symptomatic patients is reversal of catabolism and sustained anabolism by provision of simple carbohydrates by mouth (for example, glucose tablets, or sweetened, non-diet beverages) or IV if the patient is unable or unlikely to maintain or achieve anabolism through oral intake of food and fluids. IV administration of glucose should then be initiated immediately with a bolus of 2 mL/kg 25% dextrose, followed by 10% dextrose with appropriate electrolytes at a rate of 10-12 mg glucose/kg/minute and to achieve/maintain a blood glucose level higher than 5 mmol/L [Saudubray et al 1999].

All affected individuals should have a frequently updated "emergency" letter to be given, if needed, to health care providers who may not be familiar with MCAD deficiency. This letter should include a detailed explanation of the management of acute metabolic decompensation, emphasizing the importance of preventive measures (e.g., intravenous glucose regardless of "normal" laboratory results, overnight in-hospital observation), and the telephone numbers of the individual's metabolic specialist.
Management is most effectively accomplished through the input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including an endocrinologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiatrist, ophthalmologist, audiologist, endocrine surgeon, craniofacial surgeon, and medical geneticist.

Fibrous Dysplasia

There are no available medical therapies capable of altering the disease course in fibrous dysplasia. Current management is focused on optimizing function and minimizing morbidity related to fractures and deformity. The primary elements of management include the following. See Fibrous Dysplasia Management (pdf):

Orthopedic surgery to repair fractures and to prevent and correct deformities. A surgeon experienced in FD should be consulted, as approaches previously considered “standard,” (e.g., curettage, grafting, and external fixation) are frequently ineffective [Stanton et al 2012].

Diagnosis and treatment of scoliosis is of particular importance, as it may be rapidly progressive and in rare cases may lead to fatal respiratory compromise. For this reason all individuals with spinal FD should be monitored closely by an orthopedic surgeon or physiatrist for possible progression. Surgical fusion has been shown to be effective at stabilizing the spine [Leet et al 2004b, Mancini et al 2009].

Aneurysmal bone cysts, best detected by MRI, are rapidly expanding fluid-filled lesions that form within preexisting areas of FD. Patients experience acute onset of severe pain, rapidly expanding localized deformity, and rarely – when cysts compress the optic nerve – sudden loss of vision. Aneurysmal bone cysts thus carry a high risk of morbidity and should be evaluated urgently by a surgeon [Lee et al 2012, Manjila et al 2013].

Prophylactic optic nerve decompression to reduce the risk of vision loss can in fact increase the risk of vision loss and is thus contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Cutler et al 2006, Amit et al 2011].

Physical therapy to optimize function and attenuate loss of mobility is appropriate. Patients with lower-extremity FD in particular may benefit from therapies to address hip girdle weakness, range of motion, and leg length discrepancies [Paul et al 2014].

Intravenous bisphosphonates such as zoledronic acid and pamidronate are usually effective at relieving bone pain. Dosing should be based on symptoms, not on a fixed interval or bone turnover markers. Note: The oral bisphosphonate alendronate has been shown to be ineffective for treatment of bone pain [Boyce et al 2014].

Malignancy should remain a consideration for individuals with acute or rapidly expanding FD lesions, or with atypical radiographic features such as compromise of the bony cortex with an associated soft tissue mass.

Endocrinopathies 

Precocious puberty. Treatment of precocious puberty is important to prevent bone age advancement and compromise of adult height.

Effective treatment options for girls include the aromatase inhibitor letrozole [Feuillan et al 2007] and/or the estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen [Eugster et al 2003]. See Precocious Puberty Management in Girls (pdf). The primary clinical endpoints are prevention of growth acceleration and bone age advancement. Most girls will also have a decrease in the number of menstrual bleeding episodes while on treatment. Note: Prophylactic surgical intervention for large and persistent ovarian cysts should be undertaken with extreme caution due to the known risks of recurrent cysts and the potential for decreased ovarian reserve in affected women.

Given the rarity of precocious puberty in males, treatment options are less well established. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys (pdf). One strategy includes the combination of an androgen receptor blocker (e.g., spironolactone or flutamide) and an inhibitor of sex steroid synthesis (e.g., letrozole) [Boyce et al 2012].

Children of both sexes frequently enter central precocious puberty due to premature sex steroid exposure (see Clinical Description). This typically presents with reappearance of signs of puberty in a child with previously well-controlled peripheral precocious puberty. Leuprolide therapy in combination with the above medications is an effective therapeutic strategy in most.

Thyroid disease. See Hyperthyroidism Management (pdf). Methimazole is effective for management of hyperthyroidism. However, because FD/MAS-associated hyperthyroidism is persistent, most patients ultimately elect for definitive treatment. Thyroidectomy is the preferred definitive treatment in most affected individuals. Total gland resection is generally recommended due to the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth. Selection of an experienced high-volume endocrine surgeon is critical to minimize complications and optimize outcomes. Patients should be monitored post-surgically with yearly ultrasound examination to evaluate for tissue regrowth.

Note: Radioablation is typically avoided due to potential preferential uptake by areas of mutation-bearing tissue, which may lead to increased risk of malignancy in the remaining unaffected gland. Additionally, GNAS mutations are associated with a slight increased risk of malignant transformation in both thyroid and non-thyroidal tissues; the risk may potentially be enhanced by radiation exposure.

Growth hormone (GH) excess. See GH Excess: Management (pdf). Medical therapy is the preferred first-line treatment. Options include (alone or in combination) octreotide and the growth hormone receptor antagonist pegvisomant [Boyce et al 2013, Salenave et al 2014].

In growing children, the therapeutic goal is to maintain the IGF-1 level in the middle of the normal range with an IGF-1 Z-score of 0.

In skeletally mature individuals, the goal is to decrease the IGF-1 level as low as possible.

Medical therapy is typically continued indefinitely, because options for definitive treatment are associated with significant morbidity.

Surgery may be technically difficult or precluded due to craniofacial FD. Additionally, given the diffuse pituitary infiltration of GH-producing cells, patients treated surgically require total hypophysectomy with resulting total hypopituitarism [Vortmeyer et al 2012].

Radiation treatment may be effective in refractory cases, but has been associated with fatal malignant transformation of craniofacial FD [Hansen & Moffat 2003, Liu et al 2011].

The hyperprolactinemia that frequently accompanies growth hormone excess is generally responsive to treatment with dopamine agonists, including cabergoline and bromocriptine.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Treatment of frank hypophosphatemia is the same as in other disorders of FGF23 excess, and includes oral phosphorus and calcitriol. Important therapeutic endpoints include growth velocity and radiographic evidence of epiphyseal healing. Unlike other disorders of FGF23 excess, bone turnover markers in FD/MAS (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) may be constitutively elevated and are not a useful indicator of skeletal response to treatment.

Hypercortisolism. Treatment guidelines for hypercortisolism are difficult to establish given the rarity of neonatal Cushing syndrome. Additionally patients may be critically ill at presentation, which significantly affects treatment options. See Hypercortisolism Management (pdf).

Definitive treatment includes surgical removal of the diseased adrenal glands.

For medical treatment metyrapone is frequently effective, and is preferred over ketoconazole in children with liver abnormalities.

Spontaneous remission has been clearly documented in some affected individuals [Brown et al 2010]; however, it is not possible to identify prospectively which individuals will undergo remission. The decision to pursue or delay adrenalectomy must be made on an individual basis, taking into account the severity of illness, the ability of medications to control cortisol levels, and the potential effect of continued hypercortisolism on neurodevelopment.
Care by a nephrologist is recommended.

Treatment follows standard guidelines for chronic kidney disease – based on the level of the serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) – and its sequelae, which can include hypertension, anemia, and gout. Affected individuals are encouraged to prepare for kidney transplantation, the definitive treatment of ADTKD-MUC1, by staying in optimal health (e.g., by exercising, avoiding obesity and tobacco usage, and maintaining strict control of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and other cardiovascular risk factors).

Transplantation is curative, and the outcome from kidney transplantation in this group of patients is excellent.
Hyperuricemia/gout

Acute gout typically responds well to prednisone, short-term nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or colchicine.

Gout prevention with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered.

With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented.

Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required.

In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in UMOD-associated kidney disease are available at present.

Kidney disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs.

Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications.

Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-UMOD. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Allopurinol may slow the progression of kidney disease, although reliable data are not available [Pirson et al 2000, Fairbanks et al 2002].
The following are indicated:

Dopamine antagonists including tiapride, clozapine, or quetiapine, as well as dopamine depletor tetrabenazine to ameliorate chorea

Treatment of psychiatric problems according to the clinical presentation

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities according to the clinical and/or ECG presentation

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for treatment of seizures

Extended and continuous multidisciplinary psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families
Early-Onset 

Nutrition/weight. In the absence of evidence-based target BMI or weight charts, the recommendation is to weigh the child serially and assess the frequency of chest infections and hospitalizations. Weight needs to increase annually by small increments. Since these children are usually non-ambulatory and muscular mass is reduced, normalization of weight to standard weights is not the goal. In contrast, excess weight may contribute to reduced motor function, resulting in increased respiratory dysfunction.

If weight plateaus or decreases, assessment of nutrition and diet, speech and swallowing, and respiratory function by a multidisciplinary team of specialists is recommended:

The patient or caregiver may need to be prompted to recall dietary concerns including lengthy meal times, limited food intake, and/or significant constipation [Philpot et al 1999a]. Non-ambulant school-age children (because they require assistance to use the restroom) may consciously restrict liquid intake. Limited hydration, choice of diet, and lack of movement may all contribute to constipation, leading to further restriction of oral intake.

The nutritionist can review dietary fiber, total liquid consumption, and the need for laxatives (e.g., Miralax®, macromolecules FORLAX®) to optimize caloric intake during periods of growth.

If weight continues to decline, respiratory assessment to evaluate for pulmonary infection is indicated.

Adequate weight gain may be achieved by increasing the caloric content of formulas in infants and by supplementary hypercaloric protein drinks in older children.

Infants with persistently poor weight gain and frequent pulmonary infections should be referred to a gastroenterologist:

Gastroesophageal reflux is treated as needed.

A nasogastric tube or percutaneous gastrostomy may help avoid aspiration pneumonia and improve nutritional status.

Failure to thrive may require supplemental feeding and gastrostomy with or without Nissen fundoplication [Philpot et al 1999a].

Children with poor intake or vomiting may require enteral feeding or intravenous fluid therapy to avoid hypoglycemia and metabolic decompensation.

Calcium and vitamin D supplementation is recommended to support bone growth and strength and to prevent future osteopenia.

Respiratory function testing. Training five year olds to perform spirometry during regular clinic visits may allow them to become adept at performing pulmonary function tests by age six years. (Note: A training effect may lead to an initial improvement in spirometric values.) For those who cannot use a standard mouth piece due to facial weakness, a buco-nasal mask adapter or scuba mouth piece can be used.

Pulmonary function tests ideally include spirometry (forced vital capacity [FVC], forced expired volume in the first second [FEV-1]) and measures of cough effectiveness (cough peak flow and maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures). Note: In those using orthopedic trunk braces or orthoses, assess pulmonary function with and without the brace to determine if thoracic excursion is impaired.

An FVC less than 60% of the predicted value has been associated with sleep-disordered breathing; an FVC less than 40% of predicted has been associated with high risk for nocturnal hypoventilation [Mellies et al 2003].

Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted or clinical evidence of disordered sleep (daytime somnolence, morning headaches, hypercarbia) should undergo an overnight sleep study (polysomnogram) to evaluate for night-time hypoventilation, hypercapnia, and obstructive sleep apnea.

Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted and hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and/or significant aspiration of food or refluxed gastric contents should be referred to a pulmonologist.

Assessment of hypoventilation, night-time and daytime hypercapnea is indicated in children with signs of sleep-related difficulties (e.g., morning headaches, attention difficulties, hypersomnolence, increased fatigue), weight loss, recurrent pulmonary infections, a weak cry, and/or FVC less than 60% of predicted.

Because early respiratory insufficiency may not be detected by diurnal tests, polysomnography (including end-tidal CO2 measurements) can be used to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation and other sleep-related breathing difficulties, such as apnea (both obstructive and central) and hypopnea, which are usually more pronounced during REM sleep. (The predominance of findings in REM sleep may be the result of diminished respiratory drive, atonia of the upper airway and intercostal muscles, and weakness of the diaphragm.)

Assistance with coughing. Weak/ineffective cough can lead to progressive atelectasis, infection, and respiratory failure in those with diminished lung capacity.

Daily intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB) may improve diminished compliance, peak cough flow, and ability to clear secretions. It has been shown to promote expansion of the thorax, prevent or treat atelectasis, and decrease the risk of lower-respiratory infections [Mellies et al 2005, Wang et al 2010]. Positive pressure breathing can be administered by IPPB or a mechanical in-exsufflator (Cough Assist), or attained through breath-stacking maneuvers using a bag valve mask. Patients with weak cough (low cough peak flow, maximum and inspiratory pressures <60 cm H2O, and FVCs <60% predicted) can benefit from use of positive pressure breathing once or twice a day and then as needed during respiratory infections. Night-time ventilator support once initiated also helps inflate the lungs, allowing for better tidal volume and ventilation, and thus preventing atelectasis.

Because of abdominal muscle weakness and the need for high positive pressures, an abdominal belt can lead to better results, efficacy, and tolerance [Guérin et al 2010].

Noninvasive ventilation support is indicated in the setting of:

Daytime hypercapnea and/or nocturnal hypoventilation

Evidence on polysomnogram of sleep-disordered breathing (even without hypoventilation)

Recurrent chest infections or atelectasis (in the absence of either daytime hypercapnea or nocturnal hypoventilation) in infants and toddlers [SJ Quijano-Roy, personal communication]

Noninvasive ventilator interfaces include nasal pillows, nasal masks, and full face masks, all of which come with head gear. Of note, it is difficult to fit masks to infants; toddlers often fight the masks.

In children, alternating mask interfaces is recommended to prevent the progressive under-bite and midface hypoplasia that result from the bone remodeling associated with long-term use of nasal masks from an early age. Although the nasal mask causes more bite and mid-face problems than does the full face mask, the full face mask should be used with caution because of the risk of suffocation in a child who vomits into the mask and is unable to remove it.

In patients with severe lordosis/scoliosis and chronic cough or recurrent infections, chest CT may be needed to evaluate for chronic atelectasis and airway compression by the vertebral bodies

During adolescence ventilatory support is often only needed during sleep with noninvasive pressure support. Assessment of daytime hypercapnea is needed beginning in late adolescence or if patient experiences increasing fatigue, chest infections, or failure to thrive. If daytime ventilation is required, ventilation via tracheostomy may be indicated.

Joint contractures. Physical therapy including daily stander placement, stretching activities, and pool (swimming) therapy can assist in maintenance of some range of motion.

Splints, orthoses, and night positioning by casts are used to prevent progression of joint deformities.

Non-ambulant children require standing frames for postural support.

Durable medical equipment support including power wheelchair fitting is essential for non-ambulant toddlers.

Scoliosis may need orthopedic and surgical treatment [Bentley et al 2001]. When needed, specific trunk orthotics or braces that do not restrict the thorax either through compression or limitation of thoracic movements are recommended [Wang et al 2010]. Their use may improve upright posture and delay spinal fusion until early puberty, providing that bracing does not interfere with respiration by causing chest compression [Wang et al 2010].

If cervical lordosis progresses in late adolescence, posterior head support (using trunk braces or wheelchair supports) can prevent neck hyperextension.

Cardiomyopathy. Right heart failure due to respiratory insufficiency requires adequate mechanical ventilation. Primary left heart failure or rhythm disturbances require typical age-appropriate treatment.

Seizures are generally well controlled with routine administration of antiepileptic drugs. Refractory seizures in those with cortical dysplasia may require polytherapy.

Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Early intervention with physical, occupational, and speech therapy along with a multidisciplinary medical team provide the best possible outcome.

Other. Surgery to correct facial function and address cosmetic concerns has been performed [Jones & Waite 2012].

Late-Onset 

These patients need mainly respiratory and orthopedic care due to the risk of progressive respiratory insufficiency and joint and spinal deformities. Regular physical therapy for stretching limbs, shoulder and pelvic girdle, and spine is mandatory.

Antiepileptic drugs should be used to treat seizures.
Ideally treatment is tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Because of the high incidence of neurodevelopmental disability, referral to a clinical psychologist for neuropsychological and/or developmental assessment for treatment recommendations is suggested.

Medical treatment for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.

Additional management in healthy adults who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion is not necessary, although their medical care providers may benefit from being alerted to the possible increased risk for late-onset manifestations (e.g., schizophrenia).
The following are indicated:

Routine treatment of ophthalmologic, cardiac, neurologic findings

Speech, occupational, and physical therapies

Specialized learning programs to meet individual needs

No specific antiepileptic or antipsychotic medications are indicated
Because manifestations of 16p12.2 microdeletion are variable, treatment should be targeted to the specific problems identified. Early diagnosis and treatment facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists is recommended based on specific signs and symptoms. Specialists may include a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist.

Developmental and cognitive delays. Initiate developmental therapies promptly when indicated. Cognitive testing in older children may help identify any specific learning or cognitive disabilities that could be addressed by therapies or specialized education plans.

Cardiac malformations. Individuals with 16p12.2 microdeletion and cardiac malformations should have standard treatment for the malformation, including surgical correction and prophylactic antibiotic treatments as indicated.

Epilepsy. A history suggestive of possible seizure activity should prompt referral to a neurologist for additional testing, including brain imaging and EEG, and consideration of medical intervention.

Psychiatric and/or behavior problems. In individuals of any age, signs of psychiatric or behavioral problems should prompt referral to specialists, including developmental/behavioral pediatricians, psychologists, or psychiatrists, so that formal assessments may be performed and appropriate interventions (medical, social, behavioral, and/or educational) may be made.

Hearing loss. Standard treatment should be provided for hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Other malformations. Standard treatment should be provided for any other malformations, including oro-facial clefting and renal, genitourinary, or dental anomalies.
Treatment is symptomatic and depends on an individual’s specific needs.

Renal disease. Treatment should follow standard practice.

Established guidelines for the management of chronic kidney disease, including that related to CAKUT or ADTKD, are available for children and adults [KDIGO CKD Work Group 2013].

Some individuals have normal renal function, while others may progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and require dialysis or kidney transplantation.

For those who have diabetes mellitus, simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation has been successful and should be considered [Faguer et al 2011, Halbritter et al 2011, Poitou et al 2012].

MODY5. Treatment should follow standard practice. The clinical course tends to be progressive in terms of hyperglycemia, requiring treatment with insulin [Fajans & Bell 2011].

Neurodevelopmental/neuropsychiatric disorders. Early identification and intervention for neurodevelopmental or neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., global developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, and bipolar disorder) is important for optimal outcomes.

Specialized instruction and speech / occupational / physical / behavioral therapies should be provided if indicated.

Management of ASD should follow guidelines published by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers & Johnson 2007].

Psychiatric consultation and therapy is recommended for those with mental health concerns, such as mood disorders, anxiety, and/or psychosis.

Other. Cardiac, ophthalmologic, neurologic, gastrointestinal, and other conditions should be treated by the appropriate specialty according to standard guidelines.
Treatment includes the following:

Routine medical care by a pediatrician or other primary physician

Early intervention with physiotherapy for feeding problems and motor delay related to hypotonia. Physical therapy aimed at strengthening the muscles as well as therapy to improve development of the child's fine and gross motor skills may also be beneficial.

Speech therapy directed at improving verbal and nonverbal communication skills. Sign language, pictures, and computer touch screens may augment communication.

Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified

For epilepsy, treatment with routine antiepileptic drugs under the care of a neurologist. The seizures usually are easy to control with medication.

Orthopedic care as required for scoliosis, hip dislocation, and positional deformities of the feet

Standard treatment for cardiac, renal, urologic, and other medical issues

Treatment for cryptorchidism if indicated
The following are indicated:

Routine treatment of ophthalmologic, cardiac, and neurologic findings

Speech, occupational, and physical therapies, as appropriate

Specialized learning programs to meet individual needs

No specific antiepileptic or antipsychotic medications are indicated.
The following measures are appropriate:

Early speech and language therapy to address speech delays

Physical therapy as necessary to address fine and gross motor delays

Individualized education program (IEP) for school-age children

Care by a child psychiatrist for anxiety disorder and/or other neuropsychiatric manifestations

Applied behavioral analysis or other treatment for manifestations of ASD

Feeding therapy (including nutrition assessment) with a pediatric feeding specialist or behavioral pediatric psychologist; consideration of gastronomy tube for severe feeding problems and continued failure to thrive

Routine management of dental caries, congenital heart defects, and recurrent ear infections
The following are appropriate:

Routine treatment and management by appropriate specialists for cardiac, neurologic, dermatologic findings

Comprehensive physical, occupational, and speech therapy services as needed

Surgical intervention as needed for excision or treatment of mandibular keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, or other tumors that develop, or for management or correction of physical anomalies
Treatment of epilepsy involves antiepileptic drugs including valproic acid, clonazepam, zonisamide, piracetam, and levetiracetam. Valproate was particularly helpful in one family [El-Shanti et al 2006].

Ataxia may require assistive devices or eventually wheelchair.

Consultation with a speech pathologist may be helpful.
Cognitive impairment. Developmental stimulation including speech therapy is appropriate.

Note: Because developmental outcome is variable, individual counseling is important.

Spastic paraplegia. Treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.

Epilepsy. Seizures usually respond well to standard therapy with antiepileptic drugs; however, in some males seizures are resistant to the usual therapy, necessitating multi-drug therapy.

Predisposition to infections. Infections, especially of the respiratory tract, should be treated immediately with appropriate antibiotics. All vaccines should be given. If aspiration occurs, placement of a permanent gastrostomy should be considered.

Gastrointestinal dysfunction. Feeding problems, gastroesophageal reflux, swallowing dysfunction, and obstipation require referral and treatment in the usual manner.
Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietician, and physical therapist when possible.

Applicable supportive treatment [SB Wortmann, personal communication] includes:

For (progressive) spasticity. Some patients experienced (temporary) improvement of spasticity with treatment with oral or intrathecal baclofen.

For excessive drooling. Patients experienced great improvement (e.g., of respiratory problems) with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of salivary glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts.

For failure to thrive. An age-appropriate diet given via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy can greatly improve overall clinical condition.
Sensorineural hearing loss has been successfully treated with cochlear implantation [Sue et al 1998, Scarpelli et al 2012].

Ptosis can benefit from eyelid "crutches," blepharoplasty, or frontalis muscle-eyelid sling placement.

No therapy is available for PEO or retinopathy.

Aerobic exercise is helpful in MELAS and other mitochondrial diseases [Taivassalo & Haller 2004]. Physical therapy should be implemented in individuals after strokes.

Seizures respond to traditional anticonvulsant therapy.

Standard analgesics can be used for migraine headaches.

Cardiac manifestations can benefit from standard pharmacologic therapy.

Diabetes mellitus can be managed by dietary modification only, especially in thin individuals, or with oral hypoglycemic agents, but often requires insulin therapy.

L-arginine showed promise in treating stroke-like episodes in MELAS [Koga et al 2010].
Clinical practice guidelines for MEN type 1 have been developed [Thakker et al 2012] (full text).

PHPT

Parathyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with MEN1, but it is controversial whether to perform subtotal (3.5 glands) or total parathyroidectomy, and whether surgery should be performed at an early or late stage of the disease.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy (i.e. removal of ≤3.5 glands) has resulted in persistent or recurrent hypercalcemia within ten to 12 years after surgery in 40%-60% of patients with MEN1, and in hypocalcemia requiring long-term therapy with vitamin D or its active metabolite calcitriol in 10%-30% [Thakker et al 2012].

Total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation in the forearm may use both fresh and cryopreserved parathyroid tissue. Procedure is dependent on the vitality of cryopreserved cells, which declines with the time interval from cryopreservation to autotransplantation.

Intraoperative monitoring of PTH by rapid assay during surgery to determine successful removal of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue, and to help with the decision to implant parathyroid tissue in the forearm.

Recurrent hypercalcemia is present in more than 50% of patients with autotransplanted parathyroid tissue, and surgical removal of the transplanted grafts is not always successful.

Subtotal parathyroidectomy is suggested as the initial treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN1; total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation may also be reserved for those with extensive disease either at first or at repeat surgery [Thakker et al 2012].

Parathyroidectomy may be reserved for symptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 while asymptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 do not undergo parathyroid surgery but have regular assessment for symptom onset and complications.

Bone anti-resorptive agents administered prior to surgery help to reduce hypercalcemia and limit PTH-dependent bone resorption, thus reducing future risk of osteoporosis.

Some studies have reported that treatment of MEN1-associated hyperparathyroidism by calcimimetics (which act on the calcium-sensing receptor) or octreotide LAR could be also effective, particularly for individuals in whom surgery either has failed or is contraindicated [Faggiano et al 2008, Falchetti et al 2008, Moyes et al 2010].

Pituitary Tumors

PRL-secreting tumors (prolactinomas)

Dopamine agonists such as cabergoline, bromocriptine, pergolide, and quinagolide are the preferred treatment for PRL-secreting tumors.

Cabergoline may be considered the current treatment of choice because of its limited side effects and greater potency [Tichomirowa et al 2009].

Growth hormone-secreting tumors

Transsphenoidal surgery, the first treatment of choice in growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, is effective in 50%-70% of cases.

Somatostatin analogs are the medical therapy of choice for the treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors. Octreotide and lanreotide normalize serum concentration of hGH and IGF1 in more than 50% of treated individuals [Beckers et al 2003].

Dopamine agonists are only rarely effective in treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, although they can be effective in mixed GH-PRL-secreting adenomas and 10%-20% of tumors resistant to somatostatin analogs [Colao et al 1997, Marzullo et al 1999, Freda 2002].

ACTH-secreting tumors

In most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome, the treatment is excision of an adenoma. In the series of Beckers et al [2003], 92% of individuals with an identified microadenoma and 67% with a macro-adenoma were considered to be cured immediately after surgery.

For those ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome that are not cured neurosurgically, radiotherapy may be necessary to reduce the production of ACTH.

Non-secreting pituitary adenomas

In non-secreting pituitary adenomas, surgical treatment using a transsphenoidal approach is the treatment of choice. However, in rare cases of very large adenomas with considerable extracellar extension, the transfrontal approach is the only possibility [Beckers 2002].

In 5%-15% of cases, medical treatment with potent dopaminergic agonists or with somatostatin analogs may shrink the adenoma before surgery [Colao et al 1998].

Published data are not sufficient to compare the treatment of sporadic versus MEN1 syndrome-associated pituitary tumors. Although opinion on this issue differs, Beckers et al [2003] have suggested that aggressive therapy is more frequently needed in MEN1-associated pituitary tumors than in sporadic tumors.

Well-Differentiated Tumors of the Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic (GEP) Tract

Gastrinoma

Medications that can control some of the GEP hormone excess-dependent features of MEN1 syndrome and thus prevent severe and sometimes life-threatening morbidity in MEN1 syndrome include proton pump inhibitors or H2-receptor blockers to reduce gastric acid output [Jensen 1999].

Surgical (versus nonsurgical) management of gastrinoma in MEN1 syndrome is controversial as successful outcome of surgery is rare.

Because MEN1 syndrome gastrinomas occur most commonly in the first and second portions of the duodenum, and less commonly the third and fourth portions of the duodenum and the first jejunal loop, it is important that all these sites be examined during preoperative imaging, intraoperative exploration, and pathologic examination of surgical specimens [Tonelli et al 2005].

A case of a primary lymph node gastrinoma in an individual with MEN1 has been reported and a review of similar cases in the international literature reveals that some gastrinomas in lymph nodes are not the result of metastastic spread. A long-term symptom-free follow up after the excision of a lymph node gastrinoma is the only reliable criterion for the diagnosis of a primary lymph node tumor. Thus, the findings of Zhou et al [2006] supported the possibility that any gastrinoma in persons with MEN1 syndrome should be surgically resected for cure if possible. Anlauf et al [2008] reported the presence of a primary lymph node gastrinoma or occult duodenal microgastrinoma with lymph node metastases in a person with MEN1 syndrome, confirming the need for a systematic search for the primary tumor.

Pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic surgery for asymptomatic individuals with MEN1 syndrome is controversial.

Surgery is usually indicated for insulinoma and most of the other pancreatic tumors observed in MEN1 syndrome. According to Tonelli et al [2005], the best surgical approach for an MEN1 insulinoma is intraoperative localization of nodules greater than approximately 0.5 cm diameter by palpation or intraoperative ultrasound followed either by enucleation (removal) of these nodules or by pancreatic resection if multiple large deep tumors are present.

The optimal therapy of gastrinoma is controversial.

In non-metastasizing gastrinoma within the pancreas, surgery may be curative and should be performed by an experienced endocrine surgeon. MEN1 patients will have multiple small submucosal duodenal gastrinomas and in experienced surgical centers local excision of these tumors with lymph node dissection, duodenectomy, or less commonly duodenopancreatectomy may be also considered together with patient preferences, as such approaches may improve the cure rate.

Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy provides the greatest likelihood of cure for gastrinoma in patients with MEN1, but can be associated with an increased operative mortality and long-term morbidity unless performed by an experienced surgeon.

Non-resectable tumor mass can be treated with somatostatin analogs, biotherapy, targeted radionuclide therapy, locoregional treatments and chemotherapy.

Inoperable or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may be subjected to a chemotherapy. Sunitinib and everolimus may be used for patients with advanced (inoperable or metastatic) progressive well differentiated pancreatic NETs [Thakker et al 2012].

Treatment for non-functioning pancreatic NETs is controversial, some centers considered surgical resection for lesions that are greater than 1 cm in size; other centers recommend surgery only if the tumor is greater than 2 cm.

Occult metastatic disease (i.e. tumors not detected by imaging investigations) may be present in a substantial proportion of these patients at the time of initial presentation.

Carcinoid Tumors

Long-acting somatostatin analogs can control the secretory hyperfunction associated with carcinoid syndrome [Tomassetti et al 2000]; however, the risk for malignant progression of the tumor remains unchanged [Schnirer et al 2003]. Therefore, the treatment of choice for carcinoid is surgical removal, if resectable.

Thymic carcinoid recurred in all individuals with MEN1 syndrome who were followed for more than one year after resection of the tumor [Gibril et al 2003].

For unresectable tumors and those individuals with metastatic disease, treatment with radiotherapy or chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cisplatin, etoposide) may be used [Oberg et al 2008].

Adrenocortical Tumors

Consensus guidelines for the management of MEN1-associated non-functioning tumors do not exist. The risk for malignancy is increased if the tumor has a diameter greater than 4 cm, although adrenocortical carcinomas have been identified in tumors smaller than 4 cm [Thakker et al 2012]. Surgery is suggested for adrenal tumors greater than 4 cm in diameter, for tumors that are 1-4 cm in diameter with atypical or suspicious radiologic features, or for tumors that show significant measurable growth over a six-month interval [Langer et al 2002, Schaefer et al 2008, Gatta-Cherifi et al 2012].
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Standard treatment for MTC is surgical removal of the thyroid and lymph node dissection [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009, National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Current NCCN guidelines recommend consideration of therapeutic external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for incomplete tumor resection or extrathyroidal extension with positive margins [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2015]. Two kinase inhibitors – vandetanib and cabozantinib – have been shown to improve progression-free survival and in some cases cause disease regression in unresectable or advanced metastatic MTC [Elisei et al 2013, Wells et al 2013].

All individuals who have undergone thyroidectomy need thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

Autotransplantation of parathyroid tissue is not typically performed at the time of thyroidectomy unless there is evidence of hyperparathyroidism [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Pheochromocytomas detected by biochemical testing and radionuclide imaging are removed by adrenalectomy, which may be performed using video-assisted laparoscopy. Historically, some specialists recommended bilateral adrenalectomy at the time of demonstration of tumor on just a single adrenal gland because of the strong probability that the other adrenal gland would develop a tumor within ten years. However, because of the risk for adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis following bilateral adrenalectomy, most experts now recommend unilateral adrenalectomy in unilateral tumors and cortical-sparing adrenal surgery with close monitoring of the remnant tissue in persons with one remaining adrenal gland or bilateral pheochromocytoma [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].

Hypertensive treatment prior to adrenalectomy involves the use of α- and β-adrenergic receptor blockade [Pacak et al 2005].

Parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia diagnosed at the time of thyroidectomy is treated either with resection of the visibly enlarged parathyroid gland(s), subtotal parathyroidectomy, or total parathyroidectomy with forearm autograft [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009]. However, in most individuals with MEN 2A, hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed many years after thyroidectomy.

Individuals with biochemical evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism who have undergone prior thyroidectomy should have preoperative localization with excision of the localized hypertrophied parathyroid glands and forearm autotransplantation.

Therapy with medications to control primary hyperparathyroidism should be considered in individuals with a high risk for surgical mortality, limited life expectancy, or persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism after one or more surgical attempts [American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force 2009].
Menkes disease

Gastrostomy tube placement to manage caloric intake and general nutrition in some males with classic Menkes disease

Surgery for bladder diverticula that occur in classic Menkes disease

Developmental intervention

ATP7A-related DMN

Physical therapy (strength and stretching exercises)

Occupational therapy

Ankle foot orthotics
The seizure disorder can be treated with conventional anticonvulsant therapy. No controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different anticonvulsants. Levetiracetam, clonazepam, zonisamide, and valproic acid (VPA) have been used to treat myoclonic epilepsy; however, VPA may cause secondary carnitine deficiency and should be avoided or used with L-carnitine supplementation.

The myoclonus improved substantially in three of four individuals treated with levetiracetam [Crest et al 2004, Mancuso et al 2007]. Clonazepam can also reduce myoclonus.

Physical therapy is helpful for any impaired motor abilities.

Aerobic exercise is helpful in MERRF and other mitochondrial diseases [Taivassalo & Haller 2004].

Standard pharmacologic therapy is used to treat cardiac symptoms.
Mandibulofacial dysostosis

Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation and/or tracheostomy for initial stabilization.

Treatment of craniofacial manifestations is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, occupational and speech/language therapy.

Intellectual disability. Occupational, physical, and/or speech/language therapies are involved as needed to optimize developmental outcome.

Hearing loss. Treatment is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aid(s), bone-anchored hearing aid(s), and/or cochlear implant(s). See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview.

Esophageal atresia is managed as for nonsyndromic forms of EA, the definitive management being surgical. See Esophageal Atresia/Tracheoesophageal fistula Overview.

Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner.

Thumb anomalies. Preaxial polydactyly, if present, may be treated surgically; other thumb anomalies are not generally functionally significant.

Short stature is managed expectantly. Of note, the response to human growth hormone has not been specifically reported.
Pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) should be considered in individuals with arrhythmia and/or cardiac conduction defects. Individuals with progressive or life-threatening cardiomyopathy are candidates for cardiac transplantation.

Respiratory support, consisting of continuous or bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP or BIPAP), initially at night and later in the daytime, is indicated in individuals with hypercapnea and other signs of incipient ventilatory failure.

Range of motion physical therapy and assistive devices are appropriate for those with advanced muscle weakness. Treatment of scoliosis by spinal fusion is appropriate. Orthoses are indicated for treatment of foot drop.
Treatment is supportive.

A multidisciplinary team including a neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, ophthalmologist, biochemical geneticist, and physical therapist is required for the care of affected individuals.

Visual impairment, spasticity, and movement disorder should be treated as in the general population.
For management guidelines, see Guidelines/Consensus Statements and Figure 2.

Early diagnosis of MH, together with the administration of dantrolene sodium, is essential in the successful treatment of an acute episode of MH:

Discontinue use of potent inhalation agents and succinylcholine.

Increase minute ventilation to lower end-tidal CO2.

Get help. One resource is the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) hotline for acute cases: 800-MH-HYPER (800-644-9737). Similar hotlines exist in other countries, specifically the UK, Germany, and Brazil.

Prepare and administer dantrolene: 2.5 mg/kg initial dose. Tachycardia, hypercarbia, and muscle rigidity respond rapidly; multiple doses of dantrolene may be needed. The suggested upper limit is 10 mg/kg; however, more may be given as needed. Continue dantrolene at 1.0 mg/kg every four to eight hours for 24-48 hours, titrating to the desired effect (resolution of hyperthermia, acidosis, and myoglobinemia). Dantrolene sodium is a hydantoin molecule that binds to a specific region of the RYR-1 channel. It decreases the uncontrolled release of intracellular calcium [Paul-Pletzer et al 2002]. The toxicity profile of dantrolene, when administered acutely, is extremely benign. Calcium channel blocking agents should not be administered with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Dantrolene may aggravate previously existing muscle weakness.

Begin cooling measures. If patient is hyperthermic, administer iced solutions, ice packs to groin, axilla, and neck, nasogastric lavage with iced solution, or more aggressive measures as needed. Stop cooling measures at core body temperature of 38.5° C.

Treat cardiac arrhythmias as needed. Do not use calcium channel blockers.

Obtain blood gases, serum concentration of electrolytes and CK, blood and urine for myoglobin, and coagulation profile. Check values every six to 12 hours. The earliest sign of rhabdomyolysis is myoglobinuria/myoglobinemia. Serum CK levels may not rise for several hours. Serum CK concentration may remain elevated for days and should be monitored until it returns to normal.

Treat hyperkalemia with hyperventilation, glucose and insulin, and calcium as dictated by laboratory and cardiovascular changes.

Ensure urine output of 2.0 mL/kg/hr with mannitol, furosemide, and fluids as needed.

Evaluate need for invasive monitoring and continued mechanical ventilation.

Observe the individual in an ICU for at least 36 hours because of the 25% chance of recrudescence following initial treatment. Dantrolene should be continued for at least 36 hours following successful treatment in a dose of about 1.0 mg/kg every six hours or more depending on whether signs of MH are present.

Affected individuals who display extreme hyperthermia are at risk for disseminated intravascular coagulation. A coagulation profile should be obtained on all individuals experiencing fulminant MH.

Refer the affected individual to the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) for information and counseling. Complete the Adverse Metabolic Reaction to Anesthesia (AMRA) form for enrollment in the North American MH Registry.

Refer the individual to a MH diagnostic center for muscle biopsy and contracture testing after discussion with MH consultants associated with MHAUS.

Myoglobinuria. The presence of myoglobinuria mandates referral to a neurologist for further investigation.
Development. As for all children with profound developmental disability, infants and children with MIC-CAP syndrome require stimulation and recreation. Given that most have poor vision, regular tactile and auditory stimulation are recommended.

Physical habilitation. Central hypotonia and peripheral hypertonia require care by physicians and therapists specializing in physical habilitation. If the child is non-ambulatory, proper seating and bracing is required to maintain posture and prevent contractures.

Neurologic. Seizure management during infancy requires an experienced pediatric neurology team to manage medically refractory epilepsy. Multiple anticonvulsant medications are frequently required for adequate seizure control. A few individuals have responded favorably to ketogenic diet or corticosteroids.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues (e.g., enteral feeding team to optimize nutrition and weight gain)
Therapy is supportive and involves the following:

Special education programs tailored to the needs of the individual

Speech and language therapy

Behavioral therapy as needed

Occupational therapy as needed

Community services that provide support for families

Ritalin® may be helpful to treat marked hyperkinesia.

Seizures are usually responsive to monotherapy with standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Growth hormone may be considered in individuals with mild growth retardation; objective efficiency of GH therapy has not been evaluated.

Intubation may be difficult in affected individuals with small chin [Gürkan et al 2006].
The following are appropriate:

Use of a prosthesis in severe microphthalmia and anophthalmia. In some cases ophthalmologic surgery can be considered to expand the palpebral fissures and orbit by fitting the infant with prostheses of progressively increasing size.

Considerations for surgical intervention in severe microphthalmia and anophthalmia are best made after age six months, when postnatal growth of the orbit can be assessed.

Regular care of a dermatologist for individuals with significant skin lesions

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for evaluation and treatment if microcephaly, seizures, and/or other neurologic abnormalities are present

Appropriate developmental stimulation and special education as indicated for developmental delay

Routine care for diaphragmatic hernia, cardiomyopathy, congenital heart defects, and other malformations, when present
Guidance by a lymphedema therapist regarding management of edema (e.g., fitting stockings, massage) is important. Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement is usually possible with the use of properly fitted compression hosiery and/or bandaging and well fitting, supportive shoes. Toe gloves may be of benefit and good skin care is essential. Such treatment measures may improve the cosmetic appearance of the limb, decrease the size of the limb, and reduce the risk of complications.
It is important to avoid stigmatizing children and adolescents with CMM and to assure that educational opportunities including university are not lost as a result of the mirror movements.

Physicians should explain the disorder to parents and teachers, making it clear that intellectual disability is not associated.

Adaptation of the school environment (e.g., allocation of extra time during examinations and limitation of the amount of handwriting) is recommended.

Adolescents and young adults should be encouraged to consider a profession that does not require complex bimanual movements, repetitive or sustained hand movements, or extensive handwriting.
No definitive treatments exist for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies.

Management should be tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility

Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis

Use of respiratory aids when indicated

Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders
Prompt surgical repair of the obstruction causing hydrometrocolpos and drainage of the accumulated fluid is important.

Standard treatment is indicated for the following:

Polydactyly and syndactyly

Congenital heart defects

Anal anomalies and Hirschsprung disease (surgical treatment)
Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated.

Joint. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML II because of the following:

Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful.

The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification.

Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated.

Cognitive. Intellectual impairment in ML II is rarely severe. It is often milder than the adverse impression created by the significantly impaired development of speech: any well-adapted program of cognitive stimulation such as interactive play is recommended, such as a stimulation program that favors alertness, imitative skills, ambition, and even some active motion. Occupational and speech therapy are important, the former being the more effective of the two.

Dental. Severe gingival thickening can compromise routine dental cleaning. Mouth pain, infections, and even abscesses have been successfully treated with gingivectomy in some patients (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Otic. Myringotomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections is common but should not be considered a routine procedure because of the unique airway issues and hence risk associated with anesthesia (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).
Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated.

Skeletal. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML III alpha/beta for the following reasons:

Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful.

The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification.

Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated.

Management of pain in the hips during and following walking requires attention from late childhood or early adolescence.

Carpal tunnel signs may require tendon release procedures for temporary relief.

Later in the disease course more general bone pain of variable intensity is present.

Encouraging results have been obtained in several individuals with ML III alpha/beta with monthly IV administration of pamidronate, a biphosphonate. The recommended dose is 1 mg/kg monthly. The protocol under development is different from that applied to individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. Bone density needs to be monitored closely. At present, information as to when in the disease course or at what age to initiate such treatment is insufficient. Bone pain in the two individuals about whom information has been published was reduced within a few months of initiating therapy. In some wheelchair-bound individuals ambulation has been transiently restored for more than one year. Bone densitometry is improved [Robinson et al 2002].

Several remarks need to be made regarding this symptomatic treatment:

Parents and affected individuals must keep in mind that this treatment does not cure the disorder. It neither represses the slow process of bone resorption nor alters its course.

The long-term effect(s) are unknown.

The end point to the treatment regimen remains incompletely defined [Robinson et al 2002; Sillence, personal communication].

Not all affected individuals benefit from bisphosphonate treatment. The use of bisphosphonates in ML III alpha/beta and other bone diseases is an area of active clinical research worldwide.

In older adolescents and adults with milder phenotypic variants of ML III alpha/beta, bilateral hip replacement has been successful.

Audiologic. Recurrent otitis media occurs more often in ML III alpha/beta than in a control population. The prevalence decreases with age. Myringotomy tube placement may be considered necessary as a preventive measure of conductive hearing deficiency but should not be considered a “routine” procedure in this condition because of the unique airway issues and hence the anesthesia risks involved (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).
Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated. Psychosocial support of patients and families is recommended.

No known measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. Physiotherapy intervention programs need to be adapted to the affected individual’s needs.

Short sessions of aqua therapy that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain are usually well tolerated.

Later in the disease course bone pain of variable intensity may become a frequent complaint. Management of pain in the hips is required. In older adolescents and adults with milder ML III gamma, bilateral hip replacement has been successful.

Casts (especially of the hands) during the night hours are usually well tolerated and seem to improve daily functions.

Carpal tunnel signs and rarely tarsal tunnel symptoms may require surgical tendon release procedures for temporary relief [Smuts et al 2009].

In severe cases, when significant valvular dysfunction disrupts ventricular function, valve replacement should be seriously considered.
The following treatment is appropriate:

Speech therapy

Physical therapy and rehabilitation for motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia)

Ankle-foot orthotics in individuals with hypotonia and weakness of ankle dorsiflexion

Antiepileptic drugs

Topical lubricating eye drops, artificial tears, gels, or ointments for management of the intermittent ocular irritation seen frequently in younger children

Surgical correction of strabismus

High-contrast black and white materials for those with visual impairment

Note: Corneal transplantation has not been successful because the donor corneal epithelium is eventually replaced by the abnormal host epithelium.
Supportive therapy includes the following:

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) if epileptic seizures are present

Physical therapy to improve motor function

Special education

Speech therapy as needed
Whether the intent is to prolong life or to let the disease run it natural course, an extended period of nursing care with changing needs can be anticipated. Supportive therapies to maximize the retention of physical and neuromuscular functions help avoid many end-stage care problems.

Every effort should be made to maintain intellectual abilities, neuromuscular function, and mobility as long as possible. Provision of an enriched environment and an aggressive physical therapy program provides an optimized quality of life at all stages of the disease. The parents and/or caregivers should be aware of the likely progression of the disorder in order to anticipate decisions concerning walking aids, car seats, wheelchairs, suction equipment, swallowing aids, feeding tubes, and other supportive measures.

Specific findings such as seizures and contractures should be treated with antiepileptic drugs and muscle relaxants, respectively. Gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and drooling are common problems which may be helped by specific medications.

The Evanosky Foundation has a very helpful document, Suggestions for Caring for a Child with MLD (pdf), based on their family’s experience.

Because MLD affects the whole family, management should include a team of professionals to provide genetic counseling and family support through what is often a long disease process. Even children with late-infantile MLD may survive for five to ten years with progressive loss of function and continually changing care needs.

Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. A pediatrician or family physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans. The usual regime of age-appropriate vaccinations, flu shots, nutritional support, and other typical medical care need be provided. Dental care is important and is often difficult to obtain. Pulmonary function and vision may also need attention.

It is important for most families to develop a network of support services and establish contact with other families who have faced similar situations.
No consensus exists among various metabolic centers regarding treatment of acute and chronic complications of methylmalonic acidemia. Recent guidelines developed by professionals across 12 European countries and the US based on rigorous literature evaluation and expert group meetings outline the current management recommendations and areas for further research [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Stabilization of critically ill individuals

Volume replacement with isotonic solutions

All IV solutions should contain glucose, preferably D10 or D12.5. If hyperglycemia develops, an insulin infusion may be needed.

The total base deficit should be followed serially with repeat electrolyte and venous or arterial blood gas measurements and corrected by hydration and bicarbonate replacement, as needed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Adequate kcals must be delivered. Central or peripheral total parenteral nutrition (TPN), which typically contains glucose and amino acids, and in some instances, lipids, may be required. Total protein administration is usually completely withdrawn for no more than 24-48 hours and reinstated gradually depending on the patient's acid-base balance and remaining test values, including ammonia, lactic acid, and plasma amino acids among others.

Lipid infusions must be used with caution for the risk of pancreatitis.

Carnitine may be administered intravenously at 50-100 mg/kg/d bid-qid.

Urine output and serum sodium and potassium concentration need to be monitored.

Dietary protein should be reintroduced enterally as soon as is feasible given the clinical scenario and may need to be further augmented with TPN. Nasograstric or orogastric feeding should be strongly considered so that enteral feedings can be reintroduced without delay.

N-carbamylglutamate (NCG, Carbaglu®) may be considered in the event of hyperammonemia. NCG allosterically activates CPS1 (carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1), the first step of the urea cycle. It has been effective in normalizing the blood ammonia concentration in patients with a deficiency of NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthase) and can also benefit some patients with propionic and possibly methylmalonic acidemia [Tuchman et al 2008, Ah Mew et al 2010].

Hemodialysis or hemofiltration may be required in the event of treatment failure (uncontrollable acidosis and/or hyperammonemia).

A letter given to the family to present to emergency department physicians that specifies the recommended acute management protocol should be standard of care.

Medic Alert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.

Other

Aside from episodes of critical illness, patients with intercurrent illness such as viral infection or those undergoing surgery for various reasons should have aggressive fluid, metabolic, and nutritional management.

Specialists in physiatry, physical therapy, and occupational therapy can help address the complex challenges faced by patients and families, maximize functionality, and improve quality of life [Ktena et al 2015b].

Special considerations regarding choices of anesthetic agents in this patient population may apply [Ktena et al 2015a, Ruzkova et al 2015].

Most individuals require "sick day" management regimens, which typically consist of reducing or eliminating protein intake and increasing fluids and glucose to ensure delivery of adequate calories and to arrest lipolysis. Immediate hospitalization is usually required if signs suggest intercurrent infection.

Although all of the treatments discussed above may be needed in fragile individuals, they still may not prevent death, the severe sequelae of metabolic decompensation (e.g., metabolic stroke of the basal ganglia), or renal disease. The correlation and identification of treatment patterns and outcomes is needed to develop more effective management protocols for individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia.

Many affected individuals require gastrostomy/gastrojejunostomy tube feeding because of anorexia and vomiting to ensure caloric and fluid intake and improve growth.

Bone marrow failure during episodes of metabolic decompensation on rare occasion requires granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF).

Anemia is an expected complication of chronic renal failure and is treated with erythropoietin and eventually renal transplantation [Inoue et al 1981, Guerra-Moreno et al 2003, MacFarland & Hartung 2015].

Some children have had documented growth hormone (GH) deficiency; however, because response to GH therapy may vary, diet and GH replacement dose need to be carefully adjusted [Bain et al 1995, Al-Owain et al 2004]. The indications for GH replacement therapy and the response to GH replacement in treated individuals require further investigation.
Treatment is aimed at prevention of disease manifestations, early diagnosis by regular screening, and aggressive management of complications that may develop. Effective treatment requires a multidisciplinary approach that can improve both quality of life and survival for the affected individual.

Ongoing careful assessment of the potential need for part-time or permanent respiratory support is absolutely critical, as affected individuals may rapidly enter respiratory crisis or may unknowingly suffer from potentially fatal nocturnal hypoventilation.

Feeding support with tube/gavage feeds is needed if oral intake is poor. Failure to thrive may need to be overcome with high-caloric density formulas/feeds. Gastroesophageal reflux (if present) is treated in the usual manner.

Physical and occupational therapy may help to improve/maintain gross motor and fine motor functions.

Speech therapy should be provided for individuals with dysarthria/hypernasal speech.
Cooperation among multiple specialties including neurology, clinical genetics, nutrition, gastroenterology, pain management, psychiatry, and physical/occupational therapy helps with timely detection and treatment of the various aspects of multi-organ dysfunction. Once symptoms appear, treatment is primarily supportive.

Management of GI dysfunction can include the following:

Early attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection, especially in the most severely affected individuals

Trial of dromperidone for nausea and vomiting

Nutritional support including (when necessary) bolus feedings, gastrostomy tube placement, and total parenteral nutrition

Antibiotic therapy for intestinal bacterial overgrowth, a complication of dysmotility

Celiac plexus block with bupivicaine. This has been successful in reducing pain by interrupting visceral afferent pain sensation and increasing GI motility by inhibiting sympathetic efferent activity to the upper abdominal viscera and much of the small bowel [Teitelbaum et al 2002]. Splanchnic nerve block has been used successfully to reduce abdominal pain [Celebi et al 2006].

Complex medication regimens that include amitriptyline, nortriptyline, and gabapentin for relief of neuropathic symptoms, which are difficult to treat

Specialized schooling arrangements, typically necessary for children and young adults

Physical therapy and occupational therapy to help preserve mobility. Activity as tolerated should be encouraged.
Treatment is supportive.

Osteopenia and osteolysis

At present no specific therapy can alleviate the progressive osteopenia.

Assure that daily requirements of vitamin D and calcium are met.

Pamidronate is probably not effective [Phadke et al 2007].

Steroids and immunosuppressants have been used without much benefit and are best avoided given their side effects [Al-Mayouf et al 2000, Zankl et al 2007, Tuysuz et al 2009, Castberg et al 2013, Ekbote et al 2014].

Joints

Physical therapy may slow the rate of development of contractures and prolong mobility.

Surgical release of contractures may not help [Author, personal observation].

Aids to ensure mobility (wheelchair and walking aids) may be needed as the disease progresses.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may not provide sufficient relief. Referral to a rheumatologist or pain clinic may be beneficial to develop an individual pain management plan.

Cardiac manifestations. Provide medical or surgical interventions as appropriate.
The goal of management in familial monosomy 7 is early diagnosis so that definitive therapy with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) can be initiated prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone. Once transformation into AML occurs, the probability that BMT will fail to cure the disease increases significantly.

Any child or young adult with detectable monosomy 7 in combination with cytopenias and marrow dysplasia should, therefore, proceed to BMT as soon as possible, unless rising blast count warrants cytoreductive chemotherapy prior to transplant. Since BMT is the only effective treatment for the management of hematologic disease and the familial status of the disorder may not be known, rigorous evaluation of related donors is strongly suggested.

The suitability of sibs who are potential bone marrow donors may be evaluated with appropriate hematologic and cytogenetic studies to rule out bone marrow disease associated with familial monosomy 7. However, given that the underlying germline pathogenic variant may not be known, a matched sib donor may not be an ideal candidate (unless much older than the affected individual and with no evidence of hematologic disorders) and an unrelated donor may be more suitable.

Monosomy 7 in children with de

novo AML (i.e., with no clinical history of MDS, myeloproliferative disorder, or exposure to potentially leukemogenic therapies or agents) has an adverse prognosis, and thus children with monosomy 7 AML are treated on high-risk AML protocols and offered bone marrow transplantation in first remission [Hasle et al 2007].
A multidisciplinary team comprising a clinical geneticist, general surgeon, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, plastic surgeon, and social worker is preferred for optimal management of individuals with MOTA syndrome.

Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention with procedures tailored to the specific needs of the individual.

Eye anomalies

Colobomas of the upper eyelids and synechiae are managed conservatively with intensive ocular lubrication to avoid exposure keratopathy before surgery is performed.

Anophthalmia/microphthalmia and cryptophthalmos may warrant surgical intervention and insertion of prostheses to facilitate the development of the ocular region [Seah et al 2002].

Visual impairment, such as refractive errors, may be associated with colobomas and corneopalpebral synechiae.

Notched or bifid nose. Rhinoplasty may be performed for cosmetic purposes.

Omphalocele and umbilical hernia may be managed conservatively or by surgery. To date, all individuals with MOTA syndrome who have been managed surgically have tolerated the procedure well without procedure-related complications.

Anal stenosis is generally managed by serial dilatations.

Anteriorly placed anus is managed conservatively or with surgical intervention, as determined on a case-by-case basis.

Psychosocial support may be indicated for the parents and the affected child.
Physiotherapy assessment with particular reference to preventing or treating tightening of the tendo Achilles is very useful. In persons with more advanced disease, lightweight splinting of the ankle (e.g., with an ankle-foot orthosis) may be recommended.

The cardiomyopathy may respond to ACE inhibitors or other medication. Cardiac consultation is recommended.

Kyphoscoliosis may be treated with surgical stabilization of the spine. There is no treatment for spinal rigidity.
Nonspecific therapies have been shown to be effective in numerous chronic glomerular diseases and should be initiated. The judicious use of these agents, along with optimal blood pressure control, may be of benefit in individuals with DDD/MPGNII.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II type-1 receptor blockers decrease proteinuria in many glomerular diseases and slow the progression to renal failure [Ruggenenti et al 1999, Brenner et al 2001]. A retrospective study found that the combination of angiotensin blockers and immunosuppressants (steroids) is more effective than each therapy alone in preventing the development of renal failure [Nasr et al 2009].

Lipid-lowering agents, and in particular hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors, may delay progression of renal disease as well as correct endothelial cell dysfunction and alter long-term atherosclerotic risks in the presence of hyperlipidemia [Nickolas et al 2003, Maisch & Pezzillo 2004]. These agents are not widely used in children.

Renal allografts. Fewer than 200 individuals with DDD/MPGNII have undergone transplantation [Braun et al 2005]. Five-year allograft survival approximates 50%, which is significantly worse than for the NAPRTCS database as a whole (p=0.001). Living-related donor grafts fare better than deceased donor grafts (p<0.005). Allograft survival appears to be age-dependent in DDD; the survival of pediatric DDD transplant recipients is significantly worse than the rest of the pediatric transplant population [Angelo et al 2011].

DDD/MPGNII recurs in nearly all grafts and is the predominant cause of graft failure in 15%-50% of transplant recipients [Appel et al 2005, Angelo et al 2011]. There are little data to suggest that any therapeutic interventions have an effect on reversing this course, although isolated reports have described the use of plasmapheresis, which appears to be of equivocal benefit [Frémeaux-Bacchi et al 1994, Kurtz & Schlueter 2002].
Neurosurgical complications (hydrocephalus and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia). Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management are lacking.

Feeding difficulties such as chewing and swallowing difficulties and dysphagia require evaluation by a feeding specialist and/or gastroenterologist to promote early identification and prompt intervention which may include dietary modification and/or placement of a gastrostomy (G) tube.

Speech therapy is indicated for difficulties with speech, swallowing, and feeding.

Epilepsy may require long-term antiepileptic treatment.

Developmental delays. Initiation of physical, occupational, and speech therapy is recommended within the first year of life.
Guidelines for the management of MPS I have been developed [Muenzer et al 2009].

Supportive or symptomatic management can improve the quality of life for affected individuals and their families.

Infants with severe MPS I require a stimulating environment to promote early learning, as some skills may be retained during the period of general deterioration.

Skeletal. Physical therapy is a critical aspect of MPS I therapy [Tylki-Szymanska et al 2010a]. Range of motion exercises appear to offer some benefits in preserving joint function, and should be started early. Once significant joint limitation has occurred, increased range of motion may not be achieved without hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).

Various orthopedic approaches can be undertaken, particularly in individuals with attenuated disease. Joint replacement and atlanto-occipital stabilization may be necessary. These procedures must be performed at appropriate times in the individual's clinical course and must take into account the presence of other disease complications.

Carpal tunnel syndrome should be treated especially in individuals with attenuated MPS I and individuals with severe MPS I who have had HSCT. Most individuals lack typical symptoms (pain, tingling, or numbness) until severe compression occurs [Haddad et al 1997, Van Heest et al 1998, Bahadir et al 2009]; thus, nerve conduction studies should be used early in the course of disease to identify persons with carpal tunnel syndrome at a time when surgical release may be most beneficial. Surgical decompression of the median nerve results in variable restoration of motor hand activity [Van Heest et al 1998]. Intervention at an early stage, prior to severe nerve damage, optimizes outcome; repeated surgery may be required.

Ophthalmologic. Wearing peaked caps or eye shades can help reduce glare resulting from corneal clouding. Corneal transplantation is successful for individuals with attenuated disease, although donor grafts eventually become cloudy. Individuals with clear grafts may still experience poor vision because of involvement of the retina and/or optic nerve [Neufeld & Muenzer 2001].

Cardiovascular. Cardiac valve replacement should be considered early.

Hearing loss. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy correct eustachian tube dysfunction and decrease upper airway obstruction. Early placement of ventilating tubes is recommended in severely affected individuals. Hearing aids should also be considered.

ENT (otolaryngologic). Sleep apnea may require tracheotomy or high-pressure continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) with supplemented oxygen. Tracheostomy is often required to maintain the airway and control pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.

Gastrointestinal system. Some gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea and constipation) can be controlled by diet, including control of the amount of roughage. Increased roughage and the conservative use of laxatives may ease constipation.

Hydrocephaly. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure and progressive ventricular enlargement indicate a shunting procedure. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting in individuals with MPS I who have moderate to severe hydrocephalus is generally palliative and improves quality of life.

Other. Progressive compression of the spinal cord with resulting cervical myelopathy should be aggressively and quickly evaluated in individuals with attenuated disease or those who have had HSCT. Early surgical intervention may prevent severe complications.
Management of individuals with MPS IVA is best undertaken by the following multiple specialists, coordinated by a physician specializing in the care of individuals with complex medical problems:

Physiatrist (specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to optimize mobility and autonomy

Physical therapist to optimize mobility

Occupational therapist to optimize autonomy

Psychological support to optimize coping skills and quality of life

Educational professions to optimize learning in a medically fragile individual

Consideration of referral to family therapy to help normalize the experience for the affected individual, parents, sibs, and extended family members

Home care for affected individuals with multiple medical equipment needs

Hospice for end-of-life care

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Recombinant human GALNS ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) was approved by the FDA in February 2014.

The recommendation dose is 2 mg/kg/week intravenous. Although the treatment with ERT is not curative, ERT could improve endurance and overall quality of life.

Premedication (30-60 minutes prior to each enzyme infusion) with a non-sedating antihistamine (if possible) with or without antipyretics is recommended to prevent infusion-associated reactions.

A Phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in the 6MWT distance in the 2 mg/kg weekly dose group compared to the placebo group. The 3-minute stair climb test (3MSCT) and respiratory function were improved with the treatment but the differences were not statistically significant.

The long-term effects of this treatment on the skeletal features of MPSIVA are not yet known (see Therapies Under Investigation). The efficacy of ERT in improving pathology in the musculoskeletal system may be limited because of poor biodistribution of the enzyme in avascular tissue.

Musculoskeletal

For published orthopedic management guidelines, see White et al [2014]. The level of physical activity should be monitored by specialists in orthopedic surgery, neurology, physiatry, and physical therapy to optimize mobility while preventing joint injury, joint misalignments, and cervical cord damage.

Upper extremities. Non-operative interventions, such as external wrist splints, may be considered. Surgical intervention, including partial or complete wrist fusion, may be necessary to stabilize wrist range of motion.

Knee and ankle valgus. Lower extremity malalignment associated with progressively poor mechanical alignment and decreasing endurance requires intervention; however, no absolute indications for intervention exist.

Growth modulation, also called guided growth (temporary surgical tethering of the growth plate to allow gradual correction of the deformity) or realignment osteotomies have been successful [Dhawale et al 2012, White et al 2014].

Early detection and evaluation may allow surgical tethering of the growth plate to treat mild-to-moderate lower extremity angular deformities in children with open physes (growth plates). Typically this procedure is less invasive and allows for easier recovery than realignment osteotomies.

Once the growth plates close, distal femoral and proximal tibial osteotomies are needed to acutely or gradually (with the use of external fixators) correct lower extremity malalignment.

Ankle malalignment is often corrected by a distal tibial osteotomy with distal tibial screw hemiepiphyseodesis [reviewed in Tomatsu et al 2011].

Hip dysplasia. Surgery can manage pain and alignment and permit optimal mobility.

Hip reconstruction includes either femoral or acetabular osteotomy for mild cases or combined acetabular and femoral osteotomy for severe cases. Augmentation of acetabular bone stock and customized implants by using cortical grafts from the inner table of the ilium are usually required due to a shallow acetabulum [White et al 2014].

Total hip arthroplasty may be required in young adults experiencing significant hip pain which cannot be corrected by reconstructive techniques.

Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression.

To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, intervention in children is recommended when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms.

Affected individuals undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation.

Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI (see Surveillance). The affected individual should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility.

Lumbar spine malalignment. Thoracolumbar kyphosis (resulting from vertebral hypoplasia) may be progressive and symptomatic.

When kyphosis is less than 45 degrees, the risk of progressive deformity is less than with a greater curve, but warrants clinical and radiographic monitoring.

When kyphosis exceeds 45 degrees, progression is likely. Although extensive bracing with an orthosis or a cast does not prevent progression of the thoracolumbar kyphosis, it may delay the need for surgical intervention during a period of growth and development.

Anterior and posterior circumferential spinal fusion are indicated if one or more of the following are present:

Progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis greater than 70 degrees

Uncontrolled back pain

Neurologic changes related to spinal stenosis

Cardiac

Elevated heart rates could indicate a compensation mechanism, secondary to small left ventricular diameter and small stroke volume; thus tachycardia treatment with beta blockers should be avoided. Valve replacement may be considered for progressive valvular problems [Hendriksz et al 2015]. Risks need to be carefully weighed for valve replacement, either mechanical (life-long use of anticoagulants) or bioprosthesis (increased risk of valve dysplasia, degradation, and calcification).

Respiratory

Upper-airway obstruction and obstructive sleep apnea are managed by removal of enlarged tonsils and adenoids (average age 7 years [Montaño et al 2007]). Note: Even with this intervention, the rate of obstructive sleep apnea in children with a mucopolysaccharidosis is much higher than the general population; therefore, prompt clinical evaluation and referral for polysomnography are appropriate [Nashed et al 2009].

In persons with diffuse narrowing of the airway in whom adenotonsillectomy only temporally relieves upper-airway obstruction, other interventions to consider are: CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure), BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure), and tracheostomy.

Lower-airway obstruction manifest as wheezing and recurrent infection is managed by inhaled and/or oral bronchodilators and, in some instances, corticosteroids.

Restrictive lung disease is managed by supportive treatment.

Growth

Height of children with MPS IVA is best plotted on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008].

Nutrition should be optimized with a balanced diet and adequate vitamin D and calcium to assure bone health.

Learning Environment

Despite some physical limitation, individuals with MPS IVA have normal intellect and can thrive in an environment with academic and social stimulation. Children routinely attend regular class/school with assistance to prevent physical injury.

Eye

Corneal opacification often causes reduced vision in early childhood, necessitating penetrating keratoplasty, for which the outcome can vary. Recurrence of opacities within the first year post keratoplasty has been reported, making this a temporary measure for improving quality of life [reviewed by Bothun et al 2011]. In addition, other ophthalmologic problems including glaucoma and retinopathy may limit the success of corneal transplantation. Cataract surgery may benefit those with cataracts.

Dental

Daily oral hygiene care, fissure sealing, and adequate fluoride supplementation help prevent cavities. Orthodontic management to correct malocclusion may be necessary.

Hearing

Because ventilation tube placement can minimize the long-term scarring associated with chronic middle-ear effusions and recurrent acute otitis media, and improve hearing in the long term, most children have ventilation tubes placed during the preschool years. At the first occasion, a long-lasting tympanostomy tube is recommended due to high risk of recurrent middle-ear effusion and the risk associated with sedation in individuals with MPS IVA [Hendriksz et al 2015].

The progressive hearing impairment observed in most individuals with MPS IVA benefits from hearing aids.
Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, clinical genetics, and child development. Treatment of MPV17-related hepatocerebral mtDNA depletion syndrome remains unsatisfactory with a mortality rate higher than 50% (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Nutritional support should be provided by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.

Prevention of hypoglycemia requires frequent feeds and avoidance of fasting. Uncooked cornstarch (1-2 grams/kg/dose) can be used to manage hypoglycemia, and it may slow but not stop the progression of the liver disease [Spinazzola et al 2008, Parini et al 2009].

Liver transplantation. Although liver transplantation remains the only treatment option for liver failure, liver transplantation in mitochondrial hepatopathy is controversial, largely because of the multisystemic involvement. Liver transplantation has been performed in about one third of affected children; the outcome has not been satisfactory, with half of the transplanted children dying in the post-transplantation period because of multi-organ failure and/or sepsis (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Hepatocellular carcinoma. The two children reported with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were treated by liver transplantation. Screening for HCC using periodic hepatic ultrasound examination and serum alpha fetoprotein concentration potentially could result in earlier diagnosis, enabling liver transplantation before metastasis or local invasion occurs.
Treatment of muscular manifestations is symptomatic. Affected individuals are usually managed by pediatric or adult neurologists and physiatrists and/or physical therapists.

Developmental delay and intellectual disability are managed with education programs tailored to the individual's needs.

Cataracts are removed surgically during the first decade of life.

Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (i.e., primary gonadal failure) is treated with hormone replacement therapy at the expected time of puberty.
Myostatin-related muscle hypertrophy is not currently known to cause any medical complications.
The following treatment considerations apply to individuals with MSUD who have pathogenic variants in the E1a, E1b, or E2 subunits of BCKAD complex. Note: Treatment recommendations do not apply to those with disease caused by pathogenic variants in the common E3 subunit.

Home therapy. Dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) reagent allows home detection of high urine BCKAs during metabolic decompensation. With timely detection of mild or moderate illness, many individuals can be managed safely at home by experienced providers using dietary leucine restriction, high-calorie BCAA-free "sick-day" formulas, and frequent outpatient monitoring. Vomiting is the major reason that the sick neonate or child fails home therapy.

Acute decompensation. Dietary indiscretion causes plasma BCAAs to increase but only rarely results in acute decompensation and encephalopathy. In contrast, infections and injuries trigger a large endogenous mobilization of muscle protein and can precipitate metabolic crisis and hospitalization. Leading causes of hospitalization among one cohort of children with MSUD (N=15) are summarized in Table 4 [Strauss et al 2010].

Table 4. 

Reasons for 28 Hospitalizations in 15 Infants with MSUD

Indication for Hospitalization

Number

Vomiting and viral gastroenteritis

11

Viral bronchiolitis

3

Sinusitis

3

Neonatal encephalopathy

3

Urinary tract infection

2

Cellulitis

1

Influenza

1

Viral meningitis

1

Bacterial pharyngitis

1

Esophageal candidiasis

1

Appendicitis

1

Strauss et al [2010]

Reasons for 28 Hospitalizations in 15 Infants with MSUD

Strauss et al [2010]

Correction of metabolic decompensation is predicated on establishing net protein accretion. This is achieved by treating the precipitating stress (e.g., infection, dehydration, pain, fever) while simultaneously delivering sufficient calories, insulin, free amino acids, isoleucine, and valine to stimulate net protein synthesis in muscle and liver. Rapid nutritional correction of leucine intoxication in older children and adults is more challenging than in young rapidly growing infants (see, e.g., Figure 2 and Figure 9) but is, nonetheless, possible with higher weight-adjusted calorie intake (see Methods of achieving these goals) [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Simultaneous in-hospital management of metabolic intoxication and brain edema is complex and should be guided by an experienced metabolic specialist. Metabolic physicians may benefit from the expertise of an intensivist when administering medications such as insulin, hypertonic saline, and mannitol. Referral centers that admit individuals with MSUD who are in crisis should be able to provide parenteral BCAA-free amino acid and 1% isoleucine and valine solutions in the hospital pharmacy, as well as 24-hour monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations.

The primary goals of in-hospital therapy

Decrease plasma leucine concentration at greater than 750 µmol/L per 24 hrs.

Provide isoleucine and valine supplementation sufficient to maintain plasma concentrations of 400-600 µmol/L during the acute phase of illness.

Maintain serum sodium concentration of 138-145 mEq/L with minimal fluctuation.

Avoid osmolarity changes of greater than 5 mosm/L per day or 0.25 mosm/L per hour.

Maintain urine output of 2-4 mL/kg/hr and urine osmolarity of 300-400 mosm/L.

Minimize exposure to hypotonic fluid sources.

Anticipate and prevent iatrogenic electrolyte abnormalities associated with intravenous glucose and insulin therapy; the most commonly encountered are hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia.

Methods of achieving these goals

Identify and treat precipitating conditions (e.g., infection, inflammation, and fever).

Administer antiemetics (e.g., odansetron 0.15 mg/kg/dose) to control nausea and vomiting.

Provide at least 1.25 times the weight or body surface area-adjusted estimated energy requirement (EER), with 40%-50% of calories as lipid. EER, in kcal/m2/day, is approximately 1700 for neonates, 1500 for young children, and 1200 for adults. In older children and adults with catabolic illness, calorie intakes as high as three times the EER (i.e., 6000 calories per day) are often necessary to establish net protein anabolism.Note: Hypercaloric feeding typically requires a total (enteral + parenteral) glucose delivery rate of ≥10 mg/kg/min and can result in hyperglycemia. Regular insulin is typically infused at a continuous rate of 0.05-0.10 units/kg/hour and titrated to maintain euglycemia. Patients with severe illness may require higher rates of insulin infusion to counteract the glycemic effects of circulating glucagon, cortisol, and epinephrine [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Provide BCAA-free essential and non-essential amino acids: 2.0-3.5 g/kg/day.

Provide specific amino acid supplements during metabolic crisis:

Isoleucine and valine. 20-120 mg/kg/day each; intake is adjusted as necessary at 12- to 24-hour intervals to achieve the goals for isoleucine and valine plasma concentrations (400-600 µmol/L) and to optimize the rate of plasma leucine correction.

Glutamine and alanine. Total intake: 150-400 mg/kg/day each, depending on age and clinical circumstances (Table 5). Newer MSUD medical foods are fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010]; use of such products precludes the need to supply glutamine and alanine separately.

Tyrosine. During acute metabolic crisis, newborns, infants, and children with MSUD can develop acute focal or generalized dystonic posturing attributed to an increased plasma leucine:tyrosine concentration ratio, restricted brain tyrosine uptake, and reduced cerebral dopamine synthesis [Morton et al 2002, Zinnanti et al 2009]. Tyrosine dissolves poorly in aqueous solution, but when supplied enterally (100-400 mg/kg/day) can rapidly reverse dystonia associated with metabolic crisis [Strauss et al 2010; Strauss & Morton, unpublished observation].

Table 5. 

Mean and 25th to 75th Percentile Range Nutrient Intakes (per kg-day) by Age Group

Nutrient

Age in Months (# of Persons)

0-2 (31)

3-5 (18)

6-8 (21)

9-12 (18)

13-18 (21)

19-24 (18)

25-36 (32)

Nutrient Intake per kg-day: Mean (25th to 75th Percentile Range)

Leucine (mg)

72(64-84)

58(47-68)

44(37-51)

35(30-41)

33(26-39)

27(22-28)

21(20-25)

Energy (kcal)

111(103-119)

99(94-107)

89(82-99)

78(71-87)

67(55-77)

57(49-71)

38(39-51)

Total protein (g)

2.4(2.1-2.6)

2.3(1.9-2.6)

2.2(1.8-2.5)

2.0(1.5-2.5)

2.1(1.8-2.4)

2(1.7-2.3)

1.5(1.5-2.9)

Isoleucine supplement (mg)

4.4(0-7)

2.3(0-3.6)

2.7(0-3.9)

2.6(0-3.6)

3.8(2.1-5.1)

3.7(1.0-3.6)

5.5(3.5-6.2)

Valine supplement (mg)

11.5(9.8-14.8)

11.4(9.0-13.0)

11.0(9.5-12.1)

8.1(6.3-9.4)

7.8(5.4-10.0)

6.2(2.3-9.3)

5.8(4.9-8.7)

Alanine intake (mg)

233(200-262)

209(197-234)

206(193-225)

189(168-218)

178(159-199)

159(140-192)

117(114-149)

Glutamine intake (mg)

416(361-471)

363(337-405)

358(332-400)

320(288-371)

294(252-337)

256(221-318)

184(181-235)

Iron (mg)

2.2(1.9-2.5)

2.1(1.9-2.2)

2.1(2.0-2.2)

2.0(1.6-2.2)

2.0(1.8-2.1)

1.8(1.5-2.1)

1.3(1.3-1.6)

Zinc (mg)

4.6(3.7-4.9)

4.0(3.7-4.0)

4.0(3.7-4.3)

3.7(3.1-4.3)

3.7(3.4-4.0)

3.4(2.9-4.0)

2.6(2.6-3.1)

Selenium (µg)

7.0(5.7-7.5)

6.2(5.7-7.0)

6.2(5.7-6.6)

5.7(4.8-6.6)

5.7(5.3-6.2)

5.3(4.4-6.2)

4.0(4.0-4.8)

Omega-3 fattyacids, as 18:3n-3 (mg)

378(307-401)

330(307-378)

330(307-354)

307(260-354)

307(283-330)

283(236-330)

212(212-260)

Leucine / energy ratio (mg/kcal)

0.65(0.57-0.72)

0.58(0.48-0.66)

0.50(0.43-0.56)

0.46(0.37-0.53)

0.50(0.43-0.58)

0.48(0.38-0.58)

0.54(0.44-0.55)

From Strauss et al [2010]; with permission from Elsevier

Mean and 25th to 75th Percentile Range Nutrient Intakes (per kg-day) by Age Group

From Strauss et al [2010]; with permission from Elsevier

Total nutritional goals can be met by combined enteral and parenteral administration. In ill neonates or children otherwise able to tolerate enteral formula, regular feeding (30-60 mL each hour) or continuous nasogastric delivery of a one kcal/mL BCAA-free MSUD formula supplemented with isoleucine and valine is an effective way to manage metabolic crises [Nyhan et al 1998, Morton et al 2002].

Control of brain edema. A decrease in blood osmolarity of more than 8 mosm/L per day can precipitate fatal brain herniation in an ill infant or child with MSUD (Figure 4). Close monitoring (preferably in an intensive care unit) is warranted.

Neurologic assessments to be performed on a frequent basis to monitor for brain swelling include the following:

Measure head circumference and fontanel size in neonates.

Watch for signs of increased intracranial pressure including the following:

Papilledema

Disorientation, combativeness

Depressed level of consciousness

Refractory vomiting

Extremity hyperreflexia

Bradycardic hypertension

Watch for signs of impending brain herniation including the following:

Hyperactive gag

Pupillary asymmetry

Ophthalmoplegia

Decorticate posturing

Methods to minimize the possibility of brain swelling:

In appropriate clinical settings, the authors recommend use of a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line in encephalopathic patients with MSUD. This allows sufficient nutritional support to be delivered without an excessive fluid volume and reduces the risk for cerebral edema.

Elevate the individual's head.

Assess total body sodium, potassium, and water balance at 12-hour intervals. The following clinical formula is useful for managing the serum sodium concentration [Rose & Post 1994]:

Serum Na concentration equals ~([total body Na + total body K]/ total body water).

Assume total body water equals ~70% body weight, 2/3 of which is intracellular and has sodium and potassium concentrations of 14 mEq/L and 140 mEq/L, respectively [Guyton & Hall 1996].

Minimize osmotic variation of the extracellular fluid in hospitalized patients by assessing weight trend, urine output, and serum and urine electrolytes every 12 hours and adjusting electrolyte and water intake accordingly [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation].

Note: Give furosemide (0.5-1.0 mg/kg/dose) as needed every six to 12 hours to oppose the urinary concentrating action of vasopressin and maintain urine osmolarity at a ceiling value of 300-400 mosm/L. This allows for brisk output of isotonic urine to compensate for the large infused volume associated with hypercaloric feeding.

Methods to manage brain swelling:

For weight gain, hyponatremia, or deepening encephalopathy, the authors administer [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]:

Furosemide: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, followed by

Mannitol: 0.5-1.0 g/kg over 60 minutes, followed by

Hypertonic (3%-5%) saline: 2.5 mEq/kg over 60 minutes

Neuroimaging. During episodes of acute encephalopathy, individuals with MSUD are typically too unstable for magnetic resonance imaging. Cranial CT scan is used to look for major indices of cerebral edema, such as decreased volume of cerebral ventricles and basal fluid spaces, or reduced gray-white discrimination (Figure 4).

If there is clinical evidence of evolving brain herniation, elevate the individual's head, hyperventilate by face mask or endotracheal tube, give mannitol 1-2 g/kg and hypertonic saline 3 mEq/kg, and transfer the individual emergently to a pediatric or neurologic intensive care unit.

Hemodialysis/hemofiltration. Nutritional therapy alone can effectively reduce even extremely elevated plasma concentrations of leucine in persons with MSUD of any age and under a wide variety of clinical circumstances [Morton et al 2002, Strauss & Morton 2003]. However, numerous publications have shown that renal replacement methods can achieve rapid corrections of BCAAs and BCKAs during the acute phase of MSUD crisis [Jouvet et al 1997, Schaefer et al 1999, Yoshino et al 1999, Jouvet et al 2001, Puliyanda et al 2002].

As methods of invasive leucine removal, peritoneal dialysis and venovenous hemofiltration are less effective and more dangerous than short courses of continuous hemodialysis [Schaefer et al 1999]. When hemodialysis is used to treat MSUD it must be coupled with effective nutritional management to constrain the catabolic response and prevent recurrent clinical intoxication. A combined approach to therapy, using hemodialysis with simultaneous anabolic nutritional therapy, was shown to be highly effective in one neonate with classic MSUD [Puliyanda et al 2002]. Dialysis without simultaneous management of the underlying disturbance of protein turnover is analogous to treating diabetic ketoacidosis with invasive removal of glucose and ketones rather than insulin infusion. In both conditions, effective treatment depends not only on lowering concentrations of pathologic metabolites, but also on controlling the underlying metabolic derangement.

Other potential complications in hospitalized persons with MSUD:

Acute pancreatitis. If clinical signs of pancreatitis (epigastric or mid-back pain, anorexia, vomiting) develop two to three days into the treatment of a metabolic decompensation, stop all enteral feeding and measure serum concentrations of lipase and amylase [Kahler et al 1994]. Treatment is supportive; persons with MSUD with pancreatitis need to be managed with special parenteral nutrition solutions until the condition abates.

Infection. Monitor for and promptly treat hospital-acquired infections. Superficial and invasive Candida infections are common. Persons with MSUD are vulnerable to bacterial or fungal infection from central venous catheters.
The management of enlarged parietal foramina is generally conservative. Although surgical closure of parietal bone defects has been advocated and performed [Kortesis et al 2003], its role is controversial. The procedure is not likely to be routinely clinically indicated, given the benign natural history of the skull defects, their tendency to reduce in size with age, and uncertainty as to whether symptoms such as headaches are improved. However, persistent cranium bifidum may warrant operative closure [Perlyn et al 2005].

Associated headaches or seizures should be treated symptomatically.
Treatment includes the following:

Appropriate rehabilitation, e.g., hearing aids, speech therapy, culturally appropriate language training, and evaluation for eligibility for cochlear implantation [Sinnathuray et al 2003]

Enrollment in educational programs appropriate for the hearing impaired

For mild keratoderma, use of lotions and emollients; for severe keratoderma, dermatologic evaluation
The following are indicated:

Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity, including consideration of oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen if indicated

Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism (response to levodopa has been variable in this population)

Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with significant neuropsychiatric symptoms

Physical, occupational, speech, and other therapies as indicated

Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed

A gastric feeding tube to help minimize weight loss (which becomes more frequent with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia

Glycopyrrolate or transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions

Tracheostomy as indicated for difficulty managing secretions

Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications
The management of mitochondrial disease is largely supportive [Chinnery & Turnbull 2001]. The clinician must have a thorough knowledge of the potential complications of mitochondrial disorders to prevent unnecessary morbidity and mortality.

Management issues may include early diagnosis and treatment of diabetes mellitus, cardiac pacing, ptosis correction, intraocular lens replacement for cataracts, and cochlear implantation for sensorineural hearing loss.

A variety of vitamins and co-factors have been used in individuals with mitochondrial disorders, although a Cochrane systematic review has shown that evidence supporting their use is lacking [Chinnery et al 2006].

Food supplements such as ubiquinone (coenzyme Q10, ubidecarenone) are generally well tolerated and some individuals report a subjective benefit on treatment.

Individuals with complex I and/or complex II deficiency may benefit from oral administration of riboflavin.

The role of exercise therapy in mitochondrial myopathy is currently being evaluated [Taivassalo et al 2001, Taivassalo et al 2006, Murphy et al 2008].

Coenzyme Q10 is specifically indicated in persons with defects of CoQ10 biosynthesis.

Idebenone shows promise for the treatment of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy.

Some secondary causes of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as ethylmalonic aciduria, may have specific treatments [Tiranti et al 2009].

Those with mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) may benefit from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Prevention Strategies Under Investigation

The possibility of nuclear transfer as a means of preventing transmission of pathogenic mtDNA variants is currently being explored [Craven et al 2010].Management of individuals with XLCNM is based on supportive care measures and in large part is similar to that for other neuromuscular disorders. The management of an individual with XLCNM optimally involves a team of specialists with expertise in the long-term care of individuals with neuromuscular disorders. Such teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, and clinical geneticist. Of note, standard of care measures for all congenital myopathies are currently being developed.

Once the specific diagnosis of XLCNM is confirmed, management may be guided by family decisions regarding continued ventilatory support for the affected family member. Families may benefit from the involvement of professionals familiar with the data concerning the overall prognosis for XLCNM. Talking with other families who have children with the disorder can be extremely helpful (see Resources).

Because of the risks for aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure in infants with moderate or severe disease, tracheostomy and G-tube feeding should be seriously considered. Even individuals with mild disease are at risk for significant morbidity and mortality from intercurrent respiratory infection and hypoventilation.

For ventilator-dependent individuals, communication incorporates speech with a capped tracheostomy or Passy-Muir valve, sign language, and/or communication devices such as writing boards.

Affected individuals older than age five years attend school, usually assisted by a dedicated nurse or aide, or have home-based teachers to limit exposure to infectious agents.

Ophthalmologists, orthopedists specializing in scoliosis management, and orthodontists should address specific medical complications related to the underlying myopathy.

Children with XLCNM and an unexpected decline in motor skills should be evaluated for a potential abnormality in neuromuscular junction function. A recent study from Robb et al [2011] identified one individual with mild XLCNM and unexplained decline in motor skills (i.e., lost ambulation) consistent with a disorder of neuromuscular junction transmission. On evaluation this individual was found to have the electrodiagnostic features of neuromuscular junction disease (electrodecrement with repetitive stimulation and jitter with single fiber EMG) but no laboratory evidence to support a co-occurring diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Subsequent treatment with pyridostigmine resulted in rapid recovery of ambulation.
Children with Muenke syndrome and craniosynostosis should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience. These individuals benefit most from a multidisciplinary approach to care. A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes: a surgical team (craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon), clinical geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, dentist, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker. Other disciplines are involved as needed.

Craniosynostosis. Depending on the severity, the first craniosynostosis repair is typically performed between age three and six months. This procedure is usually transcranial (i.e., the skull is opened down to the dura so that the bones can be physically repositioned during a procedure such as a midface advancement).

Newer approaches being performed include endoscopic strip craniectomy and posterior distraction (PD):

Endoscopic strip craniectomy is typically performed before the affected child reaches age three months and has an overall long-term improved symmetry compared to traditional cranial vault remodeling and fronto-orbital advancement.

Posterior distraction (PD) is used to manage individuals with severe brachycephaly or turribrachycephaly. The procedure has associated risks and more studies to establish long-term outcomes are needed [Wiberg et al 2012, Thomas et al 2014].

Following craniosynostosis repair, the need for a second procedure is increased in those with Muenke syndrome compared to those with craniosynostosis without the defining pathogenic variant. The reasons for a second procedure vary by individual and can include:

Severe initial clinical presentation requiring a staged repair

Cranial vault abnormalities including temporal bulging and recurrent supraorbital retrusion requiring extracranial contouring (i.e., use of a cement such as calcium phosphate to contour the surface of the skull)

Postoperative increased ICP

Recurrent deformity requiring a second transcranial repair:

The need for a surgical revision for aesthetic reasons (typically temporal bulging) has been reported in multiple series [Renier et al 2000, Cassileth et al 2001, Arnaud et al 2002, Thomas et al 2005, Honnebier et al 2008].

According to Thomas et al [2005], individuals with craniosynostosis and the defining pathogenic variant for Muenke syndrome were more likely to require early intervention with a posterior release operation (at age ~6 months) to prevent excess frontal bulging than were those without the defining pathogenic variant.

Seven (24.1%) of 29 individuals with the p.Pro250Arg pathogenic variant underwent a second surgery (6/7 had increased ICP) as compared to two (4.3%) of 47 without the pathogenic variant. This difference in reoperation rate was statistically significant (p=0.048) [Thomas et al 2005].

In the report of Honnebier et al [2008], 16 individuals with Muenke syndrome required a second procedure: seven required a second transcranial procedure; 15 were expected to undergo extracranial contouring. Note that none had increased ICP.

However, a study by Ridgway et al [2011] challenges the above findings, reporting a frequency of frontal revision in individuals with Muenke syndrome who had fronto-orbital advancements that was lower than previously reported. This study found that the need for secondary revision procedures was inversely related to the age of the affected individual at the time of the initial repair. The location of the fused/synostotic suture, type of fixation, and the use of bone grafting do not have a significant effect on the need for revision.

In Muenke syndrome a discrepancy between severity of the craniofacial findings (e.g., severe midface retrusion, widely spaced eyes) and neurologic findings (e.g., increased ICP, hydrocephalus, structural brain anomalies, severe developmental delay, or severe intellectual disability) has been noted [Lajeunie et al 1999, Arnaud et al 2002, Honnebier et al 2008]: severe early clinical findings such as recurrent deformity and the need for a second major procedure did not correlate with postoperative risk for increased ICP.

Hearing loss. Hearing loss is often sensorineural. Standard treatments for hearing loss apply, including special accommodations for school-aged children, hearing aids, and (potentially) cochlear implants (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) [Agochukwu et al 2014b].

Developmental delay. Individuals with Muenke syndrome are at increased risk for behavioral problems, intellectual disability, and developmental delay [Maliepaard et al 2014, Yarnell et al 2015]; thus, referral for speech therapy and early intervention is indicated. Referral to a developmental and/or behavioral specialist for assessment and treatment is recommended.

Ocular abnormalities

Strabismus surgery/correction is indicated to prevent amblyopia.

Because surgical correction of craniosynostosis is a priority, delay in strabismus surgery in the first two years of life is common; however, earlier correction of strabismus should be considered to achieve binocularity.

In those with proptosis, lubrication for exposure keratopathy is indicated.
Treatment includes the following:

Dental. Referral to an orthodontist if significant dental anomalies are present

Neurologic. Referral to a pediatric neurologist if signs or symptoms suggest seizures. An EEG and/or head MRI may be warranted for diagnostic purposes or refractory seizures. Standard anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) should be used, as indicated.

Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay

Ophthalmologic. Treatment and/or following of ocular abnormalities by a pediatric ophthalmologist

Cardiovascular. Referral to a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon for treatment of congenital heart defects

Gastrointestinal. Referral to a gastroenterologist for evaluation and treatment when chronic constipation is present; evaluation for HSCR and ultrashort HSCR. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview.

Genitourinary. Referral to a urologist or nephrologist as indicated

Musculoskeletal. Referral to an orthopedist for significant pectus anomalies of the chest and/or foot/ankle anomalies
Bleeding tendency

Local measures are the first-line treatment for mucocutaneous bleeding and often are sufficient to control mild or moderate bleeding. Local measures include packing or endoscopic cauterization of the bleeding site for treatment of epistaxis; suturing for treatment of accidental or surgical wounds; and compression and application of gauzes soaked in tranexamic acid for bleeding from superficial wounds. Mouthwash with tranexamic acid may control gingival bleeding.

Transfusions of platelet concentrates are currently used to transiently increase platelet count. Platelet transfusions have associated risks of possible alloimmunization and subsequent refractoriness to platelet infusions, infectious diseases, and acute reactions. Thus, platelet transfusions should be limited to treatment for active hemorrhages that cannot be otherwise managed, life-threatening bleedings, and/or hemorrhages at critical sites; platelet concentrates may also be used as prophylaxis prior to surgery or other major hemostatic stresses. When available, platelets from HLA-matched donors should be used to prevent or overcome alloimmunization.

Eltrombopag. A Phase II study in 12 persons with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia demonstrated that eltrombopag, an oral drug mimicking the natural hormone that stimulates platelet production, increased platelet counts and abolished bleeding tendency in most instances [Pecci et al 2010]. Thereafter, short-term eltrombopag courses have been successfully used in one affected adult prior to major surgery and in one child with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia [Pecci et al 2012b, Favier et al 2013b]. At the present time, this drug is approved in the US and Europe only for individuals with some forms of acquired thrombocytopenia.

Antifibrinolytic agents. Some authors recommend the systemic administration of antifibrinolytic agents, such as tranexamic or epsilon-aminocaproic acid, to treat mild or moderate mucocutaneous bleeding [Bolton-Maggs et al 2006, Althaus & Greinacher 2009].

Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, DDAVP) shortened bleeding time in some individuals with MYH9RD [Balduini et al 1999]. Successful surgery after prophylaxis with DDAVP has been reported [Pecci et al 2014b]. As not all affected individuals respond to the treatment, a test dose is recommended to identify those who will benefit from this treatment either in future bleeding episodes or in prevention of bleeding at the time of invasive procedures.

Deafness. A total of 11 individuals with an established diagnosis of MYH9RD and severe to profound deafness have received cochlear implantations [Pecci et al 2014b, Nabekura et al 2015]. Ten of them benefited from cochlear implants; nine of them obtained restoration of practically normal hearing and verbal communication abilities.

Glomerular nephropathy

Four affected individuals with renal involvement had their proteinuria greatly reduced by treatment with angiotensin receptor blockers and/or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [Pecci et al 2008]. It is premature to conclude whether this therapeutic approach prevents or delays the development of ESRD.

Dialysis or kidney transplantation is required in individuals with ESRD.

Cataracts. Cataract surgery remedies clouding of the lens.

Elevation of liver enzymes does not require any specific treatment.
Treatment is largely symptomatic and may include the following.

Cardiovascular

Management by a cardiologist trained in congenital heart disease, including pericardial disease and restrictive cardiomyopathy. At present, no evidence suggests that in Myhre syndrome management of specific lesions would differ from standard care in current clinical practice, except that any unnecessary instrumentation should be avoided as associated tissue trauma may induce stenosis and the scarring-type tissue response unique to Myhre syndrome.

Affected individuals who are in heart failure should be under the care of a cardiovascular specialist with access to a transplant center.

Maximize all medical treatment and minimize instrumentation for all cardiac studies and therapies.

Medical treatment of systemic hypertension and pulmonary hypertension (based on underlying cause).

Respiratory

Affected individuals have required long-term tracheostomy due to complete and recurrent tracheal stenosis following multiple and/or traumatic intubations [McGowan et al 2011, Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015]. To avoid traumatic intubation, consider using a size-smaller uncuffed endotracheal tube. Elective tracheal surgery/intubation should be avoided; tracheal resection is contraindicated [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Symptomatic treatment of restrictive lung disease

Oxygen supplementation as necessary

Gastrointestinal

Minimal instrumentation of the gastrointestinal tract is advised because post-operative adhesions can be fatal [Lindor et al 2012].

Endoscopy should be approached with caution to avoid airway manipulation which increases the risk for tracheal/laryngeal scarring/stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015]. Noninvasive 3D imaging may be preferred.

Aggressive management of constipation (through dietary means or medication if necessary) is indicated.

Neuropsychiatric. The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Global developmental disability/intellectual disability educational issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Social/behavioral issues

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Individualized behavioral therapy or pharmacologic treatment for anxiety, depression, or other psychological manifestations as per current clinical practice is appropriate.

Hearing

Hearing loss. Appropriate hearing augmentation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Persistent middle ear effusions. Myringotomy tubes as needed

Craniofacial

Individuals with orofacial clefting or velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience. These individuals benefit most from a multidisciplinary approach to care.

A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team (craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon), clinical geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, multiple dental specialists, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker.

Skeletal

Consider physical therapy to keep joints mobile (no study has been done on efficacy). Note: It is not known if passive range of motion exercises help maintain flexibility.

A systematic study of growth hormone treatment for short stature has not been done. One affected individual has been noted to have anecdotal improvement in growth velocity; however, it is unknown if adult height would be affected [Starr et al 2015].

Ophthalmology. Routine treatment of strabismus and refractive errors. Note: Complications from surgical repair have not been reported.
Medications may improve either the myoclonus or the dystonia or both:

Benzodiazepines, particularly clonazepam, improve mostly myoclonus and tremor [Kurlan et al 1988, Bressman & Greene 1990, Kyllerman et al 1990, Nygaard et al 1999, Goetz & Horn 2001].

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), typically valproate but also topiramate, may improve myoclonus [Bressman & Greene 1990, Nygaard et al 1999].

Anticholinergic medication may improve dystonia [Bressman & Greene 1990, Goetz & Horn 2001] and botulinum toxin injection may be especially helpful for cervical dystonia [Bressman & Greene 2000, Goetz & Horn 2001, Berardelli & Curra 2002].

Improvement of dystonia with L-5-hydroxytryptophan [Scheidtmann et al 2000] and with L-dopa [Leuzzi et al 2002, Raymond et al 2008, Luciano et al 2009] has been reported.

One individual with M-D who represented a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence of M-D in the family) showed a robust response to zolpidem [Park et al 2009].

Gamma-hydroxybutyrate [Priori et al 2000] and the sodium oxybate may improve myoclonus [Frucht et al 2005].

Note: Although the symptoms of M-D usually resolve with ingestion of alcohol, the risk of long-term addiction to alcohol renders it an unacceptable treatment option.

Surgery. Stereotactic thalamotomy can improve myoclonus, but caused dysarthria in one individual and mild hemiparesis in another [Gasser et al 1996]. In two others, myoclonus improved, but without significant gain in function [Suchowersky et al 2000].

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). In a recent study, ten persons with M-D (9 with an identifiable SGCE pathogenic variant) had DBS of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) only (1 person), of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) only, or of both GPi and VIM (8 persons). All experienced substantial improvement of both myoclonus (61.5%) and dystonia (48.2%). No adverse effects on cognition or affect were noted. VIM DBS was associated with a slightly higher incidence of reversible adverse events, possibly accounting for the slightly less robust improvement noted in those treated with VIM vs GPi DBS. The authors also note that quadruple VIM/GPi stimulation may be slightly more effective than VIM or GPi alone [Gruber et al 2010].

The results of case studies are summarized below:

Improvement of M-D was reported in a 63-year old with symptoms from age two years, suggesting that the findings are responsive to DBS, even after more than 50 years [Kurtis et al 2010].

Neurostimulation of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) in an individual with medically intractable and progressive inherited M-D resulted in an 80% reduction of myoclonus score, but no significant effect on dystonia. A second individual who had genetically confirmed M-D had a 14% reduction of myoclonus score following VIM stimulation [Trottenberg et al 2001, Kuncel et al 2009].

DBS of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) improved myoclonus and dystonia in two individuals [Cif et al 2004, Magariños-Ascone et al 2005], one of whom had a confirmed SGCE pathogenic variant [Cif et al 2004].

DBS of the medial globus pallidus improved both myoclonus and dystonia at an eight-week follow-up [Liu et al 2002].
No specific therapy currently exists for this disorder.
Some individuals with minor complaints may only need to accommodate their activities and lifestyles to reduce symptoms [Shapiro & Ruff 2002]. Myotonic stiffness may respond to sodium channel blockers or other pharmacologic treatment options:

Mexiletine, a lidocaine derivative, is the best documented treatment option. In a double-blind randomized trial, mexiletine (200 mg 3x/day) significantly reduced stiffness in a group of 59 patients with myotonia, 34 of whom had myotonia congenita [Statland et al 2012]. In clinical practice, doses generally begin at 150 mg twice a day, increasing slowly as needed up to 200-300 mg three times a day. The most common potential side effects, including epigastric discomfort, nausea, lightheadedness, dizziness, tremor, and ataxia, are reversible with dose reduction.

Other sodium channel blockers such as phenytoin and carbamazepine have been reported to have beneficial effects [Conravey & Santana-Gould 2010].

Compounds with other presumed modes of action such as quinine, dantrolene, or acetazolamide may be beneficial in some cases [Shapiro & Ruff 2002].

See review in Conravey & Santana-Gould [2010] for a detailed description of these treatment options.
Management guidelines have been developed [Gagnon et al 2010].

No specific treatment exists for the progressive weakness in individuals with DM1.

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help evaluate affected individuals regarding the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses. Orthopedic surgery may benefit children with musculoskeletal deformities [Canavese & Sussman 2009].

Special education evaluation is indicated for children with DM1.

Increased weakness in DM1 has been associated with both hypothyroidism and certain cholesterol-lowering medications (i.e. statins); thus, some strength may return if these causative factors are eliminated.

Myotonia in DM1 is typically mild to moderate and rarely requires treatment [Ricker et al 1999]. Anecdotally, some individuals have responded to mexilitene or carbamazepine. Logigian et al [2010] found mexilitene 150-200 mg TID effective and safe for treating myotonia.

Pain management can be an important part of DM1 treatment. Different medications and combinations of medications work for some individuals, although none has been routinely effective; medications that have been used include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids, and tricyclic antidepressants. When used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, low-dose analgesics may provide relief.

Consultation with a cardiologist is appropriate for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to other symptoms in individuals with DM1. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Sovari et al 2007].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. Recurrence after surgery has been reported [Garrott et al 2004].

Males with low serum concentration of testosterone require hormone replacement therapy if they are symptomatic.

In most cases, surgical excision of pilomatrixoma including clear margins and its overlying skin is the preferred treatment [Cigliano et al 2005].

An extensive review found no evidence for successful treatment of hypersomnia with routine psychostimulants [Annane et al 2006], although others have reported benefit [Talbot et al 2003, Wintzen et al 2007].
Treatment guidelines for DM2 have been published. See Udd et al [2011] (full text).

A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help determine the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses [Johnson et al 1995].

Routine physical activity appears to be beneficial for maintaining muscle strength and endurance in persons with DM2, and as an aid to control musculoskeletal pain.

Myotonia is typically mild and rarely requires treatment [Ricker 1999], though use of mexilitene, which is very effective in controlling some forms of myotonia, has helped control muscle pain in some individuals with DM2.

The effectiveness of medications and combination of medications in pain management varies. No one medication has been consistently effective; medications that have been used with some success include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids (e.g., 5 mg prednisone on alternate days), and tricyclic antidepressants. Low-dose narcotic analgesics, when used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, may help but may also lead to development of tolerance and escalating doses.

Consultation with a cardiologist is strongly recommended for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to the onset of other symptoms. ECG, Holter monitoring, and an echocardiogram should be performed to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Florek et al 1990, Hawley et al 1991]. Due to the increased risk for cardiomyopathy, echocardiography and possibly cardiac MRI should be considered.

The value of defibrillator placement is increasingly evident in individuals with DM2 who have overt arrhythmias, but the role of pacemaker/defibrillators in asymptomatic patients is yet to be determined [Schoser et al 2004b].

Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. As compared to the more typical senile nuclear cataracts, direct ophthalmoscopy and even slit lamp examination can underestimate the functional significance of cataracts in individuals with DM2 because the alteration of vision depends on location, not just the number of subcapsular opacities.

Testosterone replacement therapy can be beneficial in males with symptomatic hypogonadism.

Direct gastrointestinal manifestations of DM2 are yet to be characterized, but some patients complain of postprandial abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea. As in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), some individuals respond to prokinetic agents such as metochlopromide (Reglan™) and tegaserod (Zelnorm™).
Hypertension and renal disease are treated as in the general population. When renal transplantation is necessary, results are usually favorable. ACE inhibitors are useful in slowing progression of proteinuria, but their use should be monitored carefully in children.

Orthopedic problems may be helped by analgesics, physiotherapy, splinting, bracing, or surgery. Because of the abnormal joint anatomy that may be present in individuals with NPS, MRI of joints to identify abnormal anatomy is important prior to surgery, so that appropriate surgical treatment can be planned in advance.

Treatment as in the general population for:

Glaucoma

Constipation

Dental problems
As for most mitochondrial diseases, no specific curative treatment for mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome and NARP exists [Kanabus et al 2014]. Supportive management includes treatment of the following:

Acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate for acute exacerbations of acidosis

Seizures. Appropriate antiepileptic drugs tailored to the type of seizure under the supervision of a neurologist. Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effects on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Anderson et al 2002].

Dystonia

Benzhexol, baclofen, tetrabenazine, and gabapentin may be useful, alone or in various combinations; an initial low dose should be started and gradually increased until symptom control is achieved or intolerable side effects occur.

Botulinum toxin injection has also been used in individuals with Leigh syndrome and severe intractable dystonia.

Cardiomyopathy. Anticongestive therapy may be required and should be supervised by a cardiologist.

Regular assessment of daily caloric intake and adequacy of dietary structure including micronutrients and feeding management is indicated.

Psychological support for the affected individual and family is essential.
Treatments for NBIA are palliative. The following treatments should be considered (some do not apply to all subtypes of NBIA):

Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures

Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with significant dystonia

Botulinum toxin for those with focal dystonia

L-DOPA treatment, which is beneficial in rare cases. Note: Some will have an initially dramatic response that usually diminishes over time; some will develop prominent dyskinesias early in the treatment

Deep brain stimulation, used clinically for dystonia with increasing frequency; shows some evidence of benefit (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Psychiatric treatment for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms

As NBIA progresses, many affected individuals may experience episodes of extreme dystonia lasting for day or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain, which may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a non-ambulatory person with marked stress on the long bones from dystonia places many individuals with NBIA at high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.
The following are appropriate:

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures under the care of a neurologist or epileptologist

Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy to optimize developmental outcomes

Spectacles as needed to correct refractive errors

Hearing aids as needed

Orchiopexy as needed
Symptomatic treatment can be successful in mitigating the manifestations of NCL. Seizures, sleep-related problems, malnutrition, gastroesophageal reflux, pneumonia, sialorrhea, hyperactivity and behavior problems, psychosis, anxiety, spasticity, Parkinsonian symptoms, and dystonia can be palliated.

Seizures. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) should be selected with caution. The stage of the disease, age of the affected individual, and quality of life are important to consider in evaluating the effectiveness of AEDs.

Lamotrigine (LTG) had a favorable effect on 23/28 individuals with JNCL, 13/19 being continued on monotherapy with 100% control, compared to 70% control for those receiving valproic acid (VPA), 60% control for VPA-clonazepam (CZP), and 60% control for LTG-CZP [Aberg et al 1999, Aberg et al 2000].

Other newer AEDs including levetiracetam and topiramate may also be beneficial [Author, personal experience].

Other. Benzodiazepines may be of benefit for seizures, anxiety, spasticity, and sleep disorders.

Trihexyphenydil improves dystonia and sialorrhea.

Individuals with swallowing problems may benefit from placement of a gastric (G) tube.

Antidepressants and antipsychotic agents are sometimes indicated for those with CLN3 disease.
Management is usually best accomplished by a team consisting of a nutritionist, a pediatric (or adult) nephrologist or endocrinologist, and a clinical geneticist.

General management. The essence of management is the provision of free access to drinking water and to toilet facilities. Infants, who are naturally unable to seek out water when thirsty, must be offered water between regular feedings. Children and adults who are heavy sleepers may need to be awakened at night by a family member or an alarm clock in order to drink water and to urinate. As long as an individual's thirst mechanism remains intact and the person is otherwise well, these measures prevent hypernatremic dehydration. Education of friends, teachers, caretakers, and neighbors and a willingness to find creative solutions are helpful.

Polyuria (and thus polydipsia) can be reduced by up to 50% without inducing hypernatremia by the use of one of the following drugs/combinations. Therapy is considered effective when urine output declines below a documented baseline in individuals with ad libitum water intake. Objective measurements of 24-hour urine volume are more valuable than subjective reports of the volume or frequency of voiding, although reduction in the latter provides a benefit to lifestyle.

Thiazide diuretics (i.e., hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide) in standard to high doses. Since these diuretics cause potassium wasting, serum potassium concentration should be monitored and supplemental potassium provided in the diet or pharmacologically as needed. Thiazides are often used in combination with either amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic) or indomethacin.

Note: When thiazide diuretic therapy is initiated, a transient increase in urine output may occur as a result of salt diuresis.

Dietary restriction of sodium to 300 mg/day to maximize the effectiveness of thiazide diuretics in reducing urine output. Although previously a diet low in protein (2 g/kg/day) to reduce the renal osmolar load and obligatory water excretion was recommended, severe limitation of dietary protein may introduce nutritional deficiencies. Thus, it is preferable to prescribe dietary restriction of sodium only.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, to potentially improve urine concentrating ability and reduce urine output. NSAIDs have been used individually and in combination with thiazide diuretics (with or without amiloride). Because NSAIDs have undesirable effects, such as gastric and renal tubular damage, caution is warranted in the chronic use of NSAIDs for treatment of NDI.

Emergency treatment for dehydration. When individuals with NDI present with dehydration or shock, it is essential to establish whether the deficit is primarily in free water (through water deprivation or excessive urine, stool, or sweat) or in extracellular fluid (bleeding, fluid extravasation). The natural tendency of healthcare providers to treat dehydration with normal saline (0.9% NaCl) is dangerous in individuals with NDI if the deficit is primarily in free water.

Acute blood loss or shock may be treated with isotonic fluid until the blood pressure and heart rate are stabilized, after which 2.5% dextrose in water is the preferred solution.

Dehydration associated with free water deficit is treated by gradually replacing the deficit water as well as ongoing urinary losses. Whenever possible, rehydration should occur with the oral intake of drinking water. If administration of IV fluids is required, 2.5% dextrose in water and/or quarter-normal saline should be used.

If significant hypernatremia is present, serum sodium concentration should be monitored and the hydration solution modified to avoid reducing serum sodium concentration faster than 1 mEq/L per hour. Rapid increases or decreases in plasma osmolality can cause seizures, coma, brain damage, and death.

Special situations. Individuals being prepared for surgery are often denied oral intake for many hours and are described as having 'NPO' (nothing per ora) status. In individuals with NDI, an IV must be provided from the beginning of NPO status and the person's oral intake of water for that period, which is typically much larger than that of an individual who does not have NDI, should be given intravenously as 2.5% dextrose in water [Moug et al 2005].

Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megacystis. Treatment involves medical management to reduce urine output and continuous or intermittent bladder catheterization when significant post-void urinary bladder residuals are present.

Psychomotor development. Children with a history of an episode of severe dehydration, delayed developmental milestones, or a delay in establishing the correct diagnosis and management warrant a formal developmental evaluation and intervention before school age.
Consensus for management of congenital myopathies have been published [Wang et al 2012] (full text).

A multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival:

Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory tract infections

Evaluation at an early stage of the need for intermittent or permanent use of a mechanical ventilator to prevent insidious nocturnal hypoxia

Assurance of adequate caloric intake and appropriate nutritional status, including special feeding techniques and high-calorie formulas and foods, if indicated

Standard treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, if present

Referral to an orthopedist for management of scoliosis and joint contractures, as in the general population

Physical therapy for maintenance/improvement of function and joint mobility

Speech therapy if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present

Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk (albeit low) of cardiomyopathy or cor pulmonale
This section discusses only the management of the phenotype of nephronophthisis. Management of other findings associated with syndromic NPH (Table 3a) are beyond the scope of this GeneReview.

Currently no cure for nephronophthisis exists. Treatment is aimed at slowing the progression of CKD and its complications, according to international clinical practice guidelines for chronic renal failure (Kidney Disease – Improving Global Outcomes [KDIGO] 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) for Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease [KDIGO 2013] (full text):

Correction of water and electrolyte imbalances, especially during intercurrent illness

Treatment of anemia, hypertension, and proteinuria if present. Preferred therapy may differ between adult and pediatric patients [KDIGO 2013].

Growth hormone treatment for children who have severe growth retardation as a result of chronic renal insufficiency and meet criteria for treatment [Wilson et al 2003]

Dialysis or renal transplantation when patients reach ESRD. Renal transplantation is the preferred treatment as disease does not recur in the transplanted kidney [Pistor et al 1985].
The movement disorder is particularly resistant to conventional therapy, but some response has been recorded with levodopa, tetrabenazine, orphenadrine, benzhexol, sulpiride, diazepam, clonazepam, and deanol in standard doses [Chinnery et al 2007, Ondo et al 2010]

Botulinum toxin is helpful for painful focal dystonia.
Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013].

Individuals with NF1 who have abnormalities involving the eye, central or peripheral nervous system, spine or long bones, or cardiovascular system should be referred to an appropriate specialist for treatment.

Discrete cutaneous or subcutaneous neurofibromas that are disfiguring or in inconvenient locations (e.g., at belt or collar lines) can be removed surgically, or, if small, by laser or electrocautery.

Surgical treatment of plexiform neurofibromas is often unsatisfactory because of their intimate involvement with nerves and their tendency to grow back at the site of removal [Fadda et al 2007, Serletis et al 2007, Prada et al 2012, Nguyen et al 2013a].

In one small series in which surgical removal of superficial plexiform neurofibromas was undertaken in children while the tumors were still relatively small, it was possible to resect the neurofibromas without producing any neurologic deficit [Friedrich et al 2005].

Radiotherapy is contraindicated because of the risk of inducing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in these genetically predisposed individuals [Evans et al 2002].

A 54% reduction in the volume of a plexiform neurofibroma has been reported in an individual with NF1 who received two cycles of carboplatin chemotherapy for a coincident seminoma [Hummel et al 2011].

A phase II clinical trial reported apparent benefit in approximately 25% of patients with large plexiform neurofibromas treated with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor [Robertson et al 2012]. Further studies are in progress.

Pain, development of a neurologic deficit, or enlargement of a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma may signal a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and require immediate evaluation [Valeyrie-Allanore et al 2005]. Examination by MRI, PET, or PET/CT [Ferner et al 2008, Matsumine et al 2009, Warbey et al 2009, Salamon et al 2013] is useful in distinguishing benign and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, but definitive differentiation can only be made by histologic examination of the tumor. Complete surgical excision, when possible, is the only treatment that offers the possibility of cure of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors [Friedrich et al 2007, Dunn et al 2013]. Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy is sometimes used as well and appears to have benefitted some (but not most) patients with NF1 [Gottfried et al 2006, Chaudhary & Borker 2012, Zehou et al 2013].

Most optic pathway gliomas found on MRI in people with NF1 are asymptomatic and do not require treatment [Segal et al 2010, Oh et al 2011, Cassiman et al 2013]. Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for progressive optic pathway gliomas in children with NF1, although the results are mixed [Rosenfeld et al 2010, Ardern-Holmes & North 2011, Fisher et al 2012]. Surgical treatment of optic nerve glioma is usually reserved for cosmetic palliation in a blind eye, and radiotherapy is usually avoided because of the risk of inducing malignancy or moyamoya in the exposed field [Evans et al 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a].

The natural history of brain stem and cerebellar astrocytomas in individuals with NF1 should be taken into consideration in deciding on management of such tumors [Vinchon et al 2000, Rosser & Packer 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a].

Dystrophic scoliosis in children with NF1 often requires surgical management, which may be complex and difficult [Shen et al 2005, Tsirikos et al 2005, Stoker et al 2012, Kawabata et al 2013]. Nondystrophic scoliosis in persons with NF1 can be treated in a manner similar to idiopathic scoliosis.

Surgical treatment of tibial pseudarthrosis is difficult and often unsatisfactory [Stevenson et al 2013].
Vestibular schwannoma. Untreated tumors may be slow growing and not require active intervention in the short term [Masuda et al 2004, Slattery et al 2004]. Therapy remains primarily surgical.

Small vestibular tumors (<1.5 mm) that are completely intercanalicular can often be completely resected, with preservation of both hearing and facial nerve function.

Larger tumors are probably best managed expectantly, with debulking or decompression carried out only when brain stem compression, deterioration of hearing, and/or facial nerve dysfunction occur [Evans et al 2005a]. However, balancing between early surgery and preservation of facial function and later surgery when a patient is still hearing is difficult [Evans et al 2005a].

Stereotactic radiosurgery, most commonly with the gamma knife, has been offered as an alternative to surgery in select individuals with vestibular schwannoma. However, the outcomes from radiation treatment in individuals with NF2 are not as good as for individuals with sporadic unilateral vestibular schwannoma, with only approximately 60% long-term tumor control [Rowe et al 2003].

Malignant transformation is a possible, though probably not common, sequela [Baser et al 2000]; however, it should be noted that tumor development following radiation may take 15 years [Evans et al 2006]. This may involve development of a malignancy within the treated lesion or a new malignancy (e.g., glioblastoma) in the radiation field [Balasubramaniam et al 2007].

Management of individuals with vestibular tumors should include counseling for insidious problems with balance and underwater disorientation, which can result in drowning.

Other tumors. Other intracranial, cranial nerve, or spinal nerve tumors are very slow growing, and surgical intervention for a tumor producing little impairment may cause disability years before it would occur naturally.

Although ependymoma in individuals without NF2 is optimally treated with complete resection, and occasionally with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, it is unclear whether ependymoma in individuals with NF2 warrants aggressive management.

Radiation therapy of NF2-associated tumors should be carefully considered because radiation exposure may induce, accelerate, or transform tumors in an individual (especially a child) with an inactive tumor suppressor gene [Baser et al 2000, Evans et al 2006].

Hearing. Hearing preservation and augmentation are important in the management of individuals with NF2. All affected individuals and their families should be referred to an audiologist to receive training in optimization of hearing and speech production.

Lip-reading skills may be enhanced by instruction.

Sign language may often be more effectively acquired before the individual loses hearing.

Hearing aids may be helpful early in the course of the disease [Evans et al 2005a].

Auditory rehabilitation with a cochlear or brain stem implant should be discussed with those who have lost hearing [Evans et al 2005a]. Rarely, individuals who have had vascular insult to the cochlea, but otherwise are without nerve damage, may benefit from a cochlear implant.

Ocular involvement. Early recognition and management of visual impairment from other manifestations of NF2 are extremely important.
Nutrition. Because of chromosome instability, vitamin E and folic acid supplementation in doses appropriate for body weight is recommended.

Infections. In individuals with severe humoral immunodeficiency and frequent infections, Ig replacement therapy should be considered.

Ig replacement is typically administered either intravenously (IVIg) or subcutaneously (SCIg).

The spectrum of recurrent infections in NBS is not opportunistic; therefore, the antibiotic selected should be appropriate for the microorganism being treated.

Malignancy. Standard treatment chemotherapy protocols for lymphoid malignancies in NBS need to be adopted according to individual tolerance [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Pastorczak et al 2016]. Treatment of affected individuals with solid tumors is also challenging. Radiotherapy of CNS tumors (medulloblastoma) caused severe complications and death in three individuals with NBS [Chrzanowska et al 1997, Bakhshi et al 2003, Distel et al 2003].

Although complete clinical remission (for >5 years) can be successfully achieved, in a proportion of affected individuals outcome is complicated by relapse or the development of a second malignancy [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Bienemann et al 2011].

For individuals who achieve first remission, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) may be considered:

The first successful bone marrow transplantation was performed in an individual with NBS who was initially misdiagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA) [Gennery et al 2004, Gennery et al 2005].

Wolska-Kuśnierz et al [2015] summarized the results of HSCT in 14 individuals with NBS, nine of whom were alive [Gennery et al 2005, New et al 2005, Albert et al 2010].

Woźniak et al [2015] reported the successful use of non-myeloablative umbilical cord transplantation in a child age 19 months with NBS and severe combined immune deficiency.

Further long-term follow up is needed to determine the outcome of HSCT in individuals with NBS.

Puberty and fertility. Females with NBS who are of pubertal age should be referred for evaluation by a gynecologist and/or endocrinologist to evaluate for hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.

Hormonal replacement therapy should be considered with careful monitoring of secondary sexual characteristics and uterus development.

Females are infertile; similarly, no male paternity has been reported.
No effective treatment for severe glycine encephalopathy exists. Circumstantial evidence is however accumulating that in patients with pathogenic variants associated with residual enzyme activity (although not in patients with two severe pathogenic variants [Korman et al 2006]) early and aggressive treatment (benzoate and NMDA receptor blockade) results in improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Korman et al 2004; Flusser et al 2005; Van Hove et al, unpublished].

Current treatment of glycine encephalopathy consists of reduction of plasma concentration of glycine through treatment with sodium benzoate and blocking of glycinergic receptors, most commonly at the N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site.

Sodium benzoate. Oral administration of sodium benzoate at doses of 250-750 mg/kg/day can reduce the plasma glycine concentration into the normal range (see Table 1); however, this treatment does not normalize CSF glycine concentration. Lowering the plasma glycine concentration into the low normal range (between 120 and 300 µmol/L) is often required in order to observe beneficial effects. Benzoate is also a useful anticonvulsant agent in this disorder; it increases alertness. In more mildly affected individuals, it may also improve behavior.

In patients with the attenuated or mild phenotype, benzoate eliminates the intermittent episodes of severe lethargy often seen in this group. However, in patients with the severe phenotype, even high doses of benzoate administered early in the disease course do not affect the natural progression toward severe intellectual disability/seizure disorder.

The dose of sodium benzoate required varies and thus must be tailored to the individual patient. The dose should be gradually increased (usually by 50 mg/kg/day) until the plasma glycine concentration is within treatment range. The higher dose of this range (500-750 mg/kg/day) is frequently associated with gastritis, which may require oral administration of antacids, H2 antagonists, or proton pump inhibitors.

Patients with a mild form of the disease require a lower dose (200-450 mg/kg/day)

Patients with a severe form of the disease require a higher dose (550-750 mg/kg/day) [Van Hove et al 2005].

Dosing of benzoate in excess of the individual requirement is dangerous: benzoate toxicity has high morbidity and mortality [Van Hove et al 2005]. Hypocalcemia and low plasma glycine concentration (<150 µmol/L) are frequent early signs of benzoate overdose. Measurement of plasma benzoate concentration can be helpful in evaluating potential toxicity.

NMDA receptor site antagonists. Antagonists at the NMDA receptor site include dextromethorphan, ketamine, and felbamate. Use of each has resulted in improved seizure control.

In contrast, antagonism of a presumably overstimulated N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel complex with use of dextromethorphan, ketamine, or felbamate has been of limited benefit to the ultimate neurodevelopmental outcome of severely affected children; this may be different in mildly affected children.

Dextromethorphan doses commonly range from five to 15 mg/kg/day, but individual variability is substantial. Blood concentration can be monitored; the therapeutic level is not defined, but should be greater than 0 and lower than 100 nmol/L. Overdose of dextromethorphan causes increased sleepiness and while awake, more movement.

Note: Cimetidine slows the metabolism of dextromethorphan and should not be used in dextromethorphan slow metabolizers (a separate pharmacogenetic phenotype) as it may cause toxicity.

Seizure control is important for symptomatic benefit.

Control of severe seizure disorders such as burst suppression pattern or hypsarrhythmia tends to result in improved developmental progress.

Children with myoclonic seizures, such as newborns and infants, may benefit from benzodiazepines.

Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as phenobarbital or phenytoin have limited efficacy for control of the seizures of glycine encephalopathy by themselves in neonates with this condition. However, because the nature of the epilepsy changes in late infancy, phenobarbital is often useful in seizures in older affected children.

Various antiepileptic drugs have been used with variable success. Felbamate has been successfully used in some children with difficult-to-treat seizures. This treatment must be closely monitored for signs of liver or hematopoietic toxicity.

Ketogenic diet has been used in some patients with variable success for the treatment of seizures. Ketogenic diet always lowers the amount of glycine substantially and the dose of benzoate should be reduced accordingly to avoid benzoate toxicity [Cusmai et al 2012].

For some older patients with severe glycine encephalopathy and difficult-to-control seizures, a vagal nerve stimulator has been used with varying (sometimes very high) levels of success [Tsao 2010].

Other. Gastrostomy tube placement should be considered early in the management of patients with swallowing dysfunction associated with severe disease.

Gastroesophageal reflux is common, and a Nissen procedure can be very helpful in reducing the risk of aspiration pneumonia.

Most affected individuals need physical therapy.

Scoliosis is managed with standard techniques.

Note: Although strychnine improves tone and respiration, its use has been abandoned because of serious side effects that result from its long-term use.
A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with NKX2-1-related disorders is recommended.

Chorea. Tetrabenazine, which has been reported to reduce chorea in low doses [Jankovic 2009, Salvatore et al 2010, Jankovic & Clarence-Smith 2011, Gras et al 2012, Jimenez-Shahed & Jankovic 2013], is a first-line treatment for chorea. Starting at low doses and gradually increasing to the dose most effective in controlling symptoms is recommended.

Children: 0.5 mg/kg/day starting dose divided into 2-3 doses

Adults: 37.5 mg/day starting dose divided in 2-3 doses

Levodopa therapy has been reported to improve chorea in four children and can be considered as second-line therapy for the treatment of chorea [Asmus et al 2005, Rosati et al 2015]. Rosati et al [2015] and Asmus et al [2005] noted a dramatic and substantial improvement in gait symptoms (specifically falls) in the same four children with levodopa therapy; this medication can be used as first-line therapy in children with gait impairment.

Of note:

Although Devos et al [2006] found a beneficial effect of methylphenidate on chorea in one patient, methylphenidate is not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea.

Although Glik et al [2008] reported amelioration of choreic movements in an individual with benign hereditary chorea treated with olanzapine for psychosis, dopamine receptor blockers are not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea.

Other neurologic manifestations. Gross motor and gait abnormalities can occur during early development [Harper 1978]; physical therapy is recommended to address delays in motor and gait development identified in childhood.

Pulmonary dysfunction. Treat asthma and interstitial lung disease as needed.

Hypothyroidism. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is recommended.
Treatment of the complications of Noonan syndrome is generally standard and does not differ from treatment in the general population.

Management guidelines have been developed by Dyscerne, a European consortium [Noonan Syndrome Guideline Development Group 2010] (full text); a separate set has been published by an American consortium working with the Noonan Syndrome Support Group [Romano et al 2010] (full text) and in the Lancet [Roberts et al 2013].

Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies is generally the same as in the general population. Pulmonary valve stenosis treated with percutaneous balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty has a higher re-intervention rate versus pulmonary valve stenosis without NS [Prendiville et al 2014]. There is substantial early mortality associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; infants presenting before age six months in congestive heart failure have the worst prognosis (2-year survival of 30%) [Hickey et al 2011, Wilkinson et al 2012].

Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

The bleeding diathesis in Noonan syndrome can have a variety of causes. Specific treatment for serious bleeding may be guided by knowledge of a factor deficiency or platelet aggregation anomaly. Factor VIIa has been successfully used to control bleeding caused by hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, thrombocytopenia, and thrombasthenia. It has also been used in an infant with Noonan syndrome whose platelet count and prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, to control severe postoperative blood loss resulting from gastritis [Tofil et al 2005].

Studies of growth hormone (GH) treatment have been published from the UK, Japan [Ogawa et al 2004], the Netherlands [Noordam 2007, Noordam et al 2008], Sweden [Osio et al 2005], and the United States [Romano et al 2009].

The rationale for GH treatment of individuals with Noonan syndrome includes:

Significant short stature compared with normal peers;

Possible impairment of the GH-insulin-like-growth-factor type I (GH-IGF-I) axis; and

Documented response to GH treatment in studies.

In Europe, GH treatment is the standard of care for children with abnormalities of the GH-IGF-I axis and could be used when GH physiology is normal.

No standard dose has been established; no correlation between dosage used and final height is apparent.

Short stature due to Noonan syndrome is an FDA-approved indication for growth hormone treatment.

Short- and long-term studies have demonstrated a consistent and significant increase in height velocity in children with Noonan syndrome who have been treated [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Romano et al 2009].

The increase in height SD varies from 0.6 to 1.8 SD and may depend on age at start of treatment, duration of study, age at onset of puberty, and/or GH sensitivity [Osio et al 2005, Noordam et al 2008, Dahlgren 2009].

Subsequent studies have shown that children with prepubertal NS growth hormone deficiency have been shown to increase their growth rate with growth hormone therapy at a rate equivalent to girls with Turner syndrome but at a lower rate than that seen in idiopathic growth hormone deficiency [Lee et al 2015, Zavras et al 2015].
Ocular manifestations

The majority of males with the classic Norrie disease (ND) phenotype have complete retinal detachment at the time of birth; therefore, interventional therapy may not offer much with regard to preservation of sight. Ophthalmologic evaluation is warranted..

Individuals without complete retinal detachment may benefit from surgery and/or laser therapy with the potential for improved outcomes if done at an early age.

A report by Chow et al [2010] described successful laser photocoagulation at birth (37 weeks’ gestation) of a male with ND in which Teller visual acuity was measured at 20/100 O.D. at 23 months of life

Retrospective medical record review of all patients seen in a tertiary care pediatric retinal clinical practice (1988-2008) of 14 males with ND documented maintenance of light perception in at least one eye (7/14 cases) with early vitrectomy done by age 12 months (median 4.5 months) [Walsh et al 2010].

In the progressive stage of the Norrie disease phenotype, development of increased intraocular pressure may require surgery. Rarely, enucleation of the eye is required to control pain.

Sensorineural hearing loss

Hearing aid augmentation is usually successful well into middle or late adulthood.

Cochlear implantation should be considered when hearing-assisted audiologic function is significantly impaired.

Behavioral issues are a lifelong challenge to many individuals with Norrie disease and to their guardians/caretakers, whether or not intellectual disability or cognitive impairment is present. Intervention and therapy are supportive and aimed at maximizing educational opportunities.

An empiric trial of psychotropic medications may be warranted, although no studies have addressed or supported the use of specific medications for treatment of Norrie disease.
Severe neurodegenerative form (NPD-A)

Progressive neurologic disease. Physical and occupational therapy to maximize function and to prevent contractures is appropriate. Aggressive therapy is not warranted and the plan for such treatment should be made in consultation with the neurologist, therapist(s), and family to establish realistic goals.

Nutrition. Feeding difficulties can make provision of adequate calories a major challenge. Regular consultation with a dietician should be provided. The use of nasogastric tube feeding or surgical placement of a feeding tube should be discussed with the family.

Sleep disorder. Irritability and sleep disturbance are quality-of-life issues for the entire family that sometimes require the use of sedatives.

NPD-B

Bleeding. Most affected individuals have thrombocytopenia. When bleeding is life threatening, transfusion of blood products is indicated. While partial splenectomy may be considered for individuals with severe hypersplenism, total splenectomy should be avoided because removal of the spleen exacerbates the pulmonary disease.

Pulmonary disease. Individuals with symptomatic pulmonary disease may require supplemental oxygen. Other measures to treat interstitial lung disease, such as steroids, have not been well studied. Several individuals have undergone bronchopulmonary lavage with variable results [Nicholson et al 2002].

Hyperlipidemia. Adults with hyperlipidemia should be treated to bring the serum concentration of total cholesterol into the normal range.

Growth retardation. Dietary assessment is indicated in all cases to assure that calorie intake is adequate for growth.

Note: Orthotopic liver transplantation in an infant with NPD-A and amniotic cell transplantation in several individuals with NPD-B have been attempted with little or no success [Kayler et al 2002].
No curative therapy for NPC exists.

Symptomatic therapy may be at least partially effective in the management of seizures, dystonia, and cataplexy.

If disordered sleep is identified, a nocturnal sedative may be indicated. In complex cases, formal evaluation by a sleep specialist should be considered.

Bronchoalveolar lavage has been described as effective in improving function in one child with pulmonary infiltrates [Palmeri et al 2005].

General supportive care, including respite for primary caregivers, is crucial to the maintenance of the family unit in the face of this devastating illness.
CHILD syndrome

Oral aromatic retinoids (etretinate) to ameliorate cutaneous symptoms; however, this drug is often poorly tolerated [Happle et al 1980] and does not prove effective in every case [Liu et al 2015].

Topical treatments including lactic acid 12% creams or lotions for itching and urea creams for dry skin. Oral and topical ketoconazole were found to result in a 90% reduction of cutaneous lesions after ten days of therapy [Liu et al 2015].

Topical statins. The use of lovastatin topically led to complete healing of the inflammatory CHILD nevus in a few single cases, whereas cholesterol application alone had no satisfactory effect [Merino De Paz et al 2011, Paller et al 2011]. Alexopoulos & Kakourou [2015] recently reported the combined topical use of simvastatin and cholesterol and showed a correction in the cutaneous phenotype of one patient.

Dermatologic surgery. An inflammatory nevus was removed from an affected boy by dermabrasion; however, it recurred within eight months [Happle et al 1996]. König et al [2010] reported successful treatment of an inflammatory nevus by grafting skin obtained from a contralateral unaffected region.

Note: No one therapy described to date appears to ameliorate the cutaneous findings for every reported individual with CHILD syndrome. Trying different methods until the clinician finds a successful therapy seems to be typical for most affected individuals.

Orthopedic abnormalities. Treatment of orthopedic abnormalities such as scoliosis and joint contractures with braces and/or corrective surgery

Other medical care as appropriate based on clinical findings

CK syndrome

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) to control seizures

Behavior modification and/or drug therapy to control aggression and help with ADHD symptoms

Ophthalmologic management of ocular abnormalities
Ophthalmologic care. Correction with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Notably, visual acuity is never correctable to normal, but parents should be advised that the achievable acuity never deteriorates.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory but may be performed if the strabismus is marked. Surgery may improve peripheral binocularity or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn or head tilt, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point to a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position. Nystagmus surgery remains highly controversial; no comparative clinical trial has compared the surgical reduction of amplitude of nystagmus to the outcomes of the natural history of dampened nystagmus with age among those forms of albinism in which increasing pigment occurs normally over time.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from “photophobia,” which is painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among all individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in acuity from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function substantively because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

Most children with albinism should remain in mainstream classrooms, as long as the school attends to their special needs resulting from visual limitation. Preschoool evaluations allow teachers and parents to develop an Individual Education Plan (IEP). Neither Braille nor “white cane” mobility training is needed in the overwhelming majority of children with albinism.

Additional classroom aids may include:

High contrast reading materials (black on white);

Large font texts or xerographically enlarged worksheets;

Preferential seating near the front of the class and work boards;

Selective optical devices, especially mobile ones such as stand magnifiers and monocular telescopes, and closed circuit chip-camera televisions; and

Computers and tablets with zoom-magnification text software.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare, to reduce some photodysphoria, and to provide some sun protection to the face.
Correction of refractive errors with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Of note, visual acuity is never correctable to normal.

Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory (because the strabismus in most individuals with albinism is not associated with the development of amblyopia); however, if the strabismus is marked or fixed, surgery can be considered to improve peripheral binocular fusion or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point into a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position.

Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from ‘photophobia, painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin.

Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision.

Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens.

A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare and to reduce some photodysphoria and to provide some sun protection to the face.

Skin care in OCA2 is determined by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Individuals with white skin that does not tan need to be protected from any prolonged sun exposure for prevention of burning, skin damage, and skin cancer. This can be for exposures as short as five to ten minutes in highly sensitive individuals and 30 minutes or more in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, and long sleeves, pants, and socks) and appropriate sunscreens after the guidance and education from a dermatologist.

Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas.

Skin cancer is treated as for the general population.
Ophthalmologic care is the most important part of the ongoing care for most individuals with OCA4.

The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors with spectacles or contact lenses can improve visual acuity. Except in the very unusual individual, correction of refractive errors cannot restore visual acuity to normal because of the foveal hypoplasia.

The alternating strabismus found in most individuals with albinism is generally not associated with the development of amblyopia. Strabismus surgery is usually not required, but can be considered for cosmetic reasons if the strabismus is marked or fixed.

Photophobia is common in individuals with OCA4, but the degree of discomfort varies and does not depend entirely on the amount of melanin pigment present in the iris or skin. In general, opaque contact lenses or darkly tinted lenses do not improve visual function. Dark glasses may be helpful for individuals with albinism, but many prefer to go without dark glasses because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. A hat with a brim (e.g., a baseball hat with a visor) is often the best way to achieve reduction in photophobia and sun protection.

Protection from the sun through the wearing of protective clothing and the regular application of sunscreen is essential to prevent sunburn and secondary skin changes, and to decrease the risk of skin cancer in later life. Regular skin check-ups for skin cancer are recommended for adult individuals with OCA4, especially in cases of severe hypopigmentation.
The following are appropriate:

Cosmetic or reconstructive surgery for clefts of the lip and/or palate, tongue nodules, and accessory frenulae; treatment as for isolated cleft palate, including speech therapy and assessment for and aggressive treatment of otitis media

Removal of accessory teeth

Orthodontia for malocclusion

Surgery to repair syndactyly, if present

Routine management of renal disease, which may require hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis and renal transplantation

Routine management of seizures

Special educational evaluation and input to address learning disabilities and other cognitive impairments
Management focuses on supportive therapy to minimize fractures and maximize function, minimize disability, foster independence, and maintain overall health [Marini & Gerber 1997]. Ideally, OI is managed by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in the medical management of OI, orthopedics, rehabilitation medicine, pediatric dentistry, and otology/otolaryngology.

Supportive therapy is individualized depending on the severity, the degree of impairment, and the age of the affected individual. Considerable support from medical personnel is generally required by parents caring for infants with perinatally lethal OI.

Physical medicine treatment

Parents and other caregivers should be instructed in safe handling techniques. These are mostly common sense practices in order to relieve stress on a single point. For example: lift an affected infant by bracing the torso, neck and lower body; avoid any situation where increased pressure is placed on a single point on any long bone; when assisting an affected child in standing up, do not pull excessively on an extended arm but bend down and brace a greater surface area (such as placing a hand behind the back and pulling gently from the front (using the arm) while applying pressure from the rear); avoid sudden acceleration/deceleration movements; and avoid throwing a child in the air. Older children should not ride on amusement park rides. Caregivers should avoid recreating the circumstances of a fracture, as it is likely to happen again.

The use of bracing to try to stabilize progressively deforming limbs depends in part on the subtype of OI. Progressively deforming OI has proven to be progressive despite external or internal bracing. The use of internal rods or braces to support and stabilize deforming limbs is more successful in the milder subtypes of OI and is guided by the expertise of the managing orthopedist.

Orthotics to support ankle instability are used in toddlers with delayed walking secondary to joint hypermobility and in other affected individuals who suffer recurrent subluxations of their ankle joints.

Physical activity serves a number of purposes. It provides gravitational stressors required for bone growth and remodeling. The muscles supporting joints are strengthened by activity and as an overall benefit, improved joint stability aides in overall well-being as pain levels are reduced and mobility is increased. Physical activity can be self-directed or coordinated through the services of a physical therapist. Each affected individual’s needs are unique and thus both physical and occupational therapy should be initiated for increased stability of bone, improved mobility, prevention of contractures, prevention of head and spinal deformity, aerobic fitness, and muscle strengthening

Mobility devices, such as scooters and chairs for children, and modified automobiles for adults should be considered.

Some individuals with OI experience chronic daily pain associated with both fractures and non-specific myofascial pain associated with the generalized connective tissue disorder. Pain management plays an important role in the management of OI. Some affected individuals do well with minimal analgesics, but many benefit from a multidisciplinary pain management service. Analgesics can be used to control pain from fractures.

Orthopedic treatment. Fractures are treated as they would be in unaffected children and adults with attention to the following:

The period of immobility in children with OI should be shortened as much as is practical.

Casts should be small and lightweight.

Physical therapy should begin as soon as the cast is removed to promote mobility and enhance muscle strength and bone mass.

At this time, intramedullary rodding remains a mainstay of orthopedic care to provide anatomic positioning of limbs that permits more normal function.

Progressive spinal deformities are particularly difficult to treat because of the poor quality of bone in severely affected children. Progressive scoliosis in severe OI does not respond to conservative management and response to surgical intervention may be limited.

Pharmacologic treatment. Bisphosphonates, analogs of pyrophosphate that decrease bone resorption, are being evaluated in both uncontrolled and controlled trials to assess the extent to which they can increase bone mass and bone strength and improve function in children with OI. These studies are still ongoing. Bisphosphonates have been used most extensively in severely affected children with OI; they may be useful in adults with OI as well [Adami et al 2003].

The role of treatment with bisphosphonates in changing the natural history of OI is incompletely understood. The Cochrane Collaboration is an international network which assembles reviews on various management strategies based on randomized controlled clinical trials within its database in order to improve the practice of evidence-based medicine. As of the Cochrane Collaboration’s most recent update of the OI review, bisphosphonate therapy did not appear to reduce fracture incidence but it did impact bone density and adult height [Dwan et al 2014] (full text).

An open-label trial of cyclical intravenous pamidronate (bisphosphonate) was reported by Glorieux et al [1998], and the effects of relatively long-term use in adults by Aström & Soderhall [2002] and Zeitlin et al [2003]. Falk et al [2003] replicated the study of Glorieux et al [1998] in children older than age 22 months, but did report one child with fracture non-union following treatment with pamidronate. No randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of pamidronate has been published. Bisphosphonate treatment has produced improvements in bone histomorphometry, increased bone mineral density (BMD), decreased some biochemical markers of bone resorption, and possibly reduced fracture risk. In addition, some investigators have reported decreased bone pain in young, but not older, children following treatment.

Pamidronate use is invasive and inconvenient, typically requiring intravenous infusions every three months four hours a day for three days and has real and potential complications. Recently, pamidronate has been offered even to very young children with OI, but complications including transient asymptomatic hypocalcemia [Plotkin et al 2000] and symptomatic hypocalcemia [Chien et al 2002] have been noted. The long-term consequences of lowering bone turnover in children with OI are unknown, but may include delayed bone union after fracture or osteotomy.

A randomized controlled clinical trial using the oral bisphosphonate alendronate was recently completed and the results published. Ward and colleagues found that treatment with oral alendronate for two years in children with OI significantly decreased bone turnover and increased spine areal BMD but was not associated with improved fracture outcomes [Ward et al 2011]. In a second study with a different oral bisphosphonate, Bishop and colleagues found that oral risedronate increased areal BMD and reduced first and recurrent clinical fractures in children with OI [Bishop et al 2010]. There have not been additional large placebo-controlled trials of IV bisphosphonates, and it is unlikely that additional large randomized placebo controlled studies comparing bisphosphonates with placebo to determine the impact of these agents in altering the natural history of OI will be conducted.

Zoledronic acid, a newer bisphosphonate with a longer half life, greater potency, and more convenient dosing, is being studied in children with OI. A study comparing pamidronate to zoledronic acid was completed; to date, the results have not been published.

Basilar impression. Criteria for surgical intervention are not well defined. If surgery is undertaken, it should be done in a center experienced in the procedures used.

Dental treatment. The goals are the maintenance of both primary and permanent dentition, functional bite or occlusion, optimal gingival health, and overall appearance. Pediatric dentists are the most knowledgeable about DI in children. Some consensus exists that early dental restorative coverage of the primary molars and (if possible) aesthetic coverage of the upper anterior teeth is optimal. Plastic polymers are sometimes used to coat teeth. As anxiety can be an issue with children, pre-medication for anxiolysis (e.g., nitrous oxide analgesia or midazolam) can be used for treatment in a clinic setting.

If warranted, orthodontic treatment can be initiated, but care must be taken in the use of orthodontic appliances because of the brittleness of the teeth.

Dental restorations in adults may best be done by a general dentist knowledgeable about OI or a specialist in prosthetic dentistry.

Hearing loss. Surgical repair of the middle-ear bones and creation of a prosthetic incus can improve unaided hearing.

Later hearing loss appears to have a significant sensorineural component that does not respond to middle ear surgery. Cochlear implantation has been used in a small number of individuals; outcome data are limited.

Management of lethal OI. It is appropriate to offer parents the option of allowing the infant to expire without attempting interventions such as assisted ventilation.

Other therapies. Early trials of anabolic steroids, sodium fluoride, testosterone, vitamins C and D, flavinoids, and calcitonin showed minimal or no improvement in bone formation, or too small a sample size was utilized for meaningful conclusions [reviewed in Byers & Steiner 1992].
Ventilatory support. The treatment goals for classic CCHS are to secure the airway and to use chronic ventilatory support at home to compensate for the altered/absent ventilatory responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Of note, although oxygen administration without artificial ventilation improves the PaO2 (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood) and relieves cyanosis, it is not an adequate treatment of hypoventilation.

Because individuals with CCHS may experience complete respiratory arrest or severe hypoventilation and, thus, the sequelae of hypoxemia, they require monitoring of objective measures of oxygenation (i.e., pulse oximeter) and ventilation (i.e., PETco2 monitor) continuously during sleep and at regular intervals while awake. They also require observation and continuous care, especially during all sleep, by an RN trained and experienced in ventilator management.

For each of the options listed below, the goal is to provide the affected individual with the technology optimal for her/his life style needs.

Typically, the infant needing ventilatory support 24 hours per day is most safely and effectively supported via tracheostomy and use of a home mechanical ventilator. Tracheostomy is also recommended for children and adults who require ventilator support during sleep only.

As children who require continuous ventilatory support become ambulatory, diaphragm pacing by phrenic nerve stimulation can be considered to allow for increased mobility and improved quality of life. Diaphragm pacing is not typically recommended for the young child who requires only nighttime ventilatory support because the benefits do not outweigh the risks; however, for older adolescents and young adults, this could be an appropriate consideration. Tracheal decannulation is not assured in affected individuals who use diaphragm pacing during sleep.

Diaphragm pacers for the active child with CCHS should be implanted at each phrenic nerve in the chest, ideally by thoracoscopic technique [Weese-Mayer et al 1996, Shaul et al 2002, Chin et al 2012].

Older infants, toddlers, and children with diaphragm pacers should be assessed for use of a Passy-Muir one-way speaking valve while awake, allowing for vocalization and use of the upper airway on exhalation.

Children with diaphragm pacers may be assessed for capping of the tracheostomy tube while awake and paced, thereby allowing for inspiration and exhalation via the upper airway; tracheostomy is typically still required for mechanical ventilation during sleep to avoid upper airway obstruction and physiologic compromise.

Although not yet accomplished, the older child with an entirely normal airway may be able to eliminate the need for a tracheostomy by relying on diaphragm pacing while awake and on mask ventilation while asleep; however, such a child may require interim endotracheal intubation to allow for optimal oxygenation and ventilation during acute illness that requires more aggressive ventilatory management.

Cooperative older children with CCHS who consistently require ventilatory support only while sleeping may be candidates for noninvasive support with either mask ventilation or negative-pressure ventilation; however, this must be done with careful consideration of each child’s needs. If successful, tracheal decannulation can be considered (with the caveat that in the event of severe illness, interim endotracheal intubation may be required in a pediatric intensive care unit). The child who normally requires ventilatory support during sleep only may, during an intercurrent illness, also require artificial ventilation both awake and asleep.

Note: Straus et al [2010] reported that the ventilatory response to hypercarbia seemed to improve with the use of oral contraceptives in two young women heterozygous for 20/25 and 20/26 genotypes. Ongoing studies have not confirmed this report.

Cardiac. Prolonged transient asystoles may present as syncope and/or staring spells, and may be of such significant duration (≥3.0 seconds) as to warrant placement of a cardiac pacemaker for management [Silvestri et al 2000, Gronli et al 2008].

Hirschsprung disease. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview.

Tumors of neural crest origin. Neuroblastomas are removed surgically and followed by chemotherapy if they have advanced beyond Stage 1. Other tumors of neural crest origin are treated individually by location and type, though surgical removal is typically recommended.
No treatment for OPA1 is of proven efficacy.

Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids).

For treatment of sensorineural hearing loss, see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview.

For treatment of ataxia, see Ataxia Overview.
Deafness is managed with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). The conductive hearing loss can be caused by fused and misshapen ossicles; attempts to separate the ossicles are usually unsuccessful and can lead to formation of a perilymphatic gusher.

Stridor in the neonatal period on account of laryngeal stenosis rarely requires surgical intervention and is non-progressive with growth.

Cosmetic surgery to correct the fronto-orbital deformity has been attempted in some individuals. Re-growth post surgery does not seem to occur [Kung & Sloan 1998]. Hand and foot malformations may also require surgery.

Orthopedic surgery

Surgical correction of limb bowing has not been reported.

Several individuals have had scoliosis surgically addressed, with satisfactory results.

Chest expansion surgery has been attempted in several individuals with Melnick-Needles syndrome, with only marginal clinical benefit.

Apnea prevention. Micrognathia and tracheobronchomalacia in severely affected individuals can lead to airway collapse and sleep apnea that have been successfully corrected with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) [Lan et al 2006] and mandibular distraction in the most severe instances of MNS.
Management of anomalies by a multidisciplinary team (including craniofacial surgeon, ophthalmologist, pediatrician, pediatric urologist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, speech pathologist, and clinical geneticist) to help assure coordination of care is indicated.

Treatment as needed by an ophthalmologist

Surgical intervention as needed for hypospadias

Surgical treatment of medically significant laryngotracheoesophageal (LTE) abnormalities; often tracheostomy is necessary initially to assure an adequate airway.

Surgical management for cleft lip/palate and other craniofacial anomalies; therapy for speech problems secondary to the cleft lip and palate

Neuropsychological support; many males with X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome require special educational programs.

Surgical intervention for imperforate anus

Surgical repair as needed for heart defects
Ptosis

Surgery is recommended when ptosis interferes with vision or appears to cause cervical pain secondary to constant dorsiflexion of the neck. The two types of blepharoplasty used to correct the ptosis are resection of the levator palpebrae aponeurosis and frontal suspension of the eyelids [Codere 1993].

Resection of the aponeurosis is easily done, but usually needs to be repeated once or twice [Rodrigue & Molgat 1997].

Frontal suspension of the eyelids uses a thread of muscle fascia as a sling; the fascia is inserted through the tarsal plate of the upper eyelid and the ends are attached in the frontalis muscle, which is relatively preserved in OPMD [Codere 1993]. The major advantage of frontal suspension of the eyelids is that it is permanent; however, the procedure requires general anesthesia.

Dysphagia

Food should be cut into small pieces.

Although no controlled trials have been performed [Hill et al 2004], surgical intervention for dysphagia should be considered when symptomatic dysphagia is accompanied by marked weight loss, near-fatal choking, and/or recurrent pneumonia [Duranceau et al 1983, St Guily et al 1995, Périé et al 1997, Coiffier et al 2006].

Cricopharyngeal myotomy, consisting of extramucosal section of the cricopharyngeal muscle that improves swallowing through the upper esophageal sphincter [Montgomery & Lynch 1971, Duranceau et al 1980, St Guily et al 1994, St Guily et al 1995, Duranceau 1997], is easily performed and immediately improves symptoms in most cases [Duranceau et al 1983]; however, in a very high proportion of patients progressive dysphagia recurs within years [Coiffier et al 2006].
Treatment is best provided by a clinical geneticist and a nutritionist experienced in the treatment of metabolic disease.

Care of Hyperammonemic Coma

Care should be provided by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a tertiary care center experienced in the management of individuals with OTC deficiency. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following.

Rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia

Level should be 200 μmol/L or lower even if a diagnosis has not yet been established because of the severely toxic effect of an elevated ammonia level on the brain.

The fastest method for lowering the ammonia level is hemodialysis [Tuchman 1992, McBryde et al 2004]:

A neonate should not be hemodialysed longer than four hours and should then be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

An older individual can be dialysed longer and should also be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization.

Depending on the height of the ammonia level (≤1500 μmol/L), one can also start with high flow hemofiltration methods to achieve a similarly speedy reduction of the ammonia level and then switch to regular hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level.

Note: Peritoneal dialysis is ineffective for management of acute hyperammonemia and is not recommended.

Ammonia scavenger therapy

Treatment allows an alternative pathway for the excretion of excess nitrogen (see Table 2).

Nitrogen scavenger therapy is available as an intravenous infusion of a mixture of sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate for acute management and as an oral preparation of phenylbutyrate or sodium benzoate for long-term maintenance therapy.

Citrulline is supplemented at 170 mg/kg/day or 3.8g/m2/day (enterally).

Table 2. 

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Patient Weight

Components of Infusion Solution

Loading 1 and Maintenance Dose 2, 3

Sodium phenylacetate & sodium benzoate 4

Arginine HCl injection, 10%

Sodium phenylacetate

Sodium benzoate

Arginine HCl 5

<25 kg

Undiluted: 2.5 mL (contains 250 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

2.0 mL at 100 mg/mL

250 mg/kg

250 mg/kg

200 mg/kg

≥25 kg

Undiluted: 55 mL (contains 5,500 mg of each)Dilute 1:10 4

40 mL at 100 mg/mL

5,500 mg/m2

5,500 mg/m2

4,000 mg/m2

Batshaw et al [2001]

1. 

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

2. 

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

3. 

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

4. 

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

5. 

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency

Batshaw et al [2001]

Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes

Maintenance dose given over 24 hours

If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion.

Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10.

Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h

Reversal of catabolism

Provide calories from glucose and fat, and resume protein intake (in the form of natural protein and an essential amino acid mix) no later than 24 hours after protein intake was discontinued

Note: Persons on hemodialysis or hemofiltration in particular need adequate nutrition to overcome catabolism because nutrients are removed by these procedures. Discontinuation of protein intake should not exceed 24 hours because deficiency of essential amino acids results in muscle breakdown and uncontrolled nitrogen release. Daily quantitative plasma amino acid analysis should guide nutritional therapy, the goal of which is to keep essential amino acid levels in the normal range.

Use of a high glucose infusion rate supported by continuous insulin infusion to maintain high set point normoglycemia (140 mg/dL) as needed. For a newborn in crisis the goal is to deliver at least 100 kcal/kg/day, mostly from glucose and fat.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage

Affected individuals who are intubated and sedated may not show clinical signs of seizures, which are prevalent in acute hyperammonemia. EEG surveillance is thus highly recommended to allow electroencephalographic detection and subsequent treatment of seizures.

Note: Phenobarbital is removed by dialysis and valproic acid is contraindicated in urea cycle disorders.

The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007] but has yet to be proven efficacious. A pilot study showed feasibility and safety (see Therapies Under Investigation).

No other interventions (besides lowering the ammonia level) have proven efficacy for neuroprotection in hyperammonemic coma due to a urea cycle disorder or other conditions.

Long-Term Treatment

Long-term treatment (including restriction of protein intake, use of nitrogen scavengers, and in some cases liver transplantation) is aimed at promoting growth and development and preventing hyperammonemic episodes.

Protein intake

should be restricted to the required dietary allowance (RDA) for protein or the minimum amount necessary to allow growth and prevent catabolism depending on the severity of the disease. Use of an essential amino acid mixture is generally necessary to maintain normal essential amino acid levels in those on significant protein restriction, even persons with partial OTC deficiency. The diet should also provide vitamins, minerals, and trace elements, either in a calorie-rich, protein-free formula or in the form of supplements.

Although protein restriction is the mainstay of therapy, when protein intake is too low, catabolism can cause chronic hyperammonemia just as high protein intake does. Careful monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations is necessary to detect essential amino acid deficiencies. High glutamine concentrations are interpreted as evidence of poor metabolic control and chronic hyperammonemia.

Nitrogen scavengers provide alternative routes for nitrogen disposal and allow more protein intake [Batshaw et al 2001, Berry & Steiner 2001].

Although it removes only half as much nitrogen as phenylbutyrate, oral sodium benzoate is the ammonia scavenger of choice in European countries and Australia rather than phenylbutyrate because it is felt to have fewer side effects.

Phenylbutyrate causes menstrual dysfunction and body odor, and appears to deplete branched chain amino acids; sodium benzoate causes hypokalemia due to increased renal losses of potassium [Scaglia et al 2004, Häberle et al 2012].

Recommendations for ammonia scavenger therapy:

Long-term ammonia scavenger treatment may consist of 450-600 mg/kg/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 170 mg/kg/day of L-citrulline in children <25 kg, and 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 3.8 g/m2/day of L-citrulline in individuals weighing ≥25 kg. Treatment should be accompanied by an appropriate low-protein diet [Batshaw et al 2001].

Note: (1) Citrulline offers the advantage over arginine of incorporating aspartate into the pathway thus pulling one additional nitrogen molecule into the urea cycle. (2) Sodium benzoate is being used instead of sodium phenylbutyrate in conjunction with L-citrulline. The recommended dose is ≤250 mg/kg/d in children <25 kg and a maximum of 12 g/d [Häberle et al 2012].

Glycerol phenylbutyrate, which is significantly more palatable than sodium phenylbutyrate, is another treatment option. It has the same mechanism of action as sodium phenylbutyrate.

Liver transplantation. No matter how mild OTC deficiency appears to be, stressors can at any age precipitate a hyperammonemic crisis that becomes life threatening. The fear of such an event, along with the restrictions on daily living imposed by the dietary therapy, prompt many families to consider liver transplantation even if the disease has been manageable up to that point with diet and medication.

In severe, neonatal-onset urea cycle disorders, liver transplantation remains the most effective means of preventing further hyperammonemic crises and neurodevelopmental deterioration [Leonard & McKiernan 2004]. It is typically performed by age six months.

Females and males with partial OTC deficiency can, after diagnosis, be maintained on a low-protein diet and oral ammonia scavenger treatment for life; the need for liver transplant depends on the individual and is typically considered when an affected individual is unstable and has frequent hyperammonemic episodes.

Living related donor livers are often considered for partial liver transplantation (LT) in individuals with a urea cycle disorder. The suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor has been discussed [Wong 2012]. According to Wakiya et al [2012], enzyme activity measurement in a liver biopsy sample is useful in determining the suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor. However, this approach is problematic for several reasons:

A liver biopsy sample may not adequately represent the enzyme activity in the liver of a heterozygous female. It can thus not be known whether a transplanted lobe contains enough enzyme activity to prevent symptoms in the recipient.

After partial hepatectomy the liver of the donor mother will regenerate. Since the X-chromosome inactivation pattern in the regenerated liver in the donor cannot be predicted, it is also impossible to predict whether the overall enzyme activity in the donor mother will remain adequate to prevent symptoms in her.

Likewise, the lobe that is transplanted into the recipient child will undergo changes after transplantation; thus, the enzyme activity in the donated lobe cannot be accurately determined at the time of transplantation, since additional post-transplantation changes could make the final enzyme activity in the recipient even more unpredictable.

Note: The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity to bridge the time to liver transplantation in unstable individuals with neonatal-onset disease is currently under investigation (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Instruction in small classroom settings to minimize distraction and extra support to manage executive function deficits are often required and necessary to maximize success in school.

Monotherapy or combination therapy with non-stimulant or stimulant medication is often necessary for the treatment of ADHD (at least during times of learning) [Gyato et al 2004, Krivitzky et al 2009]. However, these medications negatively affect appetite and their use warrants even closer monitoring of intake and body weight to avoid a catabolic state that could lead to hyperammonemia.

Seizure disorders. Valproic acid is contraindicated for treatment of seizures in urea cycle disorders because it can cause a hyperammonemic crisis.

Learning disability/intellectual disability. Brain damage from an initial hyperammonemic coma, frequent hyperammonemic episodes with moderate to severe hyperammonemia, and chronic hyperammonemia can lead to learning disabilities and intellectual disability. Appropriate support services are necessary to optimize intellectual outcome in these individuals.

Also see Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.
Bleeding disorder. Management by a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is highly recommended. In the US, such teams are often identified through the federally funded hemophilia treatment center network.

Severe bleeding manifestations, including intracranial hemorrhage (with or without hematoma evacuation) have been successfully managed with intravenous antifibrinolytics. Response to both epsilon-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid have been documented.

If PAI-1 activity needs to be increased prior to achieving the therapeutic steady state level of antifibrinolytics, infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) (10-15 mL/kg) can be used. Duration of use of FFP is individualized based on clinical course and response to therapy. Note: The use of FFP does not appear to be effective in pregnancy for the prevention of bleeding in women with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Iwaki et al 2012]. Fresh-frozen plasma to replace PAI-1 during pregnancy may be difficult due to the PAI-1 level achieved with plasma, the volume required, and the need for repeated infusion, all of which may be associated with risk of volume overload and/or infusion reactions [Gupta et al 2014].

Heavy menstrual bleeding can often be effectively managed with antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppression therapy (oral contraceptives).

Occasionally, patients with complete PAI-1 deficiency experience excessive menstrual bleeding or bleeding following a procedure or trauma that requires infusion of packed red blood cells to manage the acute blood loss.

Education regarding bleeding manifestations and when to seek treatment includes the following:

For females, anticipatory counseling regarding onset of menses and potential complications

Prompt reporting of injuries and planned procedures to allow early initiation of treatment to prevent significant bleeding

Cardiac fibrosis. There is currently no specific treatment for cardiac fibrosis associated with complete PAI-1 deficiency; treatment is symptomatic.
Medical treatment and management for hereditary pancreatitis are similar to those for non-hereditary pancreatitis.

Acute Pancreatitis

Treatment of acute pancreatitis usually focuses on pain management and discontinuation of smoking and alcohol use to slow the rate of progression and to decrease the likelihood of complications, including pancreatic cancer.

Pancreatic pain can result from pancreatic duct obstruction, parenchyma hypertension, pancreatic ischemia, inflammation, neuropathy, and central pain [Fasanella et al 2007, Mullady et al 2011]. Genetic factors, many of which remain unknown or not convincingly accountable, are thought to play a role in pain perception, tolerance, and response to medication.

Analgesics are offered when pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is not sufficient to control pain.

Antioxidants have been reported to improve pain control in a few individuals with hereditary pancreatitis [Perrault 1994, Uomo et al 2001] and non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Endoscopic or surgical interventions may be useful for treating obstructive pain [Clarke et al 2012].

Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation is sometimes considered in patients with severe pain and/or inflammation that cannot be controlled by other approaches [Bellin et al 2011].

Endoscopic and surgical interventions are also useful for complications such as pseudocysts, bile-duct or duodenal obstruction, infected pancreatic necrosis, and malignancy.

Obstructions or calcifications in the pancreatic ducts may be relieved by procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), in which endoscopic cannulation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct is followed by injection of radiographic dye. Decompressing/clearing of blockage decreases pain as well as the number of hospitalizations required and recurrent attacks in many persons with HP [Dever et al 2010]. Of note, patients with obstruction of a shorter duration have better outcomes than patients in whom treatment is delayed [Clarke et al 2012]. Note: Because of the risk for acute pancreatitis following ERCP, it is only recommended for obtaining brushings (for evaluation of strictures) and for therapeutic intervention, not for diagnosis.

Although a variety of surgical approaches are used for non-cancerous pancreatic disorders that cause pain or obstruction from multiple strictures, pancreatic surgery in those with hereditary pancreatitis is unlikely to stop the underlying inflammatory process. Furthermore, pancreatic surgery often reduces the number of islet cells which are essential in pancreatic endocrine function [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. Because total pancreatectomy with islet cell auto-transplantation (TPIAT) may be a future option for persons with HP, retaining as many islet cells as possible is an important consideration before proceeding with any pancreatic surgery [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2011].

Pancreatectomy. Although controversial, pancreatectomy has been performed as a last resort to improve the quality of life in those with uncontrolled pain, particularly young adults and children [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2014]. It is recommended that persons in whom pancreatectomy is being considered be referred to specialized centers. In persons with adequate endocrine pancreatic function, islet cell isolation and autotransplantation may be considered at the time of total pancreatectomy [Bellin et al 2008]. Note: Caution is needed for islet autotransplantation in older adults with longstanding chronic pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus because the number of islet cells is limited and because of the potential for transplanting malignant cells.

Total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (TPIAT) is increasingly used to manage severe manifestations of pancreatitis; however, in most cases pancreatitis can be managed without TPIAT. Thus, TPIAT should only be used as a last resort [Bellin et al 2014]. See Bellin et al [2014] for consensus guidelines (full text).

Issues to consider prior to referral for TPIAT:

The operation is irreversible.

Serious and life-threatening complications are associated with the operation (as with other major surgeries).

Pain relief is not universal.

Protection from diabetes mellitus is often incomplete and of variable duration.

Life-long, full-dose pancreatic digestive enzyme replacement therapy will be necessary.

Chronic Pancreatitis

Treatment of chronic pancreatitis focuses on improving quality of life by managing pancreatic pain, maldigestion, and diabetes mellitus.

Pain is a variable complication of recurrent and chronic inflammation and ranges from minimal to severe and disabling. Pain can result from inflammation, ischemia, obstructed pancreatic ducts, pseudocysts, and/or maldigestion [Fasanella et al 2007].

One small study from Italy suggested that vitamins and antioxidants reduced pain in hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]; two larger studies found that antioxidants helped relieve pain in idiopathic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Pain from maldigestion can be improved with pancreatic digestive enzymes [Dhanasekaran & Toskes 2010, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011].

If the main pancreatic duct is obstructed, a trial of endoscopic treatment is often used for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic reasons in determining longer-term therapy.

Surgery has been reported to be helpful by many patients; however, surgical approaches should be postponed if islet autotransplantation is being considered.

Pancreatic islet autotransplantation, available in several major centers expert in the treatment of pancreatitis, is used in an attempt to both control severe pain and delay the development of diabetes mellitus [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. It is recommended that physicians and patients work closely with expert centers since pancreatic islet autotransplantation is irreversible.

Maldigestion results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which is the failure of the pancreas to produce enough digestive enzymes to digest a meal.

Clinical measures of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency include observation of steatorrhea (fat and oil in the stool), symptoms of maldigestion (bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea), and nutritional deficiencies (e.g., fat-soluble vitamin deficiency and protein malnutrition with low albumin, prealbumin, or retinal binding protein).

Pancreatic enzyme deficiency can be identified using invasive or noninvasive testing (see review by Lieb & Draganov [2008]). The first two are most commonly used by expert centers in the United States:

Fecal elastase-1 analysis (ScheBo® Biotech AG; Giessen, Germany) is a simple and relatively inexpensive test that evaluates the amount of human elastase-1 present in the stool. It can be falsely positive with diarrhea, but can be used while an individual is taking pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. The test is insensitive for mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [Amann et al 1996].

Secretin-stimulated pancreatic bicarbonate secretion testing (ChiRhoStim®, ChiRhoClin, Inc; Burtonsville, MD) requires intubation of the duodenum and careful measurement of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion over about an hour (depending on the method). It is considered very sensitive, but only assesses pancreatic duct function.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) and its analogs (e.g., CCK-8) or receptor agonists (e.g., cerulean) have also been used to assess acinar cell function.

13C-mixed triglyceride breath test is of limited availability in the US. This test measures the ability of pancreatic lipase to digest a special substrate in the intestine after a test meal [Domínguez-Muñoz et al 2007].

72-hour fecal fat is used to demonstrate that pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements are effective in digesting fat in the intestine of persons with severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. It is usually performed in a clinical research unit over four to five days during which time the patient eats a special high-fat meal (>100 grams of fat per day) and all stool samples are collected and analyzed. It is not used for diagnosis because of the complexity and inconvenience of the test.

Sudan stain, which identifies fat in the stool, is not sensitive or specific for pancreatic insufficiency since undigested oils or fats can be present as a result of:

Their nature (e.g., mineral oil, olestra), or

Blocking of pancreatic lipase (e.g., orlistat), or

Diseases of the intestinal mucosa.

Diffusion-weighted MRI. Various “functional” tests have been advocated using abdominal imaging techniques, including secretin-stimulated MRI. Although diffusion-weighted MRI is probably better at detecting the structural changes of chronic pancreatitis than standard MRI [Akisik et al 2009], it does not measure function, and fluid volume cannot measure bicarbonate output.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy improves digestion in those with pancreatic insufficiency who have pain with eating, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), and/or diarrhea [Perrault 1994, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. Pancreatic enzymes most effectively relieve symptoms in persons with steatorrhea and in a subset of persons without steatorrhea [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

The amount of pancreatic enzyme replacement necessary depends on the diet and on the amount of residual pancreatic function (which diminishes over time). The normal amount of lipase secreted is about 750,000-1,000,000 units (USP) per meal. (Note that earlier papers used IU, and 1 IU = 3 USP units [Pongprasobchai & DiMagno 2005].) Since a minimum of 10% of normal pancreatic enzyme output is needed to digest a meal, about 70,000-80,000 USP units of lipase are required for an average-sized adult (70 kg) with total pancreatic insufficiency. The amount can be reduced for smaller persons and those with residual pancreatic exocrine function – while monitoring symptoms and nutritional parameters.

Diabetes mellitus is a common disorder and both type 1 and type 2 can occur in patients with pancreatitis by random chance.

Type 3c diabetes mellitus is caused by loss of pancreatic tissue as a result of surgery, chronic pancreatitis, or other rare pancreatic diseases [Rossi et al 2004, Cui & Andersen 2011, Andersen et al 2013]. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is important because loss of both the insulin-producing beta cells and the glucagon-producing alpha cells results in loss of counter-regulatory hormones and risk for hypoglycemia. Furthermore, it appears to be associated with increased risk for pancreatic cancer, and use of some anti-diabetic agents (e.g., the incretins) may be of concern [Andersen et al 2013].

Chronic pancreatitis is associated with a gradual loss of islet cell function. The following may be of benefit [Cui & Andersen 2011].

Monitoring for glucose intolerance

Optimizing pancreatic insulin secretion with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy via amino acid and fatty acid-stimulated release of endogenous incretins from the foregut, with the addition of anti-diabetic agents as needed

Synchronizing the entry of nutrients into the circulation with exogenous insulin therapy delivery through diet and promoting predictable early nutrient digestion and absorption with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy

Use of metformin as an oral anti-diabetic agent [Decensi et al 2010]

Routine screening of patients with chronic pancreatitis for glucose intolerance; recommendations for management and referral have recently been published [Rickels et al 2013b].

See also Rickels et al [2013a] for new consensus guidelines on management of diabetes in pancreatitis (click here for full text).
A team approach that includes specialists in ophthalmology, nephrology, medical genetics, and audiology is recommended.

Management is focused on preventing complications of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and/or vision loss resulting from retinal detachment.

Treatment of hypertension and/or vesicoureteral reflux (if present) may preserve renal function.

ESRD is treated with renal replacement therapy (i.e., dialysis and/or renal transplantation).

Low vision experts can assist with adaptive functioning of those with significant vision loss.
Clinical practice guidelines for the management of individuals with PGL/PCC have recently been published [Lenders et al 2014] (full text; registration or institutional access required).

The management of tumors in individuals with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes resembles management of sporadic tumors [Young 2011]; however, persons with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes are more likely to have multiple tumors and multifocal and/or malignant disease than are those with sporadic tumors.

For secretory tumors, treatment is directed toward containing the disease through antagonism of catecholamine excess with pharmacologic adrenergic blockade prior to surgical removal; treatment for malignant tumors is directed toward surgical removal and mitigation of the deleterious effects of metastatic spread [Eisenhofer et al 2004, Lenders et al 2005].

For nonsecretory skull base and neck paragangliomas, early detection allows for timely surgical resection and is believed to reduce operative morbidity and improve prognosis [Rinaldo et al 2004, Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For carotid body and low vagal paragangliomas, surgical resection is the treatment of choice in almost all cases. Most are benign and can be completely excised.

Note: In elderly individuals or those with clinically important comorbidities, surgery may be delayed and tumors monitored by serial imaging. Radiation therapy can also be considered in these patients [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For jugulotympanic paragangliomas, small tumors can usually be removed without difficulty; resection of larger tumors may be associated with CSF leak, meningitis, stroke, hearing loss, cranial nerve palsy, or even death. Therefore, close observation with symptomatically guided surgery may be prudent. Radiation therapy can also be considered, but potential long-term risks include malignant transformation of the primary tumor and other radiation-induced malignancies. In selected patients, stereotactic radiosurgery may also be performed [Gujrathi & Donald 2005].

For pheochromocytomas, surgery, preferably laparoscopic, is the treatment of choice [Lenders et al 2005, Young 2011].

Preoperative. The chronic and acute effects of catecholamine hypersecretion from adrenal chromaffin tumors must be reversed preoperatively. Combined α- and β- adrenergic blockade is required to control blood pressure and prevent intraoperative hypertensive crises. Using the following approach, only 7% of patients undergoing catecholamine-secreting tumor resection at the Mayo Clinic needed postoperative hemodynamic management [Young 2006, Young 2011]:

Alpha-adrenergic blockade starting at least seven to ten days preoperatively to allow for normalization of blood pressure and volume expansion. The dose of the alpha blocker is adjusted for a low normal systolic blood pressure for age.

A liberal sodium diet

Once adequate α-adrenergic blockade is achieved, initiation of β-adrenergic blockade (e.g., 3 days prior to surgery). The dose of the β-adrenergic blocker is adjusted for a target heart rate of 80 beats per minute.

Postoperative. Approximately one to two weeks after surgery, 24-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines should be measured.

If the levels are normal, resection of the biochemically active pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be considered complete.

If the levels are increased, an unresected second tumor and/or occult metastases should be suspected.

In individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants, paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas should be resected as soon as possible after tumor discovery. Prompt resection is particularly important for extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas because of their tendency to metastasize.
The mainstay of treatment is pharmacologic replacement of dopamine in the form of levodopa, which is converted to dopamine once it enters the brain. Other effective agents include dopamine agonists, inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B), anticholinergics, and amantadine.

Treatment of advanced or disabling symptoms includes neurosurgical procedures such as deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or globus pallidus.

Occupational, physical, and speech therapy are often helpful.
Treatment focuses on symptomatic therapy.

Feeding and nutrition. Supplying adequate calorie intake for affected children often entails the placement of a gastrostomy tube to allow simpler home management. No specific metabolic diet is recommended. With many children having some degree of malabsorption, elemental formulas may be better tolerated.

Hearing. Hearing aids should be used in children found to have hearing impairment. (See also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview for discussion of management issues.)

Vision. Cataract removal in early infancy to preserve vision is appropriate. Glasses should be used as needed to correct refractive errors.

Liver. Supplementation of vitamin K and other fat-soluble vitamins is recommended.

Liver dysfunction may lead to varices that respond to sclerosing therapies.

Primary bile acid therapy may improve liver function by reducing the accumulation of cholestanoic acids [Setchell et al 1992].

Neurologic function. Early intervention services should be provided.

Seizures are present in approximately one third of affected individuals. Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) may be used. No type of AED is contraindicated. Seizures may be difficult to control despite use of appropriate medication.
PCH2. Recommendations are based on PCH2A caused by TSEN54 pathogenic variant c.919G>T (p.Ala307Ser). All other subtypes are very rare.

No specific therapy is available. Treatment is symptomatic. The main problems to manage:

Irritability, often related to chorea (involuntary movements), which is refractory to treatment

Swallowing problems due to bucco-pharyngeal incoordination, managed with nutritional support by gastrostomy

Central visual impairment

Epilepsy, which is amenable to standard treatments

Physiotherapy can be helpful.

Episodic or long-term institutional care may be needed to relieve the parents.

PCH4 and PCH5. No specific therapy is available.

Respiratory support is usually given for a limited time. Weaning from respiratory support may be possible for only short periods.
Preliminary treatment guidelines have been published [Goldberg et al 2014] (full text) and continue to be refined.

The current treatment modalities primarily center on symptomatic relief of pain, hygienic grooming practices including paring of hyperkeratotic areas, treatment of secondary infection when indicated, and use of various walking aids, including wheelchairs, crutches and canes.

Palmoplantar keratoderma. Frequent grooming of the feet is essential and includes paring down the hyperkeratotic areas. However, trimming too aggressively can greatly increase pain. Some find it helpful to soak the feet prior to the paring. The surface of the skin and the instruments used should be clean to avoid infection. Blisters should be punctured with a sterile needle, the fluid drained, and the blister roof left in place until it dries and is shed away.

Special orthotics or insoles, wicking socks, ventilated footwear or cushioned footwear can help to lessen the pain although pain varies from day to day and at times can be intense even at rest.

Maintaining ideal body weight can be a factor in reducing the hyperkeratosis and pain. Limiting walking or standing can help to reduce trauma and slightly diminish the resulting blisters, callus, and pain.

Topical therapies to remove the hyperkeratosis:

Emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products are frequently used. Note: Creams and lotions containing keratolyics such as urea, lactic acid, salicylic acid, or propylene glycol have little effect, with some reporting negative side effects. Occlusive ointments are often poorly tolerated.

Oral retinoids, while reducing the keratoderma, do not affect the underlying blistering and fragility of the skin and sometimes increase the pain. Careful regulation of the dosage is necessary [Gruber et al 2012].

Nail dystrophy. Thickened nails are not typically painful, but become so when infected or traumatized. An effective tool for very thick nails and for children is a guillotine-type pet nail clipper which places no pressure on the nails. Other tools frequently used are razor or surgical blades or sanders such as a Dremel® tool.

If bacterial or fungal infections occur, systemic antibiotics or antifungals are indicated.

Particularly troublesome nails can be successfully removed surgically; however, few patients have had this procedure and in most cases – regardless of the specific pathogenic variant – the nails have re-grown.

Oral leukokeratosis. Good oral hygiene and frequent gentle brushing with a toothbrush can significantly improve the appearance of the thick, white patches on the tongue and oral mucosa; however, if done too vigorously, brushing may also traumatize the mucosa resulting in reactive hyperkeratosis.

Some individuals have reported reduction of the leukokeratosis in response to oral antibiotics, suggesting a possible bacterial contribution; more likely, improvement may be a response to the anti-inflammatory properties of the antibiotics.

Follicular hyperkeratosis. Especially bothersome for children and teens, this finding can be treated with alpha-hydroxy acid creams or lotions or keratolytic emollients; however, these treatments may not be especially effective for PC. The use of emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products is reported to be as effective.

Leukokeratosis with laryngeal involvement. Reported only in children with PC-K6a, respiratory insufficiency can on occasion become life-threatening, requiring emergent surgical intervention to re-establish the airway. The surgical procedures are repeated as necessary to maintain an open airway; however, surgical procedures to the larynx aimed at improving hoarseness should be avoided as they may tend to worsen the condition.

Cysts. Steatocystoma multiplex and other pilosebaceous cysts can be treated by incision with a number 11 blade and subsequent expression of the contents of the cyst (“incision and drainage”). Oral antibiotics may be indicated in the case of secondary infection. A culture should be obtained if infection is a consideration. Intralesional injection of steroid (e.g., triamcinolone) may reduce inflammation of the area if infection is not suspected. If necessary, cysts can be excised.

Failure to thrive. Poor feeding in infancy has been reported to be ameliorated by the use of a soft nipple with an enlarged opening to reduce the sucking required. All cases of ‘failure to thrive’ and poor feeding in infancy have been found to be type PC-K6a.
At present, no specific therapies can correct ciliary dysfunction. The therapies described in this section are empiric and aimed at treating consequences of dysfunctional cilia and sperm flagella. Little evidence supports use of specific therapeutic modalities in PCD.

Pulmonary disease. Management of individuals with PCD should include aggressive measures to enhance clearance of mucus, prevent respiratory infections, and treat bacterial infections.

Approaches to enhance mucus clearance are similar to those used in the management of cystic fibrosis, including chest percussion and postural drainage, oscillatory vest, and breathing maneuvers to facilitate clearance of distal airways. Because cough is an effective clearance mechanism, patients should be encouraged to cough and engage in activities that promote deep breathing and cough (e.g., vigorous exercise).

Routine immunizations to protect against respiratory pathogens:

Pertussis

Haemophilus influenzae type b

Pneumococcal vaccine

Annual influenza virus vaccine

Prompt institution of antibiotic therapy for bacterial infections of the airways (bronchitis, sinusitis, and otitis media) is essential for preventing irreversible damage. Sputum culture results may be used to direct appropriate choice of antimicrobial therapy. In those individuals in whom symptoms recur within days to weeks after completing a course of antibiotics, extended use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic or even prophylactic antibiotic coverage may be considered. (Consideration of chronic antibiotic therapy must include assessing the risk of selecting for multi-resistant organisms.)

For individuals with localized bronchiectasis, lobectomy has been performed in an attempt to decrease infection of the remaining lung. This approach, however, is controversial; consultants with expertise in PCD should be involved in the decision-making process.

Lung transplantation has been performed in persons with end-stage lung disease.

Nasal congestion and sinus infections. In some persons with extensive sinus disease, sinus surgery can facilitate drainage and relieve symptoms.

Chronic/recurrent ear infection. For chronic otitis media unresponsive to antibiotic therapy, PE tube placement may be helpful; however, some individuals with PCD have had offensive otorrhea following PE tube placement [Hadfield et al 1997].

Speech therapy and hearing aids may be necessary for children with hearing loss and delayed speech.

Male infertility. A couple in which the male has PCD-related infertility has the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection). In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with obstructive azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by in vitro fertilization [Sha et al 2014].

Other options are artificial insemination by donor sperm (AIDS).

Situs abnormalities. Typically, situs abnormalities do not require intervention unless physiologic dysfunction (e.g., congenital heart disease) requiring surgical intervention is present.
Treatment focuses on providing alternative energy sources, hydration, and correction of the metabolic acidosis during acute decompensation. Stimulating residual PC enzyme activity is an important goal for long-term stable metabolic status. Correction of the biochemical abnormality can reverse some symptoms, but central nervous system damage progresses regardless of treatment [DiMauro & De Vivo 1999].

“Anaplerotic therapy” is based on the concept that an energy deficit in these diseases could be improved by providing alternative substrate for both the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain for enhanced ATP production [Roe & Mochel 2006].

Citrate supplementation reduces the acidosis and provides substrate for the citric acid cycle [Ahmad et al 1999].

Aspartic acid supplementation allows the urea cycle to proceed and reduces the plasma and urine ammonia concentrations but has little effect on the neurologic disturbances as the aspartate does not enter the brain freely [Ahmad et al 1999]. Lowering the body ammonia burden may mitigate the neurologic insult.

Biotin supplementation is given to help optimize the residual PC enzyme activity but is usually of little use.

Triheptanoin, an odd-carbon triglyceride, providing a source for acetyl-CoA and anaplerotic propionyl-CoA, has been tried in one individual with biotin-unresponsive PC deficiency type B with immediate reversal (<48 h) of major hepatic failure and full correction of all biochemical abnormalities [Mochel et al 2005]. Triheptanoin provides C5-ketone bodies that can cross the blood-brain barrier, therefore providing substrates for the brain. Dietary intervention with triheptanoin is the only therapeutic approach that showed improvement of brain metabolism. However, this observation needs to be confirmed in additional patients.

Orthotopic liver transplantation has reversed the biochemical abnormalities in two patients [Nyhan et al 2002].
In the majority of individuals with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, once seizures come under control with the addition of daily supplements of pyridoxine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations), all antiepileptic drugs can be withdrawn, and seizure control will continue with daily pyridoxine monotherapy in pharmacologic doses.

Special education programs should be offered.
ADPEAF is a benign syndrome in the great majority of individuals. No clinical trials of different antiepileptic medications have been carried out, but most individuals have been readily able to achieve seizure control with medications used routinely in clinical practice (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate).
The following are appropriate:

Hearing habilitation (hearing aids as early as possible)

Consideration of cochlear implantation in individuals with severe to profound deafness

Educational programs designed for individuals with hearing impairment

Treatment of abnormal thyroid function (if present) using thyroid hormone replacement therapy
Hearing loss should be assessed and treated by a multidisciplinary team including an audiologist and otolaryngologist. Possible interventions include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss. Provision should be made for any special educational needs.

Early intervention in young children with profound hearing loss improves cognitive and language development.

Ovarian insufficiency. In adolescents presenting with primary amenorrhea, induction of puberty with incremental doses of estrogen should be undertaken in collaboration with a pediatric endocrinologist. In those in whom puberty is complete, cyclic estrogen and progesterone is administered to mimic the menstrual cycle and to trigger withdrawal bleeds. Estrogen can be administered orally or topically.

Estrogen has a long-term protective effect on bone metabolism and reduces the risk for early-onset osteoporosis. Treatment should last until at least age 50 years to reduce risks of cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis, provided there are no contraindications to estrogen replacement.

Assisted reproduction through in vitro fertilization using donor eggs is a consideration for women with Perrault syndrome. Before considering pregnancy, uterine size should be assessed.

For women at risk for ovarian insufficiency, oocyte cryopreservation can be considered if ovarian function is sufficiently well preserved to allow for successful harvesting of oocytes.
Parkinsonism. Dopaminergic therapy (particularly carbidopa/levodopa) should be considered in all individuals with significant parkinsonism. Response to levodopa is usually absent, erratic, or transient in Perry syndrome [Tsuboi et al 2002, Wider & Wszolek 2008]. However, large doses of carbidopa/levodopa (>2g) have been used successfully to reduce rigidity, tremor, and other symptoms in two individuals, one from the new British kindred [Newsway et al 2010] and one from the original Canadian family [J Stoessl, personal communication].

Hypoventilation. Ventilation support (invasive or noninvasive) may prolong life expectancy and have a significant impact on quality of life. Several persons without evidence of daytime central hypoventilation or respiratory troubles died suddenly at night most likely as a result of nocturnal hypoventilation. Therefore, ventilation support may be needed only during sleep [Wider & Wszolek, personal observation]. A bilateral diaphragmatic pacemaker may help combat respiratory insufficiency [Pretelt et al 2014].

Depression. Psychiatric manifestations may require antidepressants and psychiatric follow up to help reduce risk of suicide.

Weight loss. Careful weight follow up is indicated and high caloric intake should be considered if weight loss is present.
Eye. Potential preservation of vision in the affected eye(s) often requires surgery. For severe bilateral corneal opacification consideration of corneal transplantation (penetrating keratoplasty) is suggested before age three to six months to prevent amblyopia; in mild cases simple separation of iridocorneal adhesions may suffice [Traboulsi 2006]. A retrospective review of long-term outcome following penetrating keratoplasty before age 18 months in type I Peters' anomaly revealed a visual acuity of 20/400 or better in two thirds of treated persons, and no individuals with phthisis bulbi or visual acuity reduced to light perception only [Zaidman et al 2007]. However, a much poorer outcome with visual acuity in the better eye being ≤0.05 in half of the patients with Peters anomaly has been reported [Reichl et al 2017]. No results of similar studies in a large series of individuals with Peters plus syndrome are available.

Management of amblyopia by a pediatric ophthalmologist is recommended for optimal visual outcome.

Congenital glaucoma in association with Peters' anomaly is more difficult to treat than primary infantile glaucoma. Surgery and medical management result in adequate intraocular pressure in only 32%, and associated ophthalmologic issues such as amblyopia or postoperative complications contribute to poor visual results in long-term outcome studies [Yang et al 2004].

Development. Children diagnosed as neonates or infants should be referred to an infant development program for appropriate developmental interventions.

Other. Additional management is symptomatic and expectant.
The management of the individual with familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF) is

similar to that for interstitial idiopathic pneumonia (IIP) and depends on the

type of IIP diagnosed for each individual within the family [American

Thoracic Society 2000, American Thoracic

Society & European Respiratory Society 2002].

Lung transplantation may be a consideration in selected individuals with FPF. In

general, those who are unresponsive to therapy, have significant functional

impairment, and have no other major illnesses that would preclude

transplantation are good candidates. Five-year survival rates post transplant in

IPF have been estimated at 50%-56% [Raghu et al 2011].

Non-pharmologic treatments:

Oxygen therapy may improve exercise tolerance in patients with

hypoxemia.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is a recommended option for patients who would

benefit.

Pharmacologic interventions have not generally been shown to alter the course of

IPF. Treatments have been categorized into classes such as corticosteroids,

immunosuppressive/cytotoxic agents, and antifibrotic agents. However, at least

two antifibrotic pharmacologic interventions recently approved may be an option

for patients with FPF to slow the decline of lung function. See Therapies Under

Investigation.
No management guidelines have been published.

The majority of individuals with PFCP require no regular treatment.

In some individuals with PFCP, antihypertensive treatment and phlebotomies are initiated either:

When symptoms of the hyperviscosity syndrome are evident;

OR

At routine intervals to maintain the hematocrit at an almost normal level.

While low-dose aspirin can be considered for the prevention of thromboembolic events, no evidence of efficacy exists. Of note, at least one individual (a male age 40 yrs) died from myocardial infarction despite regularly performed phlebotomies [Prchal & Sokol 1996].

Hyperviscosity symptoms (see

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Grade 1. Consider aspirin treatment.

Grade 2. Consider aspirin treatment. In the presence of persistent symptoms perform phlebotomy. In the event of recurrent episodes consider regular phlebotomy to maintain the hematocrit in the age-respective normal range.

Grade 3. Consider regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment.

Thromboembolic events

Provide acute treatment according to established practice for the event.

Evaluate for other thrombophilic risk factors.

Start regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment in all patients.

Consider life-long anticoagulation (e.g., heparins, warfarin) when other severe additional risk factors are present or thromboembolic events have recurred.
Pharmacologic Therapy

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Although various medical therapies to alleviate symptoms and to stop or reverse the progression of liver damage have been tried, this disorder has, for the most part, been refractory to pharmacologic treatment. Standard treatments for pruritus associated with cholestasis (including choleretic agents such as phenobarbital and ursodeoxycholic acid [UDCA], cholestyramine, rifampin, antihistamines, carbamazepine, UV-B light therapy, and plasmapheresis) have been relatively ineffective in the long term. In addition, no data suggest that these therapies alter progression to end-stage liver disease.

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Some medications, including rifampicin, UDCA, and bile acid binding resin [Folvik et al 2012, Mizuochi et al 2012, Uegaki et al 2008] may have some efficacy.

Nutritional Therapy and Supplementation

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency

Special attention must be paid to nutritional therapy which includes infant formulas with significant proportions of medium chain triglycerides, which can be absorbed relatively independent of bile flow.

Nasogastric tube feeding has been useful in some infants.

Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation using special preparations of vitamin E (e.g., tocopheryl polyethylene glycol-1000 succinate) is useful in severe cholestasis. Individual supplementation may be required to insure adequate levels of fat-soluble vitamins.

Other Approaches

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Additional temporary approaches such as nasobiliary drainage [Stapelbroek et al 2006, Toros et al 2012] and extracorporeal liver support therapy [Huster et al 2001, Saich et al 2005, Walensi et al 2012] may hasten the end of an episode of cholestasis. Note: Because some of these studies involved individuals with a clinical – but not a molecular – diagnosis of BRIC, it is uncertain whether their disease was the result of pathogenic variants in ATP8B1 or in a different gene.

Interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids. Since liver damage in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is thought to result from a build-up of bile acids in the liver, surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids has been used as therapy. Such surgery can successfully reduce pruritus, with slowed or even reversed progression to hepatic fibrosis in some individuals [Felberbauer et al 2000, van Ooteghem et al 2002].

Surgical approaches reported to be successful in severe disease include [Hollands et al 1998, Ismail et al 1999, Rebhandl et al 1999, Melter et al 2000, Bustorff-Silva et al 2007, Clifton et al 2011]:

Partial external biliary diversion (PEBD) in which the gallbladder apex is anastomosed to one end of a segment of bowel while the other end is used to create a cutaneous stoma from which bile is then drained and discarded*, interrupts the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids and reduces pruritus. In some individuals it even slows or reverses progression to hepatic fibrosis. *PEBD includes cutaneous cholecystostomy, cholecysto-jejuno-cutaneostomy, cholecysto-appendico-cutaneostomy.

The internal biliary bypass approach of cholecystojejunocolic anastomosis.

Alternative surgical procedures include ileal exclusion, external diversion with a button device, and biliary diversion to the colon.

Note: Which surgical procedure is most helpful in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is unknown, although PEBD is the most commonly performed surgery. As most studies of responses to these procedures in individuals diagnosed with PFIC [Kaliciński et al 2003, Kurbegov et al 2003] have been performed in genetically uncharacterized patients, differences in response that may depend on which gene is mutated or on the severity of the functional effects of different pathogenic variants have not been assessed.

Liver transplantation (LTX). Individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency whose liver disease progresses to decompensated cirrhosis, may require LTX for long-term survival. Individuals whose disease does not respond to surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation may also be candidates for LTX.

In some individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency, LTX constitutes definitive therapy; however, in others secretory diarrhea in the absence of steatorrhea continues or worsens after LTX [Knisely 2004, Lykavieris et al 2003]. The diarrhea can be severe and may require intravenous fluid administration. Bile acid chelators [Egawa et al 2002] may ameliorate diarrhea after LTX, as they may divert bile produced by the allograft away from the native gut [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012]. Clonidine has palliated diarrhea after LTX in some patients [Kocoshis et al 2005].

Somatic growth failure can occur and may not be responsive to LTX.

Pancreatitis and steatohepatitis can occur after otherwise successful LTX [Egawa et al 2002, Lykavieris et al 2003, Miyagawa-Hayashino et al 2009, Davit-Spraul et al 2010, Hori et al 2011]. Steatohepatitis can be progressive and lead to cirrhosis. Both steatosis and diarrhea may respond when PEBD is used to divert the flow of bile from the allograft away from the native gut (which expresses functionally defective ATP8B1) [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012].

Extrahepatic manifestations. Persons with sensorineural hearing loss may require hearing aids [Stapelbroek et al 2009, Pawlikowska et al 2010].
Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation

The general therapies for nephrolithiasis benefit all individuals with PH1. Early diagnosis and initiation of conservative therapy are critical in preserving adequate renal function for as long as possible [Fargue et al 2009].

The following recommendations are universally embraced, and those listed here can all be found in the following recent reviews [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013].

Drinking large volumes of fluid (2-3 L/m2/24 hours) at regular intervals over the entire day/night prevents calcium oxalate supersaturation and is effective for all genotypes. Note that small children may require gastrostomy or nasogastric tube insertion for both feeds and fluid supplementation. Extreme care should be taken during any illness that could lead to hypovolemia or decreased oral fluid intake; patients should be advised to seek early medical attention.

Alkalinzation of urine (pH 6.2-6.8) to inhibit calcium oxalate crystallization can be targeted using oral potassium citrate at a dose of 0.1-0.15 mg/kg or 0.3-0.5 mmol/kg per day in 3-4 divided doses so long as the GFR is preserved. When the GFR is reduced or concerns about potassium levels ensue, alkalinization can be achieved with sodium citrate.

Moderate doses of pyrophosphate-containing solutions may also inhibit crystal formation, and may be dosed as 20-30 mg/kg per day of phosphate.

Drugs such as thiazides can decrease urinary calcium excretion and may inhibit stone formation, in particular in patients with PH3.

Any significant intake of vitamin C or D is to be avoided as both may promote stone formation.

Supplementation of dietary calcium (300 mg) or provision of supplemental calcium (300-500 mg) at each meal significantly has been shown to decrease urinary calcium oxalate without altering calcium excretion [Penniston & Nakada 2009]. While promising, this strategy remains unproven in individuals with PH1.

Dietary restriction of oxalate as such is not supported as being an effective therapy for patients with PH1, although the principle of careful food choices (avoid high oxalate food and drink) would seem reasonable.

Treatment of Kidney Stones

The stone type most prevalent in PH1 is calcium oxalate monohydrate or whewellite [Daudon et al 2008].

Patients must be counseled regarding the different success rates among the following three surgical modalities:

Shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) is a viable first option, but only if patients are willing to accept a lower success rate and higher rate of subsequent endoscopic surgery.

For larger, bulky stone burdens (>15 mm), percutaneous nephrolithotomy should be considered as first-line therapy.

Ureteroscopy holds a very good record for success of stone clearance with minimal complication rates and may be supplanting SWL as first-line therapy at many centers.

SWL. While SWL is often the first choice for treatment of kidney stones given its minimally invasive nature and requirement for only sedative anesthesia, its value has been questioned as the first-line treatment for stones in children with PH1 and PH2 as calcium oxalate monohydrate stones are among the hardest stones, and are thus more likely to be resistant to extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) [Williams et al 2003].

A retrospective review of 36 individuals with PH who were treated with SWL between 1987 and 2009 in Birmingham, UK revealed that those who were treated with SWL required more subsequent treatments to render them stone free [Al-Abadi & Hulton 2013]. Whereas SWL was effective in 43%, repeat SWL was required in 61%. Stones in the lower pole of the kidney or parenchymal stones did not respond as well to SWL as stones in other locations. There is good evidence that any given stone(s) should not be treated with more than two SWL sessions, particularly if no change is observed with treatment [Pace et al 2000].

Ureteroscopy. Of note, in the endourology literature the trend is toward endoscopic treatment (ureteroscopy) over SWL for all stone types because of its higher success rate, but with the recognition of a potentially higher complication rate and longer hospital stay [Aboumarzouk et al 2012, Matlaga et al 2012].

Percutaneous nephrolithotomy and ureteroscopy. In the cohort of Al-Abadi & Hulton [2013], percutaneous nephrolithotomy or ureteroscopy both resulted in better stone-free rates and lower retreatment rates. While the two latter modalities are more effective at rendering the patient stone free, they have higher rates of potential complications than SWL. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is still the best modality for large, bulky stone burdens.

Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis

AGT is a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme. Approximately 10%-30% of individuals with PH1 respond to treatment with pyridoxine (vitamin B6, precursor to PLP as defined by a greater than 30% reduction in plasma oxalate concentration or normalization of urinary oxalate excretion after a minimum of three months of maximal therapy [Watts et al 1985, Leumann & Hoppe 2001]. Of this group, only 40% show normalization and the other 60% a partial reduction in the concentration of plasma and urine oxalate [Toussaint 1998].

Monico et al [2005b] showed that the presence of the p.Gly170Arg pathogenic variant was associated with pyridoxine responsiveness — homozygotes showing normalization (urine oxalate concentration <0.5-0.7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) and compound heterozygotes demonstrating a partial reduction in plasma oxalate concentration by at least 30% of prior documented levels. The same result was seen in patients with at least one p.Phe152Ile pathogenic allele.

At present, two different approaches are used to titrate the pyridoxine dose:

A stepwise increase from initial low levels (1-2 mg/kg/day) [Bobrowski & Langman 2008]

Initial high doses to maximize oxalate removal, with subsequent reduction to establish the minimal effective dose

With either approach, doses of pyridoxine in the range of 5 mg/kg/day appear adequate in the treatment of those likely to respond, with no additional benefit expected at doses higher than 10 mg/kg/day [Monico et al 2005b, Bobrowski & Langman 2008, Hoppe et al 2009]. In adults, a dose of 500 mg is felt to remain below the toxic range. Paresthesias, a known complication of large doses of pyridoxine [Toussaint 1998], have only developed in one individual on a dose of 2.1 mg/kg/day and resolved following discontinuation of the drug.

Pyridoxal phosphate levels may be followed in individuals to ensure that adequate absorption is occurring [Harambat et al 2011].

Individuals responsive to pyridoxine should continue this therapy to decrease the burden of oxalate on the kidney, even when on hemodialysis or following successful kidney transplantation.

Note: It is recommended that all patients with PH1, even those diagnosed in ESRD and on dialysis, receive a minimum three-month trial of pyridoxine at the time of initial diagnosis [Milliner 2005].

Dialysis

The issues related to the removal of oxalate and current modalities of dialysis are quite complex. Interested readers are directed to two papers outlining the specific details of extracorporeal removal of oxalate [Cochat et al 2012, Plumb et al 2013].

In brief, despite the small size of the oxalate molecule (90 daltons), the rate of oxalate production in persons with PH1-related ESRD (4-7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) vastly outstrips the ability to remove it via conventional dialysis in adults (1-2 mmol/1.73 m2/day) or children (3-4 mmol/1.73 m2/day). The sequestration of oxalate in tissue compartments outside the vascular space makes it difficult to effectively remove it from the body. Current guidelines suggest that the intent of dialysis is to reduce and maintain the plasma oxalate level as long as possible below 30-45 µmol/L (the calcium/oxalate supersaturation threshold at which tissue deposition occurs).

While more aggressive strategies using high flux dialyzers, daily hemodialysis (HD), combined HD and peritoneal dialysis (PD), hemodialfiltration, and even charcoal perfusion have all been reported [reviewed in detail by Plumb et al 2013], the end result is that while plasma removal rates of oxalate can be achieved in the range of greater than 60%, the total body store of oxalate rebounds (in general) to a level of 80% of the predialysis levels within 24 hours of the last HD run.

A case report of one patient treated with aggressive HD (8-10 hrs, 7 nights/wk) does suggest that this level of intense dialysis allows for maintenance of the pre-dialysis oxalate levels at or just below the tissue saturation point (30-45 µmol/L), but further studies are needed before these data can be confirmed [Plumb et al 2013].

Despite the limitations of dialysis, Cochat et al [2010] have suggested six situations in which dialysis may be indicated:

When PH1 is not yet diagnosed in an individual requiring dialysis for other reasons

In a small child/infant with oxalosis awaiting liver/kidney transplantation

As a strategy to deplete body oxalate burden preceding or after liver transplantation

As an adjunct therapy to decrease oxalate burden in the presence of delayed or poor renal function after liver/kidney transplantation

In older individuals if liver/kidney transplantation is not deemed an option

In countries with no access to organ transplantation [Cochat et al 2006]

Organ Transplantation

As neither maintenance hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), nor a combination of the two clears oxalate quickly enough to prevent systemic oxalosis in an individual with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) lower than 25-30 mL/min/1.73 m2 [Thamilselvan & Khan 1998], organ transplantation is an acceptable option for disease therapy or perhaps cure [Marangella et al 2001]. Much discussion has occurred regarding the best transplantation strategy for an individual with PH1.

The following recommendations and suggested approaches to this issue are all well summarized in three current reviews of PH1 [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013]. Specific percentages and outcome numbers can be extracted from these papers.

The reader is strongly encouraged to review (and consider as current best practice level recommendations) the recently published suggestions on organ transplant of non-pyridoxine sensitive patients with PH1 from the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium [Cochat et al 2012]. These guidelines (see Table 7) also take into consideration the patient’s age (infantile form), residual GFR, and evidence of systemic oxalate deposition in extrarenal organs.

Table 7. 

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

Transplantation (Tx) Options:

Simultaneous liver - kidney

Sequential liver - kidney

Isolated kidney

Isolated liver

Hemodialysis (HD) Strategy:

Perioperative ± postoperative based on POx & GFR

Standard HD after liver Tx aiming at POx <20 µmol/L

Preoperative & perioperative

Sometimes perioperative

CKD Category / Residual GFR

CKD Category 3 (30<GFR<59)

No

No

No

Option in carefully selected patients

CKD Category 4 (15<GFR<29)

Yes

Option

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

CKD Category 5 (GFR <15)

Yes

Yes

Only if affected person is known to be B6 responsive

No

Infantile form (ESRD <2 yrs)

Yes

Yes

No

No

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement

From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities.

POx= plasma oxalate

The three organ transplantation strategies that have been considered and implemented in the past are:

Isolated kidney transplantation (restores oxalate excretion to "normal");

"Preemptive" liver transplantation before end-stage renal disease (restores AGT enzyme activity, decreases ongoing oxalate synthesis); or

Combined liver-kidney transplantation, either concurrent or sequential (reduces oxalate synthesis and increases oxalate excretion).

In almost all other situations, the current recommendations are for dual liver/kidney transplant in patients with PH1. In the majority of these situations, the only three issues to be considered are:

Order of transplant (liver/kidney and sequential vs concurrent);

Timing of transplant (at what level of renal dysfunction to consider liver transplant); and

Use of deceased vs. living donors for either or both organs.

Certainly the overall survival numbers for any version of dual transplant greatly outstrip those seen from historic results for isolated kidney transplant: adult five-year survival numbers for kidney vs dual transplant are 45% vs 67% [Bergstralh et al 2010]; those for children are 14% vs 76% [Harambat et al 2012].

Isolated liver transplant as such may be a consideration with respect to a patient with significant residual renal function (e.g., GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or above), with the presumption that decline in renal function will be arrested and only a single organ transplant required. However, in such scenarios the concerns regarding risk of liver transplant morbidity and mortality in the face of an uncertain rate of decline in renal function often delay the decision to proceed to a point at which it is clear that dual transplantation will still be required.

In general it is believed that simultaneous liver/kidney transplant is the most logical for any patient, adult or child, with CKD Category 4 or below, given the need for renal function to excrete the body burden of oxalate. That decision, however, may be mitigated by concerns for patients with CKD Category 5 or on dialysis, as they often face severe oxalate burden that can overwhelm a new renal graft following transplant and lead to graft failure caused by oxalate stones/deposition. The choice in such patients, and often in small children/infants where anatomy may preclude a simultaneous approach, is to proceed with a sequential liver transplant followed at an indeterminate time later by a single kidney transplant.

Most of the published literature still reports the majority of organs used as being from deceased donors; however, living/living related donation of a split liver graft if the recipient is small enough and/or living donor kidney is certainly a viable alternative in some situations. Note: The appropriateness of using a parent or sib who is heterozygous for a AGXT pathogenic variant as a donor remains unclear in the literature.

Finally, the importance of establishing the diagnosis of PH1 before transplantation is illustrated by two recent reports of individuals with undiagnosed late-onset PH1 who received isolated kidney transplants and subsequently experienced unexpected rapid recurrence of stones and systemic oxalosis. In both cases a diagnosis of PH1 was made post transplant [Kim et al 2005, Madiwale et al 2008].

It is also important to note that in all forms of transplantation, in particular isolated kidney, the individual must:

Be monitored closely and even dialyzed following surgery to prevent further calcium oxalate deposition in the kidney graft from mobilization of the body burden of oxalate;

Continue pyridoxine supplementation to promote excretion of the total body store of oxalate if responsiveness has been documented prior to transplantation [Marangella 1999].
Reduction of calcium oxalate supersaturation. As with PH1, conservative therapy is applied with the aim of minimizing oxalate-related renal injury and preserving renal function. Treatment of persons with preserved renal function, reviewed by Leumann & Hoppe [2001], essentially aims to improve oxalate solubility as follows:

Adequate fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 surface area/day)

Urinary inhibitors of calcium oxalate crystallization:

Orthophosphate treatment (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001] (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day)

Potassium citrate (0.1-0.15 g/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001]

Magnesium supplements (200-300 mg/day in divided doses) [Watts 1994]

Dialysis. Because the plasma oxalate concentration begins to rise when the renal clearance is less than 40 mL/min/1.73 m2, early initiation of dialysis or preemptive kidney-only transplantation is preferred. For patients in ESRD, intensive (daily) dialysis is required to maximize oxalate removal. As in PH1, the longer the individual with PH2 is on dialysis the more likely systemic oxalate deposition will occur.

Organ transplantation. Kidney transplantation alone has been used in PH2 with varying success. Careful management in the postoperative period, with attention to brisk urine output and use of calcium oxalate urinary inhibitors, minimizes the risk of allograft loss as a result of oxalate deposition.

To date, liver-kidney transplantation has not been used in PH2; however, as there is more enzyme present in the liver than in other tissues [Cregeen et al 2003], this strategy may have some merit.

Other. Pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine are used as a treatment in PH1 because of its role as cofactor for the defective enzyme. Its role in PH2 is unproven, but doses in the range of that found in typical multivitamin tablets have been used in an attempt to boost transaminases (including alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase) with glyoxylate metabolizing activity.
Reduction of urine supersaturation of calcium oxalate in order to reduce stone formation and formation of calcium oxalate crystals that can be injurious to the kidney:

Maintainance of high oral fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 BSA)

Oral administration of an inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystallization. Most patients are treated with one of these agents, which include potassium and sodium citrate [Leumann & Hoppe 2001], orthophosphate [Milliner et al 1994], or magnesium [Watts 1994]. Note: Simultaneous administration of citrate and phosphate should be done with caution due to the potential for increasing calcium phosphate supersaturation.

Avoidance of supersaturation of calcium oxalate in the blood. Although there is little experience with chronic kidney disease in PH3, a decline in GFR to less than approximately 40 mL/min/1.73m2 would be expected to result in increased plasma oxalate and the potential for systemic oxalosis (as in other forms of PH). If plasma oxalate exceeds 35-50 μmol/L dialysis or transplantation is needed to reduce the risk of multiorgan complications of calcium oxalate deposition.

Prevention of stone complications through regular monitoring (see Surveillance) and prompt attention to the following, any of which can damage kidney function:

Alleviate obstruction of the urinary tract by a stone promptly through stent placement and/or stone removal.

Maintain continuous fluid intake and urine flow before, during, and for several days after stone removal procedures.

Treat urinary tract infections promptly and thoroughly, as bacteria may cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Avoidance of acute kidney injury by avoiding intravascular volume contraction at all times. This may necessitate intravenous fluids during severe gastroenteritis or other circumstances in which oral fluid intake cannot be maintained.

Avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess. Since the source of the excess oxalate in PH3 is metabolic overproduction, little is gained by strict low oxalate diets, which in young children may compromise nutrition. Simple avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess is recommended.
Electrolyte and blood pressure abnormalities of PHAII are often corrected with thiazide diuretics. Metabolic abnormalities and hypertension generally improve within one week.

Different thiazide diuretics exist, with different dosing regimens. In general dosing is titrated to normalization of blood pressure. It is possible that dosing may need to be increased over time or that additional anti-hypertensives may be required to adequately control blood pressure.

There are no established guidelines regarding age at which treatment should begin for individuals with PHAII, but affected children who have hypertension are generally treated.
Endocrine abnormalities are treated as in the general population, with treatment for cortisol deficiency being the most urgent.

Anal atresia or stenosis should be treated in standard fashion.

Management of epiglottic abnormalities depends on the type of abnormality and extent of respiratory compromise and is the same as in the general population. Bifid epiglottis is commonly asymptomatic and most do not require treatment, unless accompanied by clear evidence of obstruction or associated with other anomalies, such as tracheal stenosis.

Seizures are treated symptomatically. Seizures associated with PHS are commonly responsive to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), whereas seizures associated with nonsyndromic hypothalamic hamartomas are more commonly refractory to AEDs.

Repair of polydactyly should be undertaken on an elective basis.

If developmental delays are detected, intervention and/or special education are indicated.

Occupational therapy for manual dexterity of the hands may be necessary as some individuals with mesoaxial polydactyly have digital malalignment.
The mucocutaneous manifestations of Cowden syndrome are rarely life threatening:

If asymptomatic, observation alone is prudent.

Cutaneous lesions should be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms (e.g., pain, deformity, increased scarring) are significant.When symptomatic, topical agents (e.g., 5-fluorouracil), curettage, cryosurgery, or laser ablation may provide only temporary relief [Hildenbrand et al 2001]. Surgical excision is sometimes complicated by cheloid formation and recurrence (often rapid) of the lesions [Eng, unpublished data].

Treatment for the benign and malignant manifestations of PHTS is the same as for their sporadic counterparts.
Patients with PIK3CA-associated segmental overgrowth benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Referral to the appropriate specialist(s) is recommended for the following findings:

Significant or lipomatous segmental overgrowth: referral to a surgeon and/or thoracic surgeon (when lipomatous overgrowth involves the trunk)

Leg-length discrepancy secondary to segmental somatic overgrowth

Cardiac abnormalities (i.e., structural cardiovascular disease and arrhythmias)

Renal abnormalities

Intellectual disability and/or difficulties with learning, behavior, or speech, or motor difficulties

Speech, swallowing, and feeding difficulties

Neurologic and neurosurgical manifestations

MCAP syndrome. Findings warranting neurosurgical referral include rapidly enlarging OFC, obstructive hydrocephalus, symptoms of raised intracranial pressure, and progressive or symptomatic cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (CBTE) or Chiari malformation. Early treatment of hydrocephalus may reduce the risk for progressive CBTE, but data are lacking to determine the most appropriate neurosurgical management. In recent years, favorable outcomes have been observed with ventriculostomy of the third ventricle (rather than insertion of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt), suggesting that the neurosurgical management of hydrocephalus in MCAP syndrome is evolving.

HMEG. Individuals are at risk for severe early-onset epilepsy, focal neurologic signs such as hemiparesis, and severe intellectual disability. Epilepsy and intellectual disability may be improved by hemispherectomy [Di Rocco et al 2006, Kwan et al 2008].

Individuals with HMEG and MCAP syndrome with polymicrogyria (PMG) are at increased risk for epilepsy; thus, long-term neurologic follow up is warranted, and many require long-term antiepileptic treatment [Mirzaa et al 2012].

Somatic overgrowth, vascular, lymphatic and musculoskeletal manifestations. CLOVES syndrome and fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH) are associated with severe focal overgrowth, vascular malformations, and orthopedic complications with significant morbidities. Prompt diagnosis (by MR/CT and angiography) is warranted. Most individuals undergo (often several) debulking or orthopedic procedures with significant ensuing complications (see Surveillance).

The following are the main treatment considerations in CLOVES syndrome:

The characteristic truncal lipomatous mass infiltrates surrounding tissues and often requires surgical excision. Severe scoliosis, large truncal mass, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems of the feet and hands, and central phlebectasia/thromboembolism are examples of significant morbidities that need active or prophylactic medical intervention.

Paraspinal and intraspinal extension have significant risk for compression of the cord, thecal sac, and nerve roots, with resultant major neurologic deficits, warranting prompt diagnosis and multidisciplinary care [Alomari 2009a].

Given the risk for thromboembolism in CLOVES syndrome, appropriate prophylactic measures including anticoagulation and caval filtration, particularly in the perioperative period, are recommended. Central and thoracic phlebectasia in individuals with CLOVES syndrome should be considered an indication for placement of a superior vena cava (SVC) filter.

FH is associated with severe progressive overgrowth of fibrous and adipose tissues. While the severity and natural history varied among reported individuals, thorough surgical and orthopedic evaluations are warranted. Most individuals (8/10) underwent extensive debulking or orthopedic procedures.
To date, the treatment of PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease and no specific guidelines or recommendations have been developed.

Individuals with PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease have a mild form of Parkinson disease that responds well to levodopa and to other dopaminergic agonists.

Response is usually significant and is sustained for low doses of levodopa even after long disease duration. The response may be even better in PINK1 type of young-onset Parkinson disease than in idiopathic Parkinson disease [Valente & Ferraris 2010].

The major problem is the early occurrence of severe levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and fluctuations. Fluctuations can be reduced by the combination of dopamine therapies with low doses of levodopa.

The use of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in PINK1 type Parkinson disease has been described [Moro et al 2008, Johansen et al 2011].
The following are appropriate:

Developmental. Early infant developmental services (physical, occupational, speech therapies):

Infant feeding assessment to address early hypotonia as needed

Special education services to address delays with focus on life skills

Behavioral modification for self-injurious behavior or anxiety

Pulmonary. Some reports indicate that antiepileptic medications control seizures while leaving the unusual respiratory patterns unchanged Peippo et al [2006] and others have noted some decrease in the frequency of the episodes with the use of anticonvulsants [Takano et al 2010]. Improvement of an abnormal respiratory pattern after treatment with sodium valproate has been reported in a person with PTHS with frequent apneic episodes associated with hypoxemia [Maini et al 2012]. A recent study in two patients with PTHS demonstrated that daily treatment with acetazolamide resulted in decreased frequency and duration of hyperventilatory and apneic episodes and improved oxygen saturation [Verhulst et al 2012].

Neurologic. Treatment of epilepsy appropriate to type of seizure and individualized to the patient

Ophthalmologic. Eyeglasses or surgery as needed for amblyopia

Gastrointestinal. In most patients, regular use of high-fiber diet and/or laxative regimen to address constipation

Musculoskeletal: Orthotics for abnormal foot position to aid in ambulation. Orthopedic treatment of scoliosis as indicated.

Other. Standard care for other medical issues
Polyps. Once the burden of gastrointestinal polyps has been established by endoscopy and imaging studies, prophylactic polypectomy of polyps >1cm is performed. This strategy has two goals:

To decrease the sequelae of large polyps including bleeding, anemia, obstruction, and intussusception

To reduce the risk for cancer by the malignant transformation of PJS-type polyps

The luminal polyp-related complications arise in childhood whereas cancer in PJS is typically seen in adulthood. Some evidence indicates that routine endoscopy and intraoperative enteroscopy with polypectomy decreases the frequency of emerging laparotomy and bowel loss [Pennazio & Rossini 2000, Edwards et al 2003, Oncel et al 2004]. From St. Mark’s PJS registry of 51 affected individuals who underwent surveillance endoscopies, none had emergency surgical interventions and no GI luminal cancers were diagnosed [Latchford et al 2011]. In surveillance endoscopies in affected individuals by age 18 years, 17/28 had large gastroduodenal or colonic polyps (>1 cm). These studies demonstrate that endoscopic surveillance and polypectomy in PJS is safe.

Distal small-bowel polyps that are beyond the reach of conventional endoscopy have been difficult to manage. Until recently, barium contrast upper-gastrointestinal series with a small-bowel follow through has been recommended. However, recent advances allow better diagnosis and eradication of small-bowel polyps, oftentimes without laparotomy and with a decrease in the radiation burden related to frequent surveillance:

Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) allows for better visualization of the small-bowel polyps than barium x-rays and is recommended as a first-line surveillance procedure. In children, the capsule can be deployed in the duodenum after upper endoscopy [Parsi & Burke 2004, Burke et al 2005, Mata et al 2005, Schulmann et al 2005]. See Note.

Magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) is a reliable procedure for the detection of larger small-bowel polyps with similar sensitivity to VCE and avoids the radiation exposure of CT enterography [Caspari et al 2004, Gupta et al 2010]. CT and MR enteroclysis are alternative procedures but are less well tolerated. See Note.

Balloon-assisted enteroscopy can remove distal small-bowel polyps with or without laparotomy [Ohmiya et al 2005, Ross et al 2006, Gao et al 2010]. Safety in those with PJS has been demonstrated in a few studies. Balloon-assisted enteroscopy and polypectomy should decrease the need for intraoperative enteroscopy or enterotomy, and should be reserved for affected individuals with many large and distal small-bowel polyps.

Note: (1) VCE was preferred by individuals and detected more large polyps than MRE [Urquhart et al 2014]. (2) In three individuals in a study by Gupta et al [2010], MRE detected polyps >15 mm that were not detected by VCE.

Intussusception should be treated in a standard manner.

Malignancies should be treated in a standard manner. Conservative management of gonadal tumors in males and females is appropriate.
A consensus clinical management guideline for PKAN is available to provide management information at a detailed level [Hogarth et al 2017]. Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms.

Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be profoundly debilitating and distressing to the affected individual and caregivers. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following:

Intramuscular botulinum toxin

Oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, and clonazepam: the first-line drugs most commonly effective in PKAN

Second-line drugs including clonidine, gabapentin, tetrabenazine, and pregabalin

Intrathecal and intraventricular baclofen

Deep brain stimulation, used clinically with increasing frequency and some evidence for initial benefit, although it may not be sustained as disease progresses [Lim et al 2012, Garcia-Ruiz et al 2015, Hogarth et al 2017]

Ablative pallidotomy or thalmotomy. These ablative procedures have mainly been replaced by DBS, but in certain individuals may still be useful [Dwarakanath et al 2014].

Urgent medical treatment (often hospitalization) for status dystonicus (dystonic storm), which is a common occurrence. The PKAN consensus guideline provides detailed information about approach and management of dystonic storms [Hogarth et al 2017].

Physical and occupational therapy as indicated, particularly for those who are only mildly symptomatic. Therapies to maintain normal joint mobility for as long as possible may be useful.

Referral for adaptive aids as needed (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities)

Speech therapy and/or assistive communication devices for PKAN-related dysarthria and speech delay

Other manifestations

Treatment and interventions for retinopathy as per ophthalmology

Referral to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the blind (if retinopathy is present), and special education
Current therapy for ADPKD is directed toward reducing morbidity and mortality from the renal and extrarenal complications of the disease.

Hypertension. The antihypertensive agent(s) of choice in ADPKD have not been clearly established. However, because of the role of the renin angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of hypertension in ADPKD, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists may be superior to other agents in individuals with preserved renal function. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers increase renal blood flow, have a low side-effect profile, and may reduce vascular smooth muscle proliferation and development of atherosclerosis:

The administration of ACE inhibitors, but not the administration of calcium channel blockers, has been shown to reduce microalbuminuria in individuals with ADPKD [Ecder & Schrier 2001].

In an historic, non-randomized study, the administration of ACE inhibitors without diuretics was found to result in a lower rate of decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and less proteinuria than the administration of a diuretic without an ACE inhibitor for similar control of blood pressure [Ecder & Schrier 2001].

Another study found no renal protective effect of an ACE inhibitor over a β-blocker [van Dijk et al 2003]; another study found that although more rigorous blood pressure control did not preserve renal function, it did lead to a greater decrease in left ventricular mass [Schrier et al 2002].

A long-term follow-up of the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study showed that individuals with ADPKD randomized to a low blood pressure target (mean arterial pressure [MAP] <92 mmHg) experienced significantly less ESRD and combined ESRD/death than those randomized to the usual blood pressure target (MAP <107 mmHg) [Sarnak et al 2005].

The recent HALT PKD trial did not show a benefit of the addition of an angiotensin II-receptor blocker (ARB) to an ACE inhibitor in terms of preserving renal function [Torres et al 2014]. In the same trial, a lower blood pressure target (95-110/60-75 mm Hg) compared to the standard target (120-130/70-80 mm Hg) in younger affected individuals with preserved renal function was associated with a slower increase in kidney volume but no overall change in the decline in renal function, as measured by eGFR.

Flank pain. After excluding causes of flank pain that may require intervention, such as infection, stone, or tumor, an initial conservative approach to pain management is best:

Nonopioid agents are preferred and care should be taken to avoid long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesic and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Tricyclic antidepressants are helpful, as in all chronic pain syndromes, and are well tolerated.

Narcotic analgesics should be reserved for the management of acute episodes, as chronic use can lead to physical and psychological dependence.

Splanchnic nerve blockade with local anesthetics or steroids can result in pain relief beyond the duration of the local anesthetic.

When conservative measures fail, therapy can be directed toward cyst decompression with cyst aspiration and sclerosis:

Cyst aspiration, under ultrasound or CT guidance, is a relatively simple procedure carried out routinely by interventional radiologists. Complications from aspiration of centrally located cysts are more common, and the morbidity of the procedure is proportional to the number of cysts treated. Cyst aspiration can help to establish causality between a cyst and the presence of pain, but seldom provides long-lasting relief because of fluid reaccumulation.

Sclerosing agents, such as 95% ethanol or acidic solutions of minocycline, are commonly used to prevent the reaccumulation of cyst fluid. Good results have been obtained with 95% ethanol, achieving a success rate of 90% in benign renal cysts. Minor complications include: microhematuria, localized pain, transient fever, and systemic absorption of the alcohol. More serious complications such as pneumothorax, perirenal hematoma, arteriovenous fistula, urinoma, and infection are rare.

In individuals with many cysts contributing to pain, laparoscopic or surgical cyst fenestration through lumbotomy or flank incision, renal denervation, and (in those who have reached ESRD) nephrectomy may be of benefit:

Surgical decompression was effective in 80% to 90% of individuals for one year; 62% to 77% had sustained pain relief for longer than two years. Surgical intervention neither accelerates the decline in renal function nor preserves remaining renal function.

Laparoscopic fenestration has been shown to be as effective as open surgical fenestration in short-term follow-up for individuals with limited disease and has a shorter, less complicated recovery period than open surgery.

Renal denervation via a thoracoscopic approach was successful in one affected individual [Chapuis et al 2004]. Recently, percutaneous transluminal catheter-based denervation was shown to be effective for the treatment of kidney pain in single case reports [Shetty et al 2013, Casteleijn et al 2014 ].

Laparoscopic and retroperitonoscopic nephrectomy and arterial embolization have been used to treat symptomatic polycystic kidneys in individuals with ADPKD who have ESRD [Ubara et al 1999, Dunn et al 2000].

Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy may be preferable to standard laparoscopic nephrectomy because of shorter operating time and lower morbidity [Lee & Clayman 2004].

Cyst hemorrhage and gross hematuria. Episodes of cyst hemorrhage or of gross hematuria are usually self-limited and respond well to conservative management with bed rest, analgesics, and adequate hydration to prevent development of obstructing clots.

Rarely, episodes of bleeding are severe with extensive subcapsular or retroperitoneal hematoma, significant drop in hematocrit, and hemodynamic instability. In such cases, individuals require hospitalization, transfusion, and investigation by CT or angiography. In cases of unusually severe or persistent hemorrhage, segmental arterial embolization can be successful. If not, surgery may be required to control bleeding.

Gross hematuria persisting more than one week or developing for the first time in an individual older than age 50 years requires thorough investigation.

Nephrolithiasis. Small uric acid stones can be missed on nephrotomography and are best detected by CT. CT should be obtained before and after the administration of contrast material to confirm the localization within the collecting system and to differentiate calculi from parenchymal calcifications. Dual absorption CT now facilitates the differentiation of uric acid stones from calcium-containing stones.

Excretory urography detects precaliceal tubular ectasia in 15% of individuals with ADPKD.

The treatment of nephrolithiasis in individuals with ADPKD is the same as that for individuals without ADPKD:

High fluid intake and potassium citrate are the treatment of choice in uric acid lithiasis, hypocitric calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, and distal acidification defects.

Medical dissolution of uric acid stones can usually be achieved by a program of high fluid intake, urine alkalinization (to maintain a pH of 6-6.5), and administration of allopurinol.

Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy and percutaneous nephrostolithotomy can be successful in individuals with ADPKD without excessive complications [Umbreit et al 2010].

Cyst infection. If cyst infection is suspected, diagnostic imaging should be undertaken to assist in the diagnosis:

CT and MRI are sensitive for detecting complicated cysts and provide anatomic definition, but the findings are not specific for infection.

Nuclear imaging, especially indium-labeled white cell scanning, is useful, but false negative and false positive results are possible.

18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scanning is the most sensitive method to detect an infected cyst, but it is expensive, not readily available and may not be reimbursed by insurance companies [Sallée et al 2009].

In the appropriate clinical setting of fever, flank pain, and suggestive diagnostic imaging, cyst aspiration under ultrasound or CT guidance should be undertaken to culture the organism and assist in selection of antimicrobial therapy, particularly if blood and urine cultures are negative [Torres et al 2007a].

Cyst infection is often difficult to treat. It has a high treatment failure rate despite prolonged therapy with an antibiotic to which the organism is susceptible. Treatment failure results from the inability of certain antibiotics to penetrate the cyst epithelium successfully and achieve therapeutic concentrations within the cyst. The epithelium that lines gradient cysts has functional and ultrastructural characteristics of the distal tubule epithelium. Penetration is via tight junctions, allowing only lipid-soluble agent access. Non-gradient cysts, which are more common, allow solute access via diffusion. However, kinetic studies indicate that water-soluble agents penetrate non-gradient cysts slowly and irregularly, resulting in unreliable drug concentrations within the cysts. Lipophilic agents have been shown to penetrate both gradient and non-gradient cysts equally and reliably and have a pKa that allows for favorable electrochemical gradients into acidic cyst fluids.

Therapeutic agents of choice include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones. Clindamycin, vancomycin, and metronidazole are also able to penetrate cysts well. Chloramphenicol has shown therapeutic efficacy in otherwise refractory disease.

If fever persists after one to two weeks of appropriate antimicrobial therapy, percutaneous or surgical drainage of infected cysts should be undertaken. If fever recurs after discontinuation of antibiotics, complicating features such as obstruction, perinephric abscess, or stones should be considered and treated appropriately. If complicating features are not identified, the course of previously effective therapy should be extended; several months may be required to completely eradicate the infection.

Malignancy. The diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in a polycystic kidney requires a high index of suspicion. MRI with gadolinium enhancement is particularly helpful to detect atypical solid or cystic masses, tumor thrombi, and regional lymphadenopathy.

The diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma in a polycystic kidney is equally challenging and usually requires retrograde pyelography or ureteroscopy.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD). Therapeutic interventions aimed at slowing the progression of ESRD in ADPKD include control of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, dietary protein restriction, control of acidosis, and prevention of hyperphosphatemia.

Animal data support the role of dietary protein restriction and careful control of hypertension in slowing the rate of renal failure in PKD [Qian et al 2001]. However, the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) trial showed no beneficial effect on renal function of strict (compared with standard) blood pressure control and only a slight (borderline significant) beneficial effect of a very low protein diet. Because these interventions were introduced at a late state of the disease (GFR 13-55 mL/min per 1.73 m2), the results do not exclude a beneficial effect of interventions introduced at an earlier stage of the disease.

Actuarial data indicate that individuals with ADPKD do better on dialysis than individuals with ESRD from other causes. Females appear to do better than males. The reason for this improved outcome is unclear but may relate to better-maintained hemoglobin levels through higher endogenous erythropoietin production. Rarely, hemodialysis can be complicated by intradialytic hypotension if the inferior vena cava is compressed by a medially located renal cyst. Despite renal size, peritoneal dialysis can usually be performed in individuals with ADPKD; although these individuals are at increased risk for inguinal and umbilical hernias, which require surgical repair.

There is no difference in patient or graft survival between individuals with ADPKD and those with ESRD caused by other conditions. Living donor transplantation for ADPKD, which requires exclusion of ADPKD in the donor (see Testing Strategy), has increased in the last two decades. Nephrectomy of the native kidneys is reserved for affected individuals with a history of infected cysts, frequent bleeding, severe hypertension, or massive renal enlargement. There is no consensus on the optimal timing of nephrectomy; whether nephrectomy is performed before, at, or following transplantation depends to some extent on the indication for the nephrectomy and other patient-specific considerations [Lucas et al 2010, Kirkman et al 2011]. Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy is increasingly being used [Lee & Clayman 2004]. Complications after transplantation are no greater than in the general population. Complications directly related to ADPKD are rare. One study has suggested an increased risk for thromboembolic complications [Jacquet et al 2011]. Whether individuals with ADPKD are at increased risk for new-onset diabetes mellitus after transplantation (NODAT) is questionable [Ruderman et al 2012].

Polycystic liver disease. Most individuals with polycystic liver disease have no symptoms and require no treatment.

The treatment of symptomatic disease includes the avoidance of estrogens and caffeine and the use of H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors for symptomatic relief.

Severe symptoms may require percutaneous aspiration and sclerosis, laparoscopic fenestration, combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration, liver transplantation, or selective hepatic artery embolization. Any of these interventions should be tailored to the individual [Torres 2007, Drenth et al 2010].

Cyst aspiration and sclerosis with alcohol or minocyline is the treatment of choice for symptoms caused by one or a small number of dominant cysts. Before instillation of the sclerosing agent, a contrast medium is injected into the cyst to evaluate for communication with the bile ducts. The success rate of this procedure (70% after a single treatment and an additional 20% after repeated treatment) is inversely correlated with the size of the cyst(s).

Laparoscopic fenestration of hepatic cysts, a less commonly performed procedure, is complicated by transient ascites in 40% of individuals; and the results are often short-lived. Thus, laparoscopic cyst fenestration is indicated only for the treatment of disproportionally large cysts as an alternative to percutaneous sclerosis.

Neither percutaneous sclerosis nor laparoscopic fenestration is helpful in individuals with large polycystic livers with many small- and medium-sized cysts. In most individuals, part of the liver is spared, allowing treatment by combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration. Because the surgery and recovery can be difficult, with complications such as transient ascites and bile leaks and a perioperative mortality of 2.5%, it should be performed only in specialized centers [Schnelldorfer et al 2009]. The surgery has good long-term results in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease and is often preferable to liver transplantation, which is reserved for those individuals for whom liver resection is not feasible or for those individuals in whom liver function is impaired.

Because individuals with severe polycystic liver disease have mostly normal liver function, their MELD (model for end-stage liver disease) scores are low, placing them at a disadvantage for organ allocation. For highly selected individuals in this group, caval sparing hepatectomy and subsequent living donor liver transplantation could provide a potential alternative [Mekeel et al 2008].

Selective hepatic artery embolization can be considered for highly symptomatic patients who are not surgical candidates [Takei et al 2007].

Ruptured or symptomatic intracranial aneurysm. The mainstay of therapy is surgical clipping of the ruptured aneurysm at its neck.

Asymptomatic aneurysms

Those aneurysms measuring 5.0 mm or smaller in diameter and diagnosed by presymptomatic screening can be observed and followed initially at yearly intervals. If the size increases, surgery is indicated.

The management of aneurysms 6.0-9.0 mm in size remains controversial.

Surgical intervention is usually indicated for aneurysms larger than 10.0 mm in diameter.

For individuals with high surgical risk or with technically difficult-to-manage lesions, endovascular treatment with detachable platinum coils may be indicated. Endovascular treatment seems to be associated with fewer complications than clipping, but the long-term efficacy of this method is as yet unproven [Pirson et al 2002].

Aortic dissection. When the aortic root diameter reaches 55 mm to 60 mm, replacement of the aorta is indicated.
(See recent comprehensive reviews including Sweeney & Avner [2011], Telega et al [2013], Guay-Woodford et al [2014], Sweeney & Avner [2014], and Sweeney et al [2016] for detailed management strategies.)

Initial management of affected infants centers on stabilization of respiratory function.

Respiratory

Mechanical ventilation may be necessary to treat pulmonary hypoplasia (characterized by inability to oxygenate despite jet or oscillating ventilation with 100% oxygen) or hypoventilation from massively enlarged kidneys (characterized by increased pCO2 despite adequate oxygenation). It may also be required in the first 48-72 hours postnatally to determine whether pulmonary hypoplasia or reversible pulmonary disease is present.

When massively enlarged kidneys prevent diaphragmatic excursion and/or cause severe feeding intolerance, some have advocated unilateral or bilateral nephrectomy [Shukla et al 2004].

Experience suggests that unilateral nephrectomy may be of limited value, since the contralateral kidney often shows marked enlargement following unilateral nephrectomy [Author, unpublished observations]

Bilateral nephrectomy with placement of a peritoneal dialysis catheter followed by a short period of hemodialysis often allows the peritoneum to heal in preparation for chronic peritoneal dialysis [Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney et al 2016]. The timing of these procedures, as well as potential coordination with a preemptive living donor transplantation, will be dictated by factors such as the age, size, and clinical status of the patient as well as living donor availability.

Renal

Neonates with oliguria or anuria may require peritoneal dialysis within the first days of life.

Hyponatremia is common and should be treated depending on the individual's volume status.

Early recognition and treatment of dehydration is critical. Supplemental feedings or fluid therapy via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes may be required.

Hypertension generally responds well to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor inhibitors (ARBs), which are the treatments of choice. In many cases, hypertension may be severe enough to require multiple antihypertensive medications.

Affected children with significant chronic kidney disease should be treated with all modalities of modern pediatric end-stage renal disease (ESRD) therapy, including dialysis and kidney transplantation.

Anemia in children with Stage III or higher chronic kidney disease may require treatment with iron supplementation and erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESAs).

Liver. Treatment of biliary dysfunction focuses on: (1) malabsorption of nutrients and fat-soluble vitamins; and (2) the risk for ascending cholangitis.

Administration of synthetic bile acids

The presence of poor serum levels of fat-soluble vitamins (K, D, E, A) or poor weight gain despite adequate caloric supplementation may indicate the need for bile acid supplementation.

Clinical suspicion of bile acid deficiency may be verified by measurement of serum bile acids.

Administration of synthetic bile acids is indicated if there is evidence of significant intrahepatic ductal dilation (Caroli syndrome), which can be appreciated by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).

Bacterial cholangitis, often an underdiagnosed complication in those with hepatic involvement, may present as recurrent bacteremia with enteric pathogens without typical clinical features of cholangitis. Persistent fevers, particularly with right upper-quadrant pain, should be evaluated and treated aggressively.

Alkaline phosphatase and γGTP may be elevated during episodes of acute ascending cholangitis and may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis [Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016].

Esophageal varices should be treated with endoscopic banding or sclerotherapy as indicated.

Portosystemic shunting may be necessary to treat progressive portal hypertension; however, Tsimaratos et al [2000] reported recurrent hepatic encephalopathy and death following portocaval shunting in two individuals with ARPKD who had ESRD.

In severe instances of intractable portal hypertension, or severe dual renal and hepatobiliary disease, hepatic or dual renal-hepatic transplantation has become a viable option [Telega et al 2013, Chandar et al 2015].

Dual-organ transplantation. Successful simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation in individuals with ARPKD has been reported in a small case series [Harps et al 2011, Chapal et al 2012, Brinkert et al 2013, Telega et al 2013].

Previously, only a small percent of individuals with ARPKD, particularly those diagnosed later in life, have required liver transplantation. However, with improved survival and advances in renal replacement therapy, it is likely that the number of individuals with ARPKD requiring liver transplantation may increase.

An algorithm for evaluating the risk benefit of dual organ transplant in individuals with ARPKD who have both severe kidney and liver disease has been proposed to assist clinicians in the decision-making process [Telega et al 2013]. See Table 2 (pdf) and Figure 1.

Feeding and growth

Feeding intolerance and growth failure, even in the absence of renal insufficiency, can be significant, especially in young infants. Aggressive nutritional support, which may include supplemental feedings via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes, is often required to optimize weight gain and growth [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Hartung & Guay-Woodford 2014, Sweeney & Avner 2014].

Children with growth failure may benefit from treatment with growth hormone [Lilova et al 2003]. The optimal age for starting growth hormone therapy depends on the growth velocity of the child; studies suggest that treatment is beneficial in children with chronic kidney disease who are age two years or younger [Seikaly et al 2007, Schaeffer 2016].
Attack frequency is reduced or prevented by the anticonvulsants phenytoin or carbamezepine, typically at lower doses than are used to treat epilepsy [Demirkiran & Jankovic 1995, McGrath & Dure 2003].

Other anticonvulsants proven to be effective include oxcarbazepine [Tsao 2004], ethosuximide [Guerrini et al 2002], lamotrigine [Pereira et al 2000], and gabapentin [Chudnow et al 1997].
Treatment for affected individuals of all ages can be difficult and is enhanced with the teaching and support of an experienced healthcare team consisting of physicians, nutritionists, genetic counselors, social workers, nurses, and psychologists. See ACMG Management Guidelines for PKU.

Treatment of Classic PKU

Restriction of dietary phenylalanine. The generally accepted goal of treatment for individuals with PAH deficiency is normalization of the concentrations of Phe (phenylalanine) and Tyr (tyrosine) in the blood and thus prevention of the cognitive deficits that are attributable to this disorder [Burgard et al 1999].

Genetic Metabolic Dieticians International (GMDI) has PKU Nutrition Management Guidelines that are continually updated.

Any provider managing the diet of an individual with PAH deficiency should use these resources and work closely with a dietician knowledgeable in the care and management of a person with this diagnosis.

Singh et al [2014] provide the following dietary recommendations:

Maintain blood Phe between 120 and 360 μmol/L throughout the life span.

Monitor blood Phe most frequently during times of increased anabolism: infancy, childhood, and pregnancy. The NIH recommends measurement of blood phenylalanine levels on a weekly basis for the first year of life, on a biweekly basis until age 13 years, and on a monthly basis thereafter [Camp et al 2014]. Care must be taken to avoid long periods of low blood Phe concentration, which is also harmful to brain development and function.

Monitor blood Phe consistently, preferably two to three hours after eating.

Evaluate individual nutritional needs, ability to adhere to recommendations, and access to treatment options when choosing appropriate interventions (medical food, modified low-protein food, large neutral amino acids [LNAAs], and sapropterin) to achieve blood PHE in the target range.

Include breast milk [Vockley et al 2014] and/or infant formula as sources of Phe in the diet of an infant with PAH deficiency.

Recommend that medical food be consumed throughout the day for optimal metabolic control.

Track Phe intake by any of several methods, including counting milligrams or exchanges of PHE or grams of protein.

Maintain blood Tyr in the normal range.

Maintain other nutrients and micronutrients at RDA levels, including calcium, vitamin D, iron, and B vitamins. Due to the protein-restricted dietary components, micronutrients found in animal products must be carefully monitored and supplemented, as needed.

Provide counseling and education specific to the needs of the individual with PAH deficiency (and/or his/her caregivers) to help maintain appropriate blood Phe throughout the life span.

Sapropterin (Kuvan®). BH4 responsiveness, as determined by a 30% decrease in Phe plasma levels on plasma amino acid analysis, is determined based on response to a pharmacologic dose of BH4 (10-20 mg/kg per day):

All affected individuals except those with two trans pathogenic null variants should ideally undergo a trial with sapropterin supplementation. The trial needs to be conducted when Phe levels have been stable and dietary intake can remain unchanged, so that any change in Phe level is the result of the medication; for some affected individuals it is a challenge to conduct a trial of therapy. The most common dose given is 20 mg/kg per day. Lower trial doses may lead to false negative responsiveness results [Vockley et al 2014].

Affected individuals who are responsive should continue this medication with compensatory dietary Phe liberalization, as needed, to maintain a safe Phe level between 120 and 360 μmol/L.

The majority of individuals with mild or moderate PKU may be responsive to sapropterin while up to 10% of individuals with classic PKU show a response [Bernegger & Blau 2002, Pérez-Dueñas et al 2004, Zurflüh et al 2006]. Reviewed in Ho & Christodoulou [2014].

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of sapropterin.

Large neutral amino acids (LNAA) transporters. LNAA may decrease the plasma Phe concentration in affected adolescents and adults; however, it should not be used in women of child-bearing age (see Pregnancy Management).

Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of LNAA

Treatment for Non-Classic Hyperphenylalaninemia

While debate continues, many experts believe that dietary treatment is unnecessary for many of the individuals in this class.

Individuals with Phe levels >600 μmol/L (10 mg/dL) are treated by most centers, in recognition of the finding of head MRI changes and neuropsychological findings in at least some affected individuals.

Treatment in individuals with Phe levels consistently <600 μmol/L but >360 μmol/L remains controversial [Weglage et al 2001, Hanley 2011, van Spronsen 2011].

Thirty-one individuals with PAH deficiency who were never treated and whose plasma Phe concentrations did not exceed 600 µmol/L had normal cognitive neuropsychological development.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH (PKU) state: “…treatment of infants with sustained blood Phe levels >360 µmol/L is recommended following appropriate review of the controversy with patients.”

If the Phe levels remain between 120 and 360 µmol/L, treatment is not recommended; however, children should be followed for plasma Phe levels closely during the first two years of life, then on an annual or biennial basis [Vockley et al 2014].

Care should be taken so that women of childbearing age in this group receive proper counseling about the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal plasma Phe concentration (i.e., ‘maternal HPA/PKU’) on the developing fetus [Weglage et al 2001] (see Pregnancy Management).

Other

Neuropsychiatric testing may be considered to identify learning differences. Referral to appropriate developmental services is indicated to optimize developmental outcome.

Bone health assessment. Current literature regarding the utility of DEXA scans is controversial; however, bone health should be considered in the overall health of an affected individual [Coakley et al 2016].
Only symptomatic treatment is available.

Relief of pain after curettage and iliac bone grafting of painful lesions in the talus has been reported [Arıkan et al 2014]. Supportive orthopedic devices may be of value in individual cases. The fractures have been reported to heal well [Paloneva et al 2001].

Epileptic seizures may worsen the individual's condition. Consequently, adequate antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are important.
A multidisciplinary team comprising specialists in neurology, physical medicine, orthopedics, pulmonary medicine, and gastroenterology is optimal for care.

Early attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection, especially in the most severely affected individuals, is important. Those with severe dysphagia may require feeding by gastrostomy.

Seizures are usually restricted to individuals with the most severe (connatal) syndrome and although they may not always be associated with electroencephalographic evidence for epileptiform waveforms, they generally respond to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as carbamazepine.

Spasticity management may include physical therapy and exercises, including regular stretching exercises. Antispasticity medications such as baclofen (including intrathecal administration), diazepam, and tizanidine may be helpful, especially in combination with physical therapy, exercise, orthotics, and other assistive devices. In advanced cases, surgery to release joint contractures may be required.

Severe scoliosis may result in pulmonary compromise as well as discomfort, especially with position changes, and necessitate corrective surgery to preserve pulmonary function. Proper seating, especially wheelchair, and physical therapy may reduce or prevent the need for surgery.

Specialized schooling arrangements are typically necessary for children with PLP1-related disorders. Developmental assessments can accurately assess a child's capabilities, which may be greater than is apparent because of severe motor deficits. Electronic or other communication devices may facilitate communication especially in children with visual and auditory impairment.
Response to pharmacologic treatment is poor; however, clonazepam or diazepam can be effective.

A child age four years with familial PNKD responded to gabapentin [Chudnow et al 1997].

Szczałuba et al [2009] reported individuals from a family with PNKD who responded favorably to levetiracetam.
No disease-modifying drug treatment exists for PNPLA6-related disorders. Given the great phenotypic variability and broad spectrum of the disorders, management of symptoms must be individually tailored.

Ataxia. Management should be directed to providing continuous training in the form of active speech, fine-motor, and gait exercises [Fonteyn et al 2014, Ilg et al 2014, Synofzik & Ilg 2014]:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on active, physically demanding tasks [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010]

Videogame-based whole-body training (“exergames”) with specific videogames aiming to improve coordination and rapid adaptation to changing environments [Ilg et al 2012, Synofzik et al 2013b]

Speech therapy [Sapir et al 2003]

Swallowing therapy

Spasticity. Management should be directed to improving balance, strength, and agility:

Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on improving muscle strength and gait and reducing spasticity

Assistive walking devices and ankle-foot orthotics

Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., baclofen [oral or intrathecal], tolperison; Botox® injections) and urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin)

Visual impairment. Low vision aids such as magnifiers may facilitate reading for individuals with reduced central acuity.

In the US, publicly funded agencies for the visually impaired at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine) at the time of diagnosis. Thyroid hormone levels should be normalized by replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Growth hormone deficiency. Growth hormone deficiency is treated with hormone replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist.

Hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is treated with hormone replacement therapy, often including gonadotropins, at the expected time of puberty. (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency) for more details about treatment.)
Individualized care by a multidisciplinary team including a pediatric neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech and language pathologist, neuropsychologist, rehabilitation physician, dentist, endocrinologist, ophthalmologist, ear-nose-and-throat specialist, and primary care physician is recommended.

Manifestations such as ambulation difficulties and seizures are managed in a routine manner.

Special caution needs to be taken when managing dysphagia in this disorder as it is known to be quite variable, even in a single day. This is probably due to the prominent cerebellar involvement, leading to more incoordination of swallowing with fatigue, but also with some unpredictability. Dysphagia management is therefore important. Swallowing difficulties will progress over time and individuals may require gastrostomy to manage nutrition.

Spasticity and dystonia should be monitored and treated to prevent complications and to improve the quality of life.

Hypersalivation is managed with the multidisciplinary team and an otolaryngologist. Treatment must be individualized. Therapies to consider include rehabilitation (e.g., oromotor therapy, behavioral therapy); medical therapy (e.g., anticholinergic medications, botulinum toxin injections); and, in severe cases, surgery (e.g., relocation of the parotid ducts and relocation of the submandibular ducts with or without sublingual gland excision).

Learning difficulties are likely to progress slowly. The cognitive involvement is typically much less severe than the motor involvement. In contrast, activities of daily living are likely to become problematic early on in the disease course as motor difficulties make patients progressively more dependent on assistance from others.

Dental manifestations should be managed, when necessary, by a dentist and/or orthodontist.

Patients should be followed regularly by an endocrinologist. The decision to treat sex and growth hormone deficiency, when present, should be made on an individual basis.

Patients need to be followed regularly by an ophthalmologist. A significant proportion of patients will have progressive myopia over several years, which will become severe before stabilizing.
The following treatment is recommended:

Supportive management, including physical therapy, pharmacologic management, orthotic devices, and surgery for those with spastic motor impairment

Speech therapy for those with language impairment

Occupational therapy for those with language impairment

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures based on the specific epilepsy type
The main treatment for POMC deficiency is hormone replacement therapy with glucocorticoids with other hormones as required, as well as skin care in the sun.

Adrenal insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency is treated in the usual manner with hydrocortisone replacement therapy. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Severe obesity. Hyperphagic obesity is recognized in the neonatal period and persists into adolescence and adulthood. At present, there is no recognized effective medical therapy to prevent weight gain; therefore, lifestyle measures should be instigated.

Fair skin. The individual may need appropriate verbal and written sun care advice (avoidance of sun exposure in the middle 4 hours of the day [i.e., 10 am - 2 pm], cover-up clothing, high-factor sunscreen). Discussion about the potential lifelong risk for skin cancer is recommended.

Hypothyroidism. The mild central hypothyroidism reported in POMC deficiency is treated with levothyroxine. Importantly, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been evaluated and adrenal insufficiency (if present) has been treated. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) deficiency. Adolescent-onset GH deficiency (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) is treated with daily subcutaneous GH injections. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Adolescent-onset hypogonadism (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) can be treated with sex hormone replacement. Care by an endocrinologist experienced in treating this disorder is recommended.
Treatment is highly effective; it should only be initiated after the diagnosis is well established. The mainstays of therapy for PCT are reduction of body iron stores and liver iron content and use of low-dose anti-malarial agents (chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine).

Iron reduction. In most centers serial phlebotomy is the preferred mode of reducing body iron stores and liver iron content. Iron chelation therapy (e.g., deferasirox, deferiprone, or desferrioxamine) is less efficient and more costly than therapeutic phlebotomies in reducing iron, but may be considered if the latter is contraindicated [Rocchi et al 1987].

Serum ferritin concentration should be measured before starting phlebotomy treatment. Typically, approximately 450 mL of blood is removed during a therapeutic phlebotomy, usually initially at two-week intervals. Hemoglobin levels (which are generally >10-11 g/dL) are followed as safety (not therapeutic) targets to prevent symptomatic anemia. The therapeutic target is to reduce the serum ferritin concentration to the low-normal range (15-25 ng/mL), which is associated with tissue iron depletion but usually not anemia.

Phlebotomy treatment is also guided by plasma (or serum) porphyrin levels, which are more convenient to measure repeatedly than urine porphyrins, and which decrease more slowly than the serum ferritin concentration. Plasma porphyrin levels usually decline from initial concentrations of 10-25 μg/dL to below the upper limit of normal (~1 μg/dL) within weeks after phlebotomies are completed [Rocchi et al 1986, Ratnaike et al 1988].

Development of new skin lesions generally ceases as plasma porphyrin levels become normal; however, therapy should be continued until the serum ferritin concentration has reached the low end of normal. The chronic skin lesions of PCT are slow to resolve, and some chronic scarring may remain indefinitely.

After a remission has been achieved, continued phlebotomies are generally not needed unless initial evaluation has determined the presence of HFE-related familial hemochromatosis. For persons with the HFE genotypes p.Cys282Tyr / p.Cys282Tyr or p.Cys282Tyr / p.His63Asp, management guidelines for HFE-related familial hemochromatosis should be followed.

Although not essential, adherence to a low-iron diet, especially with restriction of intake of red meat and liver (rich sources of heme iron, which is absorbed better than iron from vegetable sources) is reasonable, especially in those with HFE pathogenic variants. In addition, the ingestion of tea with lunch or dinner further reduces the gastrointestinal absorption of iron.

Note: Treatment of PCT in persons with end-stage renal disease is more difficult since the option for phlebotomy is often limited by anemia. However, in several instances erythropoietin therapy has been shown to correct anemia, mobilize iron, and support phlebotomy [Shieh et al 2000]. Such individuals may also be considered for iron chelation therapy.

Low-dose anti-malarial agents. A low-dose regimen of twice-weekly hydroxychloroquine (100 mg) or chloroquine (125 mg) is also effective and most appropriate when phlebotomy is contraindicated or poorly tolerated [Bruce & Ahmed 1998]. Note: Chloroquine is not recommended in persons with increased serum ferritin concentration [Stölzel et al 2003].

Although the use of low-dose anti-malarial agents is preferred at many centers because they are less costly and more convenient, these agents do not deplete hepatic iron and the mechanism of their action in the treatment of PCT is not fully understood. Combining both treatment modalities (i.e., anti-malarial agent therapy and phlebotomy) may be beneficial if the individual is unable to tolerate full courses of phlebotomy.

Other. Individuals are advised to stop drinking alcohol and smoking and to discontinue further oral estrogen use.

Adequate intake of ascorbic acid and other nutrients may be recommended although this is not considered to be primary therapy.

PCT may also improve after treatment of coexisting hepatitis C. PCT should be treated first in most individuals:

PCT generally causes more symptoms and can be treated more quickly and effectively than hepatitis C.

Some evidence shows that hepatitis C treatment may be more effective after iron reduction [Desai et al 2012, Ryan Caballes et al 2012].

Both interferon and ribavirin (used in the treatment of hepatitis C) commonly cause anemia, which usually precludes phlebotomy for PCT.

Attainment and maintenance of an iron-reduced state decreases the severity and progression of chronic hepatitis C and probably also reduces the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma [Ryan Caballes et al 2012].
Neurovisceral Symptoms

Most acute neurovisceral attacks require hospital admission; patients with mild attacks (not requiring narcotic analgesics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or muscle weakness) are sometimes treated as outpatients. A rapid, thorough, and multidisciplinary evaluation is optimized by in-patient management.

As with other acute porphyrias, evaluation should include identification of exacerbating drugs and other precipitating factors. Harmful medications include barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Harmful medications should be discontinued.

Seizures, motor neuropathy, and hyponatremia suggest severe disease and should be managed in the ICU with adequate supportive treatment.

Narcotic analgesics are usually required for pain and ondansetron or a related drug for nausea and vomiting. A phenothiazine is also effective for nausea and for psychiatric symptoms (e.g., agitation, hallucinations) [Anderson et al 2005, Harper & Wahlin 2007].

Mild attacks (not requiring narcotics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or motor neuropathy) can be treated with glucose loading, but most attacks should be treated with intravenous hemin [Anderson et al 2005].

Note: ‘Hemin’ refers to the oxidized form of iron protoporphyrin IX, but is also the generic term for heme preparations used as intravenous therapies for acute porphyrias, such as lyophilized hematin (heme hydroxide) and heme arginate. When these hemin preparations are infused intravenously, the heme is bound to circulating albumin as heme albumin. The latter is taken up by hepatocytes and decreases the synthesis of hepatic ALAS1, the rate-controlling enzyme for heme synthesis in the liver.

Patients with acute attack should be carefully monitored for muscle weakness and respiratory impairment that may require ventilatory support.

Hyponatremia should be corrected slowly and seizures treated with medications that do not exacerbate porphyria.

Liver transplantation, which has been effective in persons with AIP with severe repeated acute attacks that respond poorly to medical therapy, is a consideration in VP [Dowman et al 2012].

Cutaneous Symptoms

Porphyrin levels may decrease and photosensitivity improve if exacerbating factors can be identified and removed. Otherwise there is no effective treatment that lowers porphyrin levels. Treatment with hemin may lower porphyrins in the short term only.

Patients should wear protective clothing and avoid exposure to sunlight.

Analgesics may be needed for painful lesions and antibiotics for superimposed infection. Topical steroids are of little or no benefit.

Specific measures effective in the treatment of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) (i.e., phlebotomy and low-dose hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine) are not effective in the management of VP.
Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with PTLS, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: audiology, cardiology, dental, developmental pediatrics, endocrinology, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, clinical genetics, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, physical medicine and rehabilitation, psychiatry, sleep medicine, speech pathology, and urology.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Strabismus and/or refractive errors

Standard treatment as recommended by ophthalmologist

Dental crowding / malocclusion

Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist

Evidence of sleep apnea

Standard treatment as indicated

Assess for iron deficiency if excessive periodic limb movements are identified on sleep study.

Poor weight gain / failure to thrive

Feeding tube in the short term if required for nutrition & growth

Diet diary & calorie counts may be requested.

Hypoglycemia, short stature, evidence of growth hormone deficiency

Standard treatment(s) as recommended by endocrinologist

Cardiac anomaly, dilated aortic root/aortopathy, and/or ECG abnormality

Standard treatment as recommended by cardiologist

Renal anomaly and/or vesicoureteral reflux

Standard treatment as recommended by nephrologist/urologist

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. A “full individual evaluation” (FIE) will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently integrated into an individualized education plan (IEP).

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district generally until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including medical and financial guardianship, financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life and integration into community. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize strength and mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis). Aquatic therapy and hippotherapy (therapeutic horseback riding) may also be considered.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Physical medicine and rehabilitation evaluations may be warranted [Neira-Fresneda & Potocki 2015].

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended to address difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and handwriting.

Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control and/or sensory aversions, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth.

Communication issues. Consider:

Speech and language therapy to address receptive and expressive language deficits, articulation abnormalities, and verbal apraxia;

Evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.
Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB)

Surgical management. Treatment for all types is complete surgical resection when feasible. Chemotherapy is recommended in all cases of types II and III PPB utilizing aggressive sarcoma-based regimens; for type I less aggressive regimens can be used based on extent of resection and disease.

Type I PPB is treated with complete surgical removal with or without adjuvant chemotherapy. The long-term survival for this subgroup is over 94%; the only deaths are following progression to type II or III [Messinger et al 2012].

Types II and III PPB are treated with aggressive surgical resection and intensive chemotherapy; survival rates at ten years are 62% for type II and 46% for type III [Williams et al 2012].

Complete resection of PPB is recommended by physicians associated with the International PPB Registry (IPPBR). For cystic and solid or purely solid tumors, primary resection is preferred, but adequate biopsy followed by neoadjuvant chemotherapy and delayed complete resection is acceptable. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible when cysts are extensive.

Primary resection of tumors that are cystic and solid or purely solid should be performed with care so as not to disrupt the tumor or induce tumor spill, similar to the care taken with removal of Wilms tumor. Since solid components of PPB are very friable, piecemeal removal and spill are often inevitable.

If it is evident at the time of surgery that the tumor has spread to the chest wall, pericardium, and/ or diaphragm, removal of all grossly visible tumor is recommended. Sites of unresectable residual disease may be titanium clipped for radiographic localization and possible radiotherapy. Involvement of the diaphragm may require excision of a portion of the diaphragm and use of a Gortex patch.

Delayed resection after chemotherapy is performed for tumors deemed unresectable at the time of diagnosis. Individuals receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy may have marked tumor reduction; however, this response may be transient and tumor can recur rapidly. Chemotherapy alone is insufficient to eradicate solid PPB.

The IPPBR physicians recommend that surgical resection occur no later than after the third cycle of chemotherapy. As with primary surgery, removal of all sites of gross disease should be attempted if possible.

If gross-total resection is not achieved, additional surgery may be required for local control.

Pleural effusions. Drainage of pleural effusions should be approached with caution. Solid tumors often invade the chest wall obliterating the pleural space. Proper placement of needle and catheter can be difficult without radiographic guidance.

Surgery for metastases. Brain parenchyma is the most common metastatic site for PPB. Resection is strongly suggested for intracranial mass lesion(s). Several patients in whom cerebral PPB metastases have been resected have had durable, non-relapse survival [Priest et al 2007].

Therapeutic resection of bone and liver metastases is rarely indicated.

Chemotherapy

Type I PPB. Use of chemotherapy is controversial [Priest et al 2006, Messinger et al 2012].

Types II and III PPB. Aggressive chemotherapy is necessary. Chemotherapy regimens are typically based on other childhood sarcoma regimens with the inclusion of vincristine, actinomycin-D, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, and doxorubicin. Agents that have been used with limited success include etoposide and cisplatin or carboplatin.

The IPPBR is currently conducting the first prospective clinical study of an aggressive multi-agent chemotherapy; specifics are available at the IPPBR Web site (www.ppbregistry.org).

Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is used primarily to treat PPB recurrence or metastasis, or in the setting of local control of residual unresectable tumor [Priest et al 1997, Kamenova et al 2006, Indolfi et al 2007, Williams et al 2012].

Radiation therapy of brain metastasis can result in long-term survival for some patients.

If radiation therapy is chosen, dosage appropriate for high-grade sarcoma (44 Gy or above) should be used [Indolfi et al 2007].

Treatment failure. Survival after failure of primary therapy for types II and III PPB is poor – 35% at two years and 27.5% at five years, respectively [IPPBR, unpublished data]. Modalities used include surgery, attempted repeat complete resection, and radiation therapy. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation have also been used. Intracavitary 32P and cisplatin have also been used on occasion. Because cases are few and chemotherapy regimens used to treat recurrences have varied, data to support specific treatment recommendations in the setting of recurrent disease are limited.

Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Tumors

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (including Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, juvenile granulosa cell tumor, and gynandroblastoma) are rare and few studies have focused on clinical variables, treatment, and prognosis. Treatment regimens are based on those used for ovarian germ cell tumors and data are limited [Schneider et al 2002, Schultz et al 2012].

If imaging or laboratory studies suggest the presence of an ovarian tumor, consultation with specialists in surgery/gynecology and oncology is suggested. Surgical resection with staging procedures is usually the initial treatment. Fertility-sparing surgery is recommended for most girls and young women.

Most patients undergo unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with sampling of peritoneal fluid and cytologic examination of peritoneal washings. Lymph nodes should be carefully examined intraoperatively and removed if they are clinically concerning. Level of differentiation and stage influence outcome and are critical to determining whether adjuvant therapy is necessary. Effort must be made to avoid rupture of the tumor as this would result in an increased stage for some patients. If rupture occurs, the timing of rupture (preoperative vs. intraoperative rupture) must be carefully documented as this may influence the need for adjuvant therapy.

The decision to use adjuvant treatment such as chemotherapy following surgery for SLCT or JGCT is based on histology and stage:

Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. For SLCT stage greater than Ia (including Ic with perioperative or preoperative rupture or poorly differentiated SLCT), adjuvant chemotherapy is sometimes used. Depending on the stage, pathology, and need for fertility preservation, consideration should also be given to additional surgery. When chemotherapy is used, a platinum-based regimen such as cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) or cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI) is often used. Additional regimens more often used in adults may include taxanes or anthracyclines. A Phase II randomized trial is currently open through Gynecology Oncology Group comparing cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin to carboplatin and paclitaxel.Follow-up monitoring for ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors should include attention to tumor markers and imaging. Imaging with either MRI or ultrasound may be preferred over CT as neither involves ionizing radiation; however, the use of MRI in very young children is limited by the need for sedation. If MRI is used, the radiologist should be notified of the clinical concern for ovarian tumor so that appropriate imaging protocols are used.

Juvenile granulosa cell tumor (JGCT). In young children with FIGO Stage Ia JGCT the prognosis is excellent with resection alone. Adjuvant chemotherapy, often given with higher-stage disease, is suggested for stages higher than Ic. The most common regimens in the United States include a platinum analog, generally cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) and in Europe cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI). An individualized approach is needed in the instance of preoperative vs intraoperative tumor rupture. Generally speaking, recurrent JGCT is difficult to treat and the approach is highly individualized. Hyperthermic chemotherapy has been used by some investigators. Although a small number of survivors of advanced or recurrent JGCTs underwent radiation therapy, the use of radiation therapy in the treatment of recurrent ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors is not well defined.

Gynandroblastoma. The malignant potential of gynandroblastoma is not yet clear. Most are found in an early stage, and surgical resection has been curative for the majority of the reported cases.

Other Tumors

Cystic nephroma

Surgery. Treatment consists of surgical resection via partial or full nephrectomy. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible for patients with extensive bilateral cysts.

Chemotherapy. Although the use of chemotherapy has been considered in rare cases with extensive bilateral disease and continued rapid growth, its efficacy has not been studied.

Multinodular goiter (MNG) and thyroid cancer

Observation with or without biopsy. The approach to preoperative investigation is the same for patients with a sporadic nodule with or without a DICER1 pathogenic variant. See guidelines from the American Thyroid Association (purchase required) or the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/Associazione Medici Endocrinologi/European Thyroid Association collaborative (available online).

Ultrasound examination is used to confirm the nodule and to determine the need for fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA). In general, FNA is recommended for nodules measuring ≥1 cm. FNAB of smaller nodules should be considered in patients with a history of previous radiation exposure and/or concerning sonographic features, including (but not limited to) microcalcifications and abnormal lymph nodes. FNA results that show benign-appearing follicular cells (including Hürthle cells and/or lymphocytes) indicate (in most cases) nodular hyperplasia, follicular adenoma, or lymphocytic thyroiditis. Continued follow-up care is appropriate in the presence of a stable nodule(s).

Surgery is appropriate for symptomatic nodules or nodules with significant growth on serial US examination. If the results of the FNA are positive for papillary thyroid carcinoma, total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice in patients who are surgical candidates.

Radioactive iodine (RAI) is the most effective medical treatment for patients found to have distant (lung) metastasis or persistent disease not amenable to repeat surgery.

Ciliary body medulloepithelioma (CBME). The four management options include:

Observation. In one patient age nine years with CBME and PPB, the CBME was monitored in six-month intervals over a two-year period by high-resolution imaging and ocular examination. The histology of the CBME was unknown [Priest et al 2011].

Local resection. Small, well-circumscribed (<3 clock hours) tumors may be treated by local resection with preservation of useful vision. However, many of these tumors will progress. In one series of ten individuals with CBME, six were initially treated with local resection, including two who received application of a radioactive plaque. However, in all six, tumor recurred after a mean of 2.5 years. Four required enucleation, one received local cryotherapy, and one needed exenteration and irradiation [Shields et al 1996].

Enucleation. Most CBME have advanced features at diagnosis (friable appearance, a neoplastic cyclitic membrane or adjacent free-floating cysts) that should prompt enucleation. Long-term survival is common after this definitive therapy. Four of the five individuals reported with CBME and PPB underwent enucleation with follow-up ranging from seven months to 44 years [Priest et al 2011, Laird et al 2013].

Orbital exenteration. Although rarely indicated, exenteration (with consideration of adjunct chemotherapy and radiation) is required for a CBME that extends beyond the globe. Although long-term survival has been observed following exenteration, it is generally associated with a poor prognosis [Broughton & Zimmerman 1978].

Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix may not require hysterectomy since these tumors are usually confined to the cervix and typically do not have deep stromal invasion. Local resection followed by chemotherapy appropriate for ERMS is one management approach. On completion of chemotherapy, biopsies are performed to determine if residual viable tumor is present. The decision for additional treatment is based on the results of the post-chemotherapy biopsies and follow-up imaging studies.

Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH). The extent of this tumor is best determined by appropriate imaging studies and is usually managed by surgical resection. When access to the tumor is adequate one approach is endonasal endoscopy with resection. If complete resection is difficult, these tumors can be effectively debulked in most cases; however, complete extirpation is preferred.

Pituitary blastoma. All six reported patients with pituitary blastoma had surgical resection of the mass by a variety of approaches [Scheithauer et al 2012]; five had subtotal resection and the sixth had a gross total resection. For adjuvant therapy one patient received “polychemotherapy” and another received temozolomide and 5400 cGy radiation therapy. Normalization of endocrine laboratory values, especially ACTH, is expected post-operatively and is a useful marker of disease activity. Some children have required two surgeries to successfully extirpate the tumor.

Pineoblastoma. Immediate management issues may include interventions for obstructive hydrocephalus. MRI of the entire spinal axis is indicated, as is CSF cytology and serum and CSF sampling of germ cell tumor markers (beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein). Open resection, rather than biopsy, is the treatment of choice for pineoblastoma. An aggressive surgical approach is associated with prolonged survival. Following maximal surgical resection, standard adjuvant therapy includes fractionated radiotherapy (to brain and spine) and chemotherapy [Tate et al 2011].
See McLaughlin et al [2013], Taichman et al [2014] and Hill et al [2015] for evidenced-based treatment algorithms.

Referral centers specializing in diagnosis and therapy of PAH are available across the US (see Pulmonary Hypertension Association Web site). Consultation is encouraged for all persons suspected of having PAH because of the complexity and continuing evolution of diagnosis and treatment.

Unprecedented approval of medications for PAH by the FDA in the last two decades has led to availability of a dozen therapies which all demonstrate some efficacy, but substantial limitations remain: none of them cures the disease, nor is effective in all patients, nor stops or reverses the underlying pathogenesis (obstruction of the pulmonary arteries).

The most effective among them, continuous IV prostanoids, are the most complicated to administer as they require patient management of a pump for continuous infusion, with a myriad of possible problems, including sepsis related to chronic central venous catheters. Patient preference often dictates the route of medication administration (continuous IV or subcutaneous (subQ), aerosol, oral) or side effects determine which agents are personally acceptable.

Continuous patient monitoring for progression of disease and medication adjustment requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team which communicates seamlessly with multiple specialty pharmacies and insurors.

Medications in use for PAH include the following:

Prostacyclin analogsEpoprostenol (continuous IV)Treprostinil (inhalation, oral, continuous subQ, or IV)Iloprost (inhalation)

Endothelin blockers (oral)BosentanAmbrisenanMacitentan

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (oral)SildenafilTadalafil

Guanylate cyclase stimulator (oral)Riociguat

Calcium channel blockers. A minority of individuals with PAH have a favorable long-term clinical response to oral calcium channel blockers. Such responders may be identified by a positive acute pulmonary vasodilator response (inhaled nitric oxide) assessed during cardiac catheterization. Three retrospective studies suggest that individuals with HPAH are less likely to demonstrate an acute pulmonary vasodilator response or have more severe disease than those with PAH of unknown cause [Elliott et al 2006, Rosenzweig et al 2008, Sztrymf et al 2008].

Adjunctive agents. Fluid retention may be ameliorated by diuretic therapy, hypoxemia may be helped by supplemental oxygen, and anticoagulation therapy may prevent superimposed thrombosis, especially common for indwelling catheters needed to deliver continuous infusion of a prostanoid.

Lung transplantation is an effective treatment for selected patients with PAH, but has many limitations, among them insufficient availability of donor lungs and limited long-term survival after lung transplantation for most recipients because of chronic graft rejection. Mean survival after lung transplantation is about five years.

Lung transplantation is appropriate only for patients whose lives are threatened by lung disease. Although the many effective PAH medications can improve symptoms, they do not reverse the underlying pulmonary vascular disease and it is debated how much they prolong overall survival [Humbert 2010, Macchia et al 2010]. The time span of months usually needed to assess the benefit of the many different medications or combinations of medications can delay the decision about timing of lung transplantation.
Treatment is supportive. No specific therapy for PPD is available.

Pain due to secondary osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs. Other anti-inflammatory medications including steroids and immunosuppressive drugs (cyclosporine and methotrexate) have a limited role in treatment and are best avoided in view of their significant side effects.

Physical therapy may help preserve joint mobility. Immobilization (e.g., casting) should be avoided.

Most joint involvement requires intervention by an orthopedist and/or physical therapist.

Angular deformities of lower limbs. The indications for surgical correction are to restore normal alignment of the lower limbs and to alleviate gait disturbance, instability, and/or pain.

Progressive joint stiffness

Large joint stiffness is managed by physical therapy, activity modification, and walking aids.

Small joint arthropathy is managed by an occupational therapist who may advise adaptive devices, modification of activity, and/or vocational training.

Joint pain. Severe joint pain due to advanced osteoarthritis is treated by joint arthroplasty (i.e., hip and knee replacement). Early hip replacement (second decade of life) can be successful in relieving pain and restoring the ability to ambulate.

Progressive stiffness and deformities of the spine

Scoliosis and mild kyphosis can be managed with bracing.

Spinal canal stenosis can be managed with decompression, fusion, and instrumentation.
Therapy is aimed at controlling symptoms that may cause discomfort.

If present, seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as diphenylhydantoin or carbamazepine.

Myoclonus can sometimes be mitigated by clonazepam.

Issues related to dysphagia are often difficult to resolve. Since the disease is terminal, families are often faced with the decision of whether or not to place a permanent feeding tube. The timing of this decision differs depending on the type of prion disease. In general, placement of a feeding tube should be discouraged in those with late-developing dysphagia, as it may make it difficult for families to eventually withdraw feeding.

Evaluation by a social worker is mandatory to assist the family in management planning, as many decisions are required during the course of disease and at the end of the disease process. Autopsy to confirm the diagnosis should always be a consideration, as accurate information is important for family members.
No curative treatment is available.

Care is preferably provided by a multidisciplinary team. Supportive treatment of skin, lung, and immunologic manifestations has been efficacious in some (but not in all) patients. Caution is warranted in the treatment of infections, which can be fulminant and fatal.

Click here (pdf) for further details, including treatments in which only partial or short-term benefit was reported.
The main principle of treatment in CPHD is replacement therapy with the appropriate hormones [Mehta et al 2009].

Growth hormone. GH deficiency is treated by subcutaneous injection of biosynthetic (i.e., recombinant) GH. To obtain an optimal outcome, replacement therapy should be started as soon as the diagnosis of GH deficiency is established. The initial dose of recombinant human GH (rhGH) is based on body weight, but the exact dose and the frequency of administration vary by protocol. The dose increases with increasing body weight to a maximum during puberty and is usually discontinued when final height has been reached, at approximately age 17 years [Ranke 1995, Rosén et al 1995, Growth Hormone Research Society 2000 (full text)].

There is increasing support for the use of rhGH treatment in young adults with GHD as well because of the possible effects on fat metabolism, lean body mass, and bone mineral density [Ho et al 2007 (full text)].

Clinical response to exogenous GH usually depends on the etiology and severity of the GH deficiency, deficiencies of other pituitary hormones, age of onset of growth failure, the time interval between the onset of growth failure and the onset of GH therapy, duration of replacement therapy, and the sex of the affected individual [Blethen et al 1997]. De Ridder et al [2007] developed a model that accurately predicts the adult height that will be achieved by GH therapy.

TSH. TSH deficiency is treated by thyroid hormone replacement in the form of L-thyroxine at a dose of approximately 1-3 µg/kg/day given orally. Of note, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been assessed and adrenal insufficiency is treated if present.

LH and FSH

Male infants with micropenis are treated with 50 mg testosterone enanthate intramuscularly every four weeks for a total of three to four doses.

If GH deficiency is present and if the child's growth normalizes before adolescence, it is appropriate to begin sex steroid replacement to induce secondary sex characteristics.

In males, this can be initiated at age 12 to 13 years with monthly injections of 100 mg testosterone enanthate, gradually increasing by 50 mg every six months to a dose of 200 to 300 mg per month.

In females, this can be initiated at age 11 to 12 years with conjugated estrogens or ethinyl estradiol, eventually cycling with estrogen and progesterone.

If the child has untreated growth hormone deficiency, the sex hormone replacement is given in lower doses and started at a later age to ensure maximal growth before epiphyseal closure.

Usually sex steroids are used to maintain secondary sex characteristics.

Fertility in both females and males is possible with administration of gonadotropins [Voutetakis et al 2004c]. Note: Because infertility in individuals with PROP1-related CPHD is secondary to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, appropriate treatment consists of gonadotropin replacement rather than the use of clomiphene citrate, which requires an intact pituitary gland.

ACTH. Long-term management is usually 10-15 mg/M2 oral hydrocortisone per 24 hours divided into three doses.

For individuals with GH deficiency, the lowest safe dose of hydrocortisone is used to avoid interfering with the growth response to growth hormone therapy.

For minor stress such as fever or minor illness, the dose of hydrocortisone is doubled or tripled until the illness has resolved.

For major stress, such as surgery or significant illness, hydrocortisone is increased to 40 to 100 mg/M2 and administered parenterally.
Neonatal/acute decompensation. Birth, infections, trauma, surgery, postpartum recovery, or other forms of stress and hormonal changes can result in a catabolic response that leads, among other things, to protein breakdown with release of propiogenic amino acids that cannot be metabolized in PA. The goal of acute management is to reverse this process through promotion of anabolism and removal of toxic intermediates. The treatment of individuals with acutely decompensated PA is a medical emergency and requires a transfer to a center with biochemical genetics expertise and the ability to support urgent hemodialysis, especially if hyperammonemia is present.

In-patient management

Assess and manage ventilation and circulation as necessary.

Treat precipitating factors (fever, infection, dehydration, pain, vomiting, and other sources of stress).

Determine the need for sepsis workup and antibiotics.

Reverse catabolism by giving intravenous glucose and lipids.

The volume, glucose content and electrolyte composition of intravenous fluids is determined by age, target glucose infusion rate, cardiovascular status, renal condition, and co-administration of other medications.

Intravenous D10 ½ normal saline typically between 100% and 150% of the maintenance requirements is a common starting fluid. Dextrose solutions exceeding the concentration of 12.5% require a central line placement. The target glucose infusion rates varies by age [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Additional calories can be provided using parenteral lipid emulsion.

The use of intravenous insulin drip may be needed to maintain euglycemia and promote anabolism.

Manage protein intake to reduce propiogenic precursors; avoidance of protein transiently for <24-36 hours may be required.

Transition to enteral feedings should be commenced as soon as they are tolerated (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Dietary management).

If transition to enteral feedings within 48 hours is not possible, total parenteral nutrition is required.

Parenteral amino acid solutions are prescribed based on the recommended daily intake of age-appropriate energy, protein, isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine and adjusted using the daily and weekly growth data and plasma amino acid concentrations.

Remove toxic compounds.

Pharmacologic detoxification:

Nitrogen scavenger medications (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, sodium phenylbutyrate), such as those used in urea cycle disorders to help control ammonia levels during acute decompensations, should be used with caution in the treatment of hyperammonemia associated with PA as they can accentuate frequently observed low plasma glutamine [Al-Hassnan et al 2003, Filipowicz et al 2006]. For a discussion regarding the use of sodium benzoate versus sodium phenylacetate and sodium phenylbutyrate in propionic acidemia see Baumgartner et al [2014].

Oral N-carbamoylglutamate (carglumic acid; 100 mg/kg divided every 6 hours in individuals <20 kg and 2.2 gm/m2 in individuals >20 kg) can aid in the detoxification of ammonia during neonatal and acute decompensations [Filippi et al 2010, Schwahn et al 2010, Chapman et al 2012].

Extracorporeal detoxification is required for persistent acidosis and hyperammonemia (plasma ammonia level >250-300 μmol/L) not responding to fluid and drug treatment. Methods include (depending on age and clinical situation) continuous veno-venous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or hemodialysis [Chapman et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014].

Carnitine supplementation (100 mg/kg/day IV divided in 3 doses) may enhance the detoxification of propionic acid by conjugating into propionylcarnitine, which is excreted by the kidneys. Alternatively, it may relieve intracellular coenzyme A accretion and provide a benefit through this mechanism. Consult hospital pharmacy for the recommended maximum daily dose in older patients.

Manage pancreatitis using standard practices.

Home management of metabolic status. The detection and management of metabolic decompensations at home are a critical part of the chronic management of PA. Patients and care providers should notify their medical team about new symptoms and discuss the appropriateness of home management. Strategies to achieve home management should be tailored for the conditions of each patient and family and may include the following:

At-home detection and monitoring of urine ketones

Diet modification under the direction of the metabolic team

If fever is present due to an infection, treatment may include paracetamol and ibuprofen [Baumgartner et al 2014].

Use of anti-emetics such as ondansetron (see precautionary considerations in Agents/Circumstances to Avoid)

Other

Any injury, illness, hospitalization, or surgical procedure should involve consultation with the metabolic team.

The diagnosis and management of pancreatitis is the same as for pancreatitis of other causes.

Neutropenia and other cytopenias usually improve with metabolic control of PA.

Management of arrhythmias is similar to that from other causes.

Cardiomyopathy may improve after liver transplantation in some patients [Romano et al 2010].

Seizures are a frequent complication of PA, necessitating an antiepileptic drug. The use of valproic acid in organic acidemias is often avoided; however, several authors described its use in patients with PA [Haberlandt et al 2009, Schreiber et al 2012].

Dermatologic manifestations (e.g., persistent dermatitis or eczema) warrant a nutritional reassessment to rule out dietary deficiency of essential amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.
As with any complex and multisystem disorder, patients with PS benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Overgrowth is an ongoing issue for many patients with Proteus syndrome. The management is complex and highly dependent on the nature of the overgrowth, which can vary substantially among patients.

For overgrowth of tubular bones, epiphysiostasis and epiphysiodesis should be the mainstays of management. One intervention that the authors have found to be detrimental to patients with Proteus syndrome is distraction osteotomy (so-called Ilizarov procedure) performed on the normal (shorter) limbs. Readers are referred to a recent review and conference report for more details on this complex issue [Tosi et al 2011].

The skeletal overgrowth of PS can result in significant biomechanical and functional compromise. Because of this, ongoing and comprehensive Rehabilitation Medicine care, including physical and occupational therapy, is important for many patients. In addition, many patients with PS develop substantial needs for custom-designed footwear or orthotics due to leg-length inequality or plantar CCTNs.

Patients with PS who develop large plantar CCTNs should receive regular dermatologic care and attention to manage malodor (a potential complication of difficulty with cleanliness of the deepening of the sulci in late adolescence) and other concerns, such as pressure ulcerations. Large plantar CCTNs can also contribute to problems with shoe fit and often warrant pedorthic intervention as mentioned above.

Management of the overgrowth of adipose tissue is challenging because the areas of adipose overgrowth are not encapsulated and discrete (in contrast to lipomas) and, therefore, can be difficult to resect and commonly regrow after surgical debulking. The authors generally recommend open surgical approaches over liposuction because the highly vascularized lipomatous overgrowth in some patients can result in hemorrhaging that is difficult to control and/or chronically weeping lymphatics.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). The most urgent and life-threatening complication of Proteus syndrome can be DVT and PE [Slavotinek et al 2000]. The rarity of this problem in the general pediatric population can result in a delay in diagnosis.

The authors recommend emergent evaluation of patients who develop symptoms of DVT (e.g., palpable subcutaneous rope-like mass, swelling, erythema, pain, and distal venous congestion) or PE (e.g., shortness of breath, chest pain, and cough which may include hemoptysis). Because patients with PE can be asymptomatic, it is recommended that a patient with a DVT be evaluated for PE regardless of symptoms.

Evaluation for DVTs. In the absence of cardiopulmonary compromise, consider the d-dimer assay and/or ultrasonographic evaluation.

Evaluation of PE. High-resolution chest CT (so called spiral CT) with contrast is recommended. Ventilation-perfusion nuclear medicine scanning may be appropriate in some cases.

Treatment of DVT and PE should follow recommended anticoagulation guidelines for these disorders. The authors recommend hematologic evaluation and consultation for consideration of anticoagulant prophylaxis for patients undergoing surgery or other procedures that may predispose to DVT/PE.

Bullous pulmonary disease. Although uncommon, bullous pulmonary disease does affect some patients with Proteus syndrome, and, as with other disease manifestations, this can progress with startling rapidity. Pulmonary evaluation is recommended for these patients and resection of large bullous lesions may be indicated in some cases. Bullous disease in the context of scoliosis can pose significant and complex challenges for appropriate management.

Psychosocial issues. In addition to functional compromise, the skeletal and connective tissue overgrowth of PS can result in disfigurement for some patients, a significant concern for many families [Turner et al 2007]. This condition is progressive and the degree of severity varies widely among patients, creating uncertainty for both clinicians and families. Coping with an ultra-rare and chronic condition like PS poses challenges for many patients and families, and genetic and psychosocial counseling is certainly warranted in most instances.

Although PS is exceedingly rare, a robust support group infrastructure exists and many families find this very helpful (see Resources).
Hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria in individuals with PRS superactivity can be reduced by treatment with the following:

Reduced intake of red and organ meats, poultry, and shellfish [Choi et al 2004], oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines), beer, avoidance of high-fructose corn syrup-containing foods and drinks, and increased low-fat dairy intake

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, prescribed in doses with the ultimate aim of achieving serum urate concentrations lower than 6.0 mg/dL (360 μmol/L). The starting dose should be 100 mg once a day (in adults) with titration every three to four weeks according to the serum urate concentration. However, because of the uric acid overproduction and excessive uric acid excretion, allopurinol should be prescribed conservatively, as there is a high risk for xanthinuria and xanthine renal lithiasis – see Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Febuxostat, a newer urate-lowering xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat has not been tested in individuals with PRS superactivity, but there is no reason a priori to doubt that it will be effective in the treatment of this disorder. Febuxostat should also be prescribed conservatively, because of a high risk for xanthinuria causing renal lithiasis. Note: Excretion of >1.1 g uric acid per day in an adult is associated with a greater than 50% risk for kidney stones.

High daily fluid intake (i.e., ≥2 L/day in the adult)

Potassium citrate (usually administered 4x/day to alkalinize the urine) when urate urinary tract stones are present or uric acid gravel is in the urine [Becker 2008]. Xanthinuria does not respond to urinary alkalinization.

Note: The interventions described only prevent/treat gout and the other metabolic complications of hyperuricemia; they have no known beneficial effect on hearing loss or neurodevelopmental impairment.

Sensorineural hearing loss is managed in the usual manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management).

Ataxia is managed in the usual manner (see Hereditary Ataxias, Management).
Medical treatment and management for PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis are similar to those for non-hereditary pancreatitis.

Treatment of acute pancreatitis usually focuses on pain management and discontinuation of smoking and alcohol use to slow the rate of progression and to decrease the likelihood of complications, including pancreatic cancer.

Pancreatic pain can result from pancreatic duct obstruction, parenchyma hypertension, pancreatic ischemia, inflammation, neuropathy, and central pain [Fasanella et al 2007, Mullady et al 2011]. Genetic factors, many of which remain unknown or not convincingly accountable, are thought to play a role in pain perception, tolerance, and response to medication.

Analgesics are offered when pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is not sufficient to control pain.

Antioxidants have been reported to improve pain control in a few individuals with hereditary pancreatitis [Perrault 1994, Uomo et al 2001] and non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Endoscopic and surgical interventions are reserved for complications such as pseudocysts, bile-duct or duodenal obstruction, infected pancreatic necrosis, and malignancy.

Obstructions or calcifications in the pancreatic ducts may be relieved by procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), in which endoscopic cannulation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct is followed by injection of radiographic dye. Decompressing/clearing of blockage decreases pain as well as the number of hospitalizations and recurrent attacks in many persons with HP [Dever et al 2010]. Note: Because of the risk of acute pancreatitis following ERCP, it is only recommended for obtaining brushings (for evaluation of strictures) and for therapeutic intervention, not diagnosis.

Although a variety of surgical approaches are used for non-cancerous pancreatic disorders that cause pain or obstruction from multiple strictures, pancreatic surgery in those with hereditary pancreatitis is unlikely to stop the underlying inflammatory process. Furthermore, pancreatic surgery often reduces the number of islet cells which are essential in pancreatic endocrine function [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. Because total pancreatectomy with islet cell auto-transplantation may be a future option for persons with HP, retaining as many islet cells as possible is an important consideration before proceeding with any pancreatic surgery [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2011].

Although controversial, pancreatectomy has been performed as a last resort to improve the quality of life in those with uncontrolled pain, particularly young adults and children [Sutton et al 2010]. It is recommended that persons in whom pancreatectomy is being considered be referred to expert centers. In persons with adequate endocrine pancreatic function, islet cell isolation and autotransplantation may be considered at the time of total pancreatectomy [Bellin et al 2008]. Note: Islet autotransplantation should not be offered to older adults with long-standing chronic pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus because the implanted cells may be malignant.

Pain is a variable complication of recurrent and chronic inflammation and ranges from minimal to severe and disabling. Pain can result from inflammation, ischemia, obstructed ducts, pseudocysts, and/or maldigestion [Fasanella et al 2007].

One small study from Italy suggested that vitamins and antioxidants reduced pain in hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]; two larger studies found that antioxidants helped relieve pain in idiopathic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

Pain from maldigestion is improved with pancreatic digestive enzymes [Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011].

If the main pancreatic duct is obstructed, a trial of endoscopic treatment is often used for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic reasons in determining longer-term therapy.

Surgery has been reported to be helpful by many patients; however, surgical approaches should be postponed if islet autotransplantation is being considered.

Several expert groups (e.g., University of Minnesota, University of Pittsburgh) are offering pancreatic islet autotransplantation in an effort to both control severe pain and delay the development of diabetes mellitus [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. It is recommended that physicians and patients work closely with expert centers since the process is irreversible.

Treatment of chronic pancreatitis focuses on improving quality of life by managing pancreatic pain, maldigestion, and diabetes mellitus.

Maldigestion results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which is the failure of the pancreas to produce enough digestive enzymes to digest a meal.

Clinical measures of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency include observation of steatorrhea (fat and oil in the stool), symptoms of maldigestion (bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea) and nutritional deficiencies (e.g., fat soluble vitamins, and protein malnutrition with low albumin, prealbumin, or retinal binding protein).

Pancreatic enzyme deficiency can be identified using invasive or noninvasive testing (see review by Lieb & Draganov 2008):

Fecal elastase-1 analysis (ScheBo® Biotech AG; Giessen, Germany). This simple and relatively inexpensive test evaluates the amount of human elastase-1 present in the stool. It can be falsely positive with diarrhea, but can be used while an individual is taking pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. The test is insensitive for mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [Amann et al 1996].

Secretin-stimulated pancreatic bicarbonate secretion testing (ChiRhoStim®, ChiRhoClin, Inc; Burtonsville, MD). This test requires intubation of the duodenum and careful measure of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion over about an hour (depending on the method). It is considered very sensitive, but only assesses duct function.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) and its analogues (e.g., CCK-8) or receptor agonists (e.g., cerulean) have also been used to assess acinar cell function.

13C-mixed triglyceride breath test. Of limited availability in the US, this test measures the ability of pancreatic lipase to digest a special substrate in the intestine after a test meal [Domínguez-Muñoz et al 2007].

72-hour fecal fat. This test is used to demonstrate that pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements are effective in digesting fat in the intestine of persons with severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. It is usually performed in a clinical research unit over four to five days during which time the patient eats a special high-fat meal (>100 grams of fat per day) and all stool samples are collected and analyzed. It is not used for diagnosis because of the complexity and inconvenience of the test.

Sudan stain. This test, which identifies fat in the stool, is not sensitive or specific for pancreatic insufficiency since undigested oils or fats can be present as a result of:

Their nature (e.g., mineral oil, olestra);

Blocking of pancreatic lipase (e.g., orlistat); or

Diseases of the intestinal mucosa.

Diffusion-weighted MRI. Various “functional” tests have been advocated using abdominal imaging techniques, including secretin-stimulated MRI. Although diffusion-weighted MRI is probably better at detecting the structural changes of chronic pancreatitis than standard MRI [Akisik et al 2009], it does not measure function, and fluid volume cannot measure bicarbonate output.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy improves digestion in those with pancreatic insufficiency who have pain with eating, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), and/or diarrhea [Perrault 1994, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. Pancreatic enzymes most effectively relieve symptoms in persons with steatorrhea and in a subset of persons without steatorrhea [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011].

The amount of pancreatic enzyme replacement necessary depends on the diet and on the amount of residual pancreatic function (which diminishes over time). The normal amount of lipase secreted is about 750,000-1,000,000 units (USP) per meal. (Note that earlier papers used IU, and 1 IU = 3 USP units) [Pongprasobchai & DiMagno 2005]. Since a minimum of 10% of normal pancreatic enzyme output is needed to digest a meal, about 70,000-80,000 USP units of lipase are required for an average-sized adult (70 kg) with total pancreatic insufficiency. The amount can be reduced for smaller persons and those with residual pancreatic exocrine function – while monitoring symptoms and nutritional parameters.

Diabetes mellitus is a common disorder and both type 1 and type 2 can overlap with HP. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is caused by loss of pancreatic tissue as a result of surgery, chronic pancreatitis, or other rare pancreatic diseases [Rossi et al 2004, Cui & Andersen 2011]. Type 3c is important because loss of both the insulin-producing beta cells and the glucagon-producing alpha cells results in loss of counter-regulatory hormones and risk of hypoglycemia.

Chronic pancreatitis is associated with a gradual loss of function. The following may be of benefit [Cui & Andersen 2011]:

Monitoring for glucose intolerance

Optimizing pancreatic insulin secretion with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy via amino acid and fatty acid-stimulated release of endogenous incretins from the foregut, with the addition of antidiabetic agents as needed

Synchronizing the entry of nutrients into the circulation with exogenous insulin therapy delivery through diet and promoting predictable early nutrient digestion and absorption with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy

Use of metformin as an oral antidiabetic agent [Decensi et al 2010]
Joint pain may be controlled with analgesics, but no systematic studies have evaluated the effectiveness of various forms of pain control in pseudoachondroplasia.

Osteotomy to treat the lower limb malalignment is common during childhood. The need for subsequent revision is also common, which most likely reflects the severe joint instability that can be present in some affected individuals [Hunter 1999, Li et al 2007].

Very few examples of extended limb lengthening have been reported for pseudoachondroplasia; thus, the outcome of this procedure in pseudoachondroplasia is not known.

Surgical treatment of scoliosis is rarely needed but may be effective in severe situations. Surgical methods are standard.

In persons with neurologic symptoms and radiographic evidence of cervical spine instability or cord compression, C1-C2 fixation is the recommended surgical procedure.

Awareness of psychosocial issues related to short stature, including stigmatization and discrimination, is important in caring for the individual. Social support organizations including the Little People of America and other similar organizations in other countries (see Resources) may be of great benefit in providing information to affected individuals and their families.
The management of thrombosis in individuals with prothrombin-related thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances.

The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide) [Kearon et al 2012]. Low molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux have largely replaced unfractionated heparin because of their many advantages [Garcia et al 2012].

Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with LMWH or fondaparinux (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international-normalized ratio (INR). A target INR of 2.5 (therapeutic range: 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in F2 20210G>A homozygotes.

Rivaroxaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, is also approved for the treatment of acute DVT and PE and secondary prevention of recurrent VTE.

Note: LMWH and warfarin are both safe in women who are breast-feeding. Rivaroxaban is contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding because animal studies showed reproductive toxicity, and evidence that the drug crosses the placenta and is secreted in milk [Ageno et al 2012].

The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be based on an individualized assessment of the risks of VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with VTE experience recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent five years [Prandoni et al 2007]. Recurrence risk is determined by the clinical circumstances of the first event (provoked or unprovoked), adequacy of early treatment, and individual risk factors (see Clinical Description, Recurrent Thrombosis, Risk for recurrent thrombosis in adult 20210G>A heterozygotes.

20210G>A heterozygosity is generally not an indication for long-term anticoagulation in the absence of other risk factors. The presence of a hereditary thrombophilia was not a factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis based on evidence that inherited thrombophilic disorders are not major determinants of VTE recurrence risk [Kearon et al 2012] (full text). Other clinical guidelines and expert opinion also conclude that identification of 20210G>A heterozygosity should not affect clinical decision making [Baglin et al 2010, Bauer 2010, Kyrle et al 2010, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012, National Clinical Guideline Centre 2012]. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2012].

Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring [Kearon et al 2012]. The decision should be based on an assessment of potential risks and benefits regardless of 20210G>A status [Berg et al 2011]. Long-term anticoagulation is considered in selected individuals homozygous for the 20210G>A allele or with multiple inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders [De Stefano & Rossi 2013]. In these individuals at higher risk for recurrence, the potential benefits of long-term anticoagulation may outweigh the bleeding risks.

LMWH, fondaparinux, warfarin, and rivaroxaban are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of VTE. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin, argatroban, and dabigatran), and apixaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, are approved for use in specific circumstances [Schulman 2014].

Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT.

Treatment of thrombosis in children. Treatment recommendations for children with VTE are largely adapted from studies in adults. There is no evidence that a 20210G>A allele should influence decisions about the intensity or duration of anticoagulation in children [Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012]. British guidelines for antithrombotic therapy in children do not consider inherited thrombophilia as a determinant of either the intensity or duration of therapy.

Children with a first VTE should receive initial treatment with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH for at least five days. LMWH is favored over warfarin for continued therapy, especially in very young children and those with complex medical problems. Recommendations on the duration of antithrombotic therapy are based on the nature of the thrombotic event (e.g., spontaneous or provoked) [Chalmers et al 2011, Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements).

Anticoagulation is recommended:

For at least three months after a VTE provoked by a clinical risk factor that has resolved.

Beyond three months until the risk factor has resolved in children with ongoing but potentially reversible risk factors.

For six to 12 months after a first idiopathic (unprovoked) VTE.

Indefinitely for those with recurrent idiopathic VTE

Expert opinion emphasizes the importance of a careful risk/benefit assessment in each individual [Raffini & Thornburg 2009, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011].

Consensus guidelines are also available for management of stroke in infants and children [Monagle et al 2012].
Individuals often benefit when management is provided by a multidisciplinary team including relevant specialists, which may include, but is not limited to, a pediatrician, clinical geneticist, child neurologist, pulmonologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, and speech and language therapist.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Cognitive/developmental delay

See Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues.

Seizures

Management by a neurologist

May include video EEG monitoring to help distinguish epileptic from non-epileptic events (e.g., dystonia, dyskinesia, dysconjugate eye movements)

Vision deficits

Correction of refractive errors; vision support; standard treatment for strabismus & exophoria

Hypoventilation

Supplementary oxygen (at night) & rarely tracheostomy

Ambulatory peripheral saturation monitoring may be required.

Some infants require short periods of intubation & mechanical ventilation, particularly during acute illness.

Congenital heart defect

Management as per current practice for the specific congenital heart defect

Frequent aspiration (or high risk of aspiration)

A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube may be considered.

GERD

Medical management; consideration of Nissen fundoplication if medical treatment is not sufficient

Constipation

Routine management

Referral to a gastroenterologist may be required in severe cases.

Congenital urogenital defect

Management as per current practice for the specific urogenital defect

Scoliosis

Standard management

Progressive neuropathic scoliosis may require spinal fusion.

Osteoporosis/osteopenia

Standard management

Instability in standing position

Ankle foot orthoses (AFO) may improve stability, allowing for better standing & transferring ability.

Neuropathic hip dysplasia, progressive subluxation, & dislocation

Consideration of hip reconstructions w/varus derotational proximal femoral osteotomies

Generalized joint laxity & continued inability to walk may cause relapsing hip subluxation even after previous femoral osteotomies.

Vitamin D deficiency

Vitamin D supplementation

Anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies

Standard treatment as directed by an endocrinologist

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide, federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP should be developed by the local public school district based on each individual’s level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of medications or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing).

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation.
A team approach to management is recommended [Goldstone et al 2008, Cassidy & McCandless 2010].

Feeding, hyperphagia, and obesity. Special feeding techniques, including special nipples or gavage feeding, may be necessary for the first weeks to months of life to assure adequate nutrition and avoid failure to thrive. Individuals diagnosed with PWS typically do not need a G-tube since the feeding will improve with time.

When weight centiles begin increasing in nutritional phase 2a (typically between 18 and 36 months), a program of a well-balanced, low-calorie diet, regular exercise, and close supervision to minimize food stealing should be instituted to prevent obesity (i.e., BMI Z score of <2) and its consequences. The same program is appropriate if obesity is present at any time. Consultation with a dietician and close follow up are usually necessary, and locking the kitchen, refrigerator, and/or cupboards is often needed once the child is able to open the refrigerator and cupboards. Caloric needs of infants and children with PWS are typically 60%-80% of the recommended daily allowance (RDA). The energy requirement of adults with PWS, which rarely exceeds 1200-1400 Kcal/day, should be considered in planning daily food intake. Assessment of adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake by a dietician, and prescription of appropriate supplementation, is indicated, especially for calcium and vitamin D.

No medications are known to aid in controlling hyperphagia, but several clinical trials are underway (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Gastric bypass is not recommended in PWS, as it does not appear to correct the lack of satiety and will not prevent overeating. In addition, complication rates are high [Scheimann et al 2012].

Growth hormone treatment normalizes height, increases lean body mass, decreases fat mass, and increases mobility, which are beneficial to weight management. Dose recommendations in young children are generally similar to those for individuals with isolated growth hormone deficiency (i.e., ~1 mg/m2/day) but the dose must be individualized as the child grows. Therapy can be started in infancy or at the time of diagnosis. The adult dose of growth hormone is 20%-25% of the dose recommended in children. Monitoring of growth velocity, head circumference, and serum IGF-1 is important to avoid overtreatment.

Controlled trials of growth hormone therapies have demonstrated significant benefit from infancy through adulthood [Carrel et al 2010, Sode-Carlsen et al 2010, Wolfgram et al 2013].

An increase in language and cognitive skills in treated infants [Myers et al 2007] and an improvement in mental speed and flexibility as well as motor performance in adults [Höybye et al 2005] have been reported based on controlled trials.

A review of the results of one to two years of growth hormone treatment among 328 children documented in the database of one pharmaceutical company indicated improved height velocity, particularly in prepubertal children, but no change in BMI [Craig et al 2006].

Significantly greater adult height was demonstrated in 21 individuals treated long term versus 39 untreated individuals without an increase in adverse side effects [Angulo et al 2007].

Some improvements in cognition have been suggested with growth hormone therapy in individuals with PWS [Osório 2012, Siemensma 2012], but more work and longer studies need to be done.

Although there was initial concern about growth hormone treatment contributing to scoliosis in PWS, later studies showed no difference in frequency or severity in those treated compared to those who were not treated [Nagai et al 2006, Angulo et al 2007].

Decreased saliva production can be addressed with products developed for the treatment of dry mouth, including special toothpastes, gels, mouthwash, and gum.

Therapies, education and behavior management. Early intervention in children before age three years, particularly physical therapy, may improve muscle strength and encourage achievement of developmental milestones. In older individuals, daily muscle training increases physical activity and lean body mass [Schlumpf et al 2006].

Initiate appropriate educational programming in children:

Begin speech therapy for language delay and articulation abnormalities in infancy and childhood.

Special education, either in an inclusion setting or in a self-contained classroom setting, is usually necessary during school age. An individual aide is helpful in assuring attendance to task. Social skills training groups have been beneficial.

Behavioral disturbance should be addressed with behavioral management programs, including firm limit setting. While no medication is beneficial in managing behavior in all individuals with PWS, serotonin reuptake inhibitors have helped the largest proportion of affected teenagers and adults, particularly those with obsessive-compulsive symptoms [Brice 2000, Dykens & Shah 2003].

Psychosis is reported to respond well to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, but not to mood stabilizers [Soni et al 2007]. There are no well-designed studies of the effectiveness of treatment for psychosis in PWS [Ho & Dimitropoulos 2010].

Hypogonadism. Cryptorchidism may resolve spontaneously, even up to adolescence, but usually requires hormonal and surgical approaches; however, preservation of fertility is not an issue. Standard treatment is appropriate. Human chorionic gonadotropin treatment for infants with undescended testes should be considered as it can improve the size of the scrotal sac and improve surgical outcome [McCandless 2011; Angulo & Miller, unpublished data].

Replacement of sex hormones produces adequate secondary sexual characteristics but is somewhat controversial because of the possible role of testosterone replacement in behavior problems in males and the role of estrogen replacement in the risk of stroke as well as hygiene concerns related to menstruation in females. Daily use of the testosterone patch or gel may avert exacerbation of behavioral problems by providing a more even blood level than use of a slow-release depo-testosterone injection every month. Also, it was shown in the non-PWS adult population that depo- testosterone injections were associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular events, hospitalizations, and deaths compared with gels and patches [Layton et al 2015].

Concern about osteoporosis should be considered in deciding about hormone replacement. Recent reports of fertility in four women with PWS raise the issue of need for birth control [Akefeldt et al 1999; Schulze et al 2001; Vats & Cassidy, unpublished data].

Sleep issues. Disturbed sleep in children and adults should prompt a sleep study, as treatment may be available. Treatment depends on the cause and may include tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy and/or CPAP or BiPAP, as in the general population.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (unrelated to the degree of sleep apnea) is frequently seen in individuals with PWS. Modafinil has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for this condition [De Cock et al 2011].

Skin picking. One study demonstrated decreased skin picking with topiramate treatment in some individuals [Shapira et al 2004]; other clinicians have reported anecdotally that approximately half of individuals with PWS who skin pick benefit from low-dose (25-50 mg daily) topiramate.

A recent study of 35 individuals with PWS (age 5-39 years) using 450-1200 mg/day of N-acetylcysteine found a high degree of success in reducing or eliminating skin picking [Miller & Angulo 2014].

Other

Management of strabismus is as for any infant.

Management of scoliosis, hip dysplasia, and complications of obesity is as in the general population.

Adulthood. For adults with PWS, the most successful living situation for behavior and weight management is a group home specially designated for individuals with PWS, where diet and access to food are tightly restricted and exercise is included in daily activities. Affected individuals generally require a sheltered employment environment.

Issues of guardianship, wills, trusts, and advocacy should be investigated no later than adolescence.
No specific treatment for PXE exists.

Management of PXE requires coordinated input from a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a dermatologist, primary care physician, ophthalmologist, cardiologist, vascular surgeon, plastic surgeon, genetics professional, and nutritionist. Support groups can benefit affected individuals and their families by providing accurate information and education and reducing isolation.

Current treatment for macular degeneration, especially the intraocular injection of anti-angiogenic drugs, also appears to be effective in PXE [Finger et al 2011]. A retinal specialist should be consulted immediately when the individual experiences any distortion in vision.

Surgical or radiologic intervention may be indicated for gastrointestinal bleeding, severe peripheral vascular disease (if correctable), and the improvement of changes of the skin of the face, neck, axilla, and groin that are of cosmetic concern. Although wound healing seems to be uncomplicated in PXE, cosmetic acceptability of surgery involving the skin is less predictable, although generally good [Viljoen et al 1990].
For all phenotypes

Critical care: standard management of manifestations such as seizure or apnea

Note: A seizure care plan, with provision of rescue therapy for prolonged seizures if indicated, is strongly recommended for those in whom epilepsy has been confirmed by either electrodiagnostic testing or highly suggestive clinical features.

Occupational therapy to maximize motor function

Speech therapy for dysarthria

RDP. In a few patients with RDP decreased spasms have been noted with high-dose benzodiazepines. Dosing should be judged by the physician on an individual basis.

Standard therapies for the following are appropriate:

Seizures

Dysphagia

Psychotherapy for mood disorder (such as depression and anxiety), substance abuse, and/or psychosis

Two individuals treated with deep brain stimulation [Kamm et al 2008] did not show marked improvement [A Brashear, personal communication].

AHC. Medical treatment generally involves the following [Neville & Ninan 2007]:

Episode prophylaxis (avoiding triggers; reducing the frequency and/or severity of recurrent paroxysmal episodes by sleep – either natural or induced with daily prophylactic medications):

Prophylactic medications

Flunarizine. Symptomatic benefit in reducing the frequency and/or severity of the recurrent paroxysmal episodes of neurologic dysfunction has been reported with flunarizine [Silver & Andermann 1993, Sasaki 2001]. Flunarizine has been examined in a few small series of patients, and is reported to decrease the frequency and/or severity of the episodic dystonic and/or plegic episodes. In spite of the lack of well-designed placebo-controlled trials, flunarizine has remained the most commonly prescribed therapy for prophylaxis of episodic neurologic dysfunction in AHC for more than two decades. Note that abrupt withdrawal of the medication has been associated with deterioration in clinical status [Sweney et al 2009, Sasaki et al 2014a].

Topiramate is another commonly prescribed agent for prophylaxis [Jiang et al 2006, Chi et al 2012].

Sleep. Placing the affected individual in a quiet, dark room or putting a child down for a nap can help alleviate severe episodes and/or promote an earlier recovery.

Acute attack management with use of various rescue medications including:

Benzodiazepines, which are commonly used and reported to be of some benefit in increasingly the tolerability of episodes, especially for severe or prolonged dystonic episodes

Chloral hydrate

Other sleep inducers

A low threshold for suspicion of seizure activity is critical, particularly in the setting of either recurrent brief or more prolonged tonic or dystonic episodes associated with alterations in consciousness or apparent awareness of their environment. Epilepsy management utilizes existing anticonvulsants.

Recently, two separate reports described patients with AHC who responded to a ketogenic diet [Ulate-Campos et al 2014, Roubergue et al 2015].

CAPOS syndrome. Symptomatic treatment includes hearing and visual aids.
Capillary malformations (CMs). Referral to a dermatologist can be considered for evaluation of CMs that are of cosmetic concern and discussion of the risks and benefits of intervention.

AVMs/AVFs. The risks and benefits of intervention for AVMs and AVFs must be considered. Depending on the location and symptoms of AVMs/AVFs, a multi-disciplinary team including specialists in interventional radiology, neurosurgery, surgery, cardiology, and dermatology is recommended to determine appropriate approaches (e.g., embolization vs. surgery).

Cardiac overload. Referral to a cardiologist is indicated if cardiac overload is suspected.

Hemihyperplasia and/or leg length discrepancy. Referral to an orthopedist is recommended in individuals with hemihyperplasia and leg length discrepancy.

Lymphangiography to evaluate for lymphatic malformations may be considered. Compression stockings for those with evidence of lymphedema may be considered.
It has been suggested that most individuals with RBS are stillborn or die in infancy. However, it is important to emphasize that, because it is possible for individuals to have normal intelligence and a healthy psychological adjustment, even with all of the stigmata of RBS, such individuals should be managed in a way that allows each to improve their quality of life and to reach their full potential.

Individuals with severe RBS who survive the newborn period face a number of medical problems, and management of these individuals usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatrics, genetics, ophthalmology, cardiology, nephrology, neurology, child development, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved. Comprehensive medical intervention is suggested, as is complete and clear parental counseling when discussing the possible outcome for these individuals [Karabulut et al 2001].

Treatment is based on the affected individual’s specific needs and may include the following:

Surgical treatments including cosmetic or reconstructive surgery for clefts of the lip and/or palate and for limb abnormalities (several surgeries are usually required). Hand surgery improves early and proper development of the prehensile grasp.

Prostheses

Speech assessment and therapy and aggressive treatment of otitis media if cleft palate is present

Intervention and/or special education if developmental delays are detected

Standard treatment for specific ophthalmologic problems, cardiac defects and renal dysfunction
Management is supportive and limited because of the multiple handicaps present at birth and the poor outcome.

Cataract extraction may preserve some vision.

Physical therapy is recommended to assist in the improvement of contractures; orthopedic procedures have improved function in some individuals.
Chronic Treatment

The following are indicated:

Dietary restriction of phytanic acid intake

Avoidance of sudden weight loss

Lifelong treatment with hydrating creams

Regular care by a cardiologist for cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy in order to treat signs and symptoms properly with antiarrhythmic and cardiogenic supportive drugs

Because the pupils do not dilate well if at all, other measures, such as use of iris hooks, may be necessary to allow sufficient pupillary enlargement during cataract surgery. In addition, an anterior chamber lens with iris fixation may be necessary because the brittleness of the zonular fibers holding the lens capsule may not allow positioning of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag after cataract removal, a complication observed in one patient [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication].

Treatment of Acute Presentation

Many acute features such as polyneuropathy, ataxia, ichthyosis, and cardiac arrhythmias resolve with reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Plasmapheresis or lipapheresis can be used in the event of acute arrhythmias or extreme weakness because phytanic acid is transported on lipoproteins [Wierzbicki et al 1999]. During plasmapheresis, cardiac monitoring should be continuous and plasma glucose concentration should be kept high to prevent onset or exacerbation of arrhythmias.

A low phytanic acid diet can be given orally or by nasogastric tube. If oral intake is restricted, appropriate parenteral nutrition and fluid therapies are needed to maintain plasma glucose concentrations and prevent ketosis.
Goals of treatment are first preservation of life, and then of sight. As optimal treatment may be complex, specialists skilled in the treatment of Rb from various fields including ophthalmology, pediatric oncology, pathology and radiation oncology collaborate to deliver optimized care.

In addition to eye classification and tumor stage, choice of treatment depends on many factors, including the number of tumor foci (unifocal, unilateral multifocal, or bilateral), localization and size of the tumor(s) within the eye(s), presence of vitreous seeding, the potential for useful vision, the extent and kind of extraocular extension, and the resources available.

Treatment options for the eye include enucleation; cryotherapy; laser, systemic, or local ocular chemotherapy including intra-arterial chemotherapy combined with or followed by laser or cryotherapy; radiation therapy using episcleral plaques; and, as a last resort, external beam radiotherapy.
Low-vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low-vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs.

Public school systems are mandated by federal law to provide appropriate education for children who have vision impairment. Assistance may include larger print textbooks, preferential seating in the front of the classroom, and use of handouts with higher contrast.

Many individuals with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis are able to obtain a restricted driver's license. Some individuals have found specially designed telescopic lenses useful when driving; legal use of telescopic lenses may vary by locale.

Retinoschisis affects primarily the inner retinal layers; hence, retinoschisis alone (without retinal detachment) is at best difficult to treat surgically.

Treatment of retinoschisis may require the care of a retinal surgeon to address the infrequent complications of vitreous hemorrhage and full-thickness retinal detachment. The clinical presentation of a large area of peripheral retinoschisis may mask a true retinal detachment. Advice from an ophthalmologist or retinal surgeon should be sought when in doubt.
The treatment program needs to be individualized following an assessment of the affected individual’s clinical problems and needs.

Management is mainly symptomatic and focuses on optimizing the individual's abilities using a dynamic multidisciplinary approach, with specialist input from dietitians, physiotherapists, and occupational, speech, and music therapists [Lotan et al 2004, Weaving et al 2005].

Psychosocial support for families is an integral part of management.

Therapeutic horseback riding, swimming, and music therapy have been reported to be of benefit.

Effective communication strategies, including the use of augmentative communication techniques, need to be explored for these severely disabled individuals [Ryan et al 2004].

Treatment for seizures needs to be individualized with input from a pediatric neurologist. Topiramate may improve seizure control and/or respiratory abnormalities [Goyal et al 2004].

Risperidone (low dose) or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors have been somewhat successful in treating agitation.

Melatonin can ameliorate sleep disturbances [McArthur & Budden 1998]. Chloral hydrate, hydroxyzine, or diphenhydramine may be used along with melatonin.

Ample fluid intake and a high-fiber diet can help prevent acute intestinal obstruction. When diet is ineffective, Miralax® (polyethylene glycol) and other stool softeners may be used to control constipation; they are tolerated better than milk of magnesia.

Anti-reflux agents, smaller and thickened feedings, and positioning can decrease gastroesophageal reflux.

Scoliosis [Kerr et al 2003] and spasticity need to be treated to maintain mobility. Recently, guidelines were developed for the management of scoliosis in Rett syndrome [Downs et al 2009] (full text).

Some individuals known to have prolonged QTc may benefit from the use of β-blockers or cardiac pacing, in consultation with a specialist pediatric cardiologist.
Medications

High dose supplementation

of

riboflavin. Because oral riboflavin supplementation is effective (and possibly life saving), it should begin as soon as a riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy is suspected and continued lifelong unless the diagnosis is excluded by molecular genetic testing.

High-dose supplementation of riboflavin between 10 mg and 50 mg/kg/day has been effective in patients with genetically proven riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy and also in some patients in whom the genetic basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy has not been established.

Although no formal placebo control trial has been conducted and the longest course of riboflavin supplementation has been 36 months, riboflavin supplementation: improves symptoms and signs on clinical examination; improves objective testing (vital capacity, brain stem evoked potentials, nerve conduction studies), and normalizes acylcarnitine levels [Foley et al 2014].

Before initiating riboflavin supplementation, perform the assessments in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis.

Oral riboflavin supplementation should be given in gradually increasing doses in order to establish the optimum dose:

Riboflavin 10 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 20 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 30 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 40 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Riboflavin 50 mg/kg per day in 3 doses for 1 month

Note: Some patients are on doses up to 70 mg/kg/day.

Side effects, problems, or deterioration at any point require discussion with the treating clinician.

See Surveillance for recommended follow up of individuals treated with riboflavin supplementation.

Note: Treatments attempted before the basis of riboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy was known have included the following:

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been tried in a number of patients with reports of improvement as well as reports of no or non-sustained response [Bandettini Di Poggio et al 2014].

Some patients have reported additional improvement with other multivitamins and coenzyme Q10.

Supportive Care

The following are appropriate:

Respiratory support

Physiotherapy to avoid contractures

Occupational therapy for support in activities of daily living

Orthotics for limb and trunk bracing

Hearing aids and appropriate educational intervention for those with sensorineural hearing loss

Speech and language therapy to avoid choking and respiratory problems

Wheel chair as needed

Low vision aids for those with decreased visual acuity

Routine management of scoliosis to avoid long term respiratory problems

Routine management of depression
Pharmacologic treatment focuses on improving pain and correcting bone deformation.

In children, treatment generally begins at the time of diagnosis and continues until long bone growth is complete.

Treatment for most children consists of oral phosphate administered three to five times daily and high-dose calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Two different regimens have been used, but have not been compared:

Low dose. Treatment is generally started at a low dose to avoid the gastrointestinal side effects of diarrhea and gastrointestinal upset. The doses are then titrated to a weight-based dose of calcitriol at 20 to 30 ng/kg/day administered in two to three divided doses and phosphate at 20 to 40 mg/kg/day administered in three to five divided doses [Carpenter et al 2011].

High dose. Some clinicians favor a high-dose phase of treatment for up to a year. The high-dose phase consists of calcitriol at 50-70 ng/kg/day (up to a maximum dose of 3.0 µg daily) along with the phosphate [Sabbagh et al 2014].

Doses are adjusted based on (1) evidence of therapeutic success including reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase activity, changes in musculoskeletal examination, improvement in radiographic rachitic changes, and (when possible) improved growth velocity; and (2) evidence of therapeutic complications including hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Note: Normalization of the serum phosphate concentration is not a therapeutic goal as normal serum phosphate concentration frequently indicates overtreatment and increases the risk for treatment-related complications.

Jehan et al [2008] described differences in growth during treatment that are associated with different vitamin D receptor promoter haplotypes, providing a possible explanation for some of the clinical variability observed in XLH.

After growth is complete, lower doses of the medications can be used to reach the treatment goals.

In adults, the role of treatment has not been well studied; treatment is generally reserved for individuals with symptoms such as skeletal pain, upcoming orthopedic surgery, biochemical evidence of osteomalacia with an elevated alkaline phosphatase, or recurrent pseudofractures or stress fractures [Carpenter et al 2011]. The calcitriol doses that are frequently employed in adults are in the range of 0.50 to 0.75 µg daily; the phosphate is given as 750 to 1000 mg/day in three to four divided doses. As with children, the phosphate dose is slowly titrated to avoid gastrointestinal side effects, starting at 250 mg/day and titrating up by 250 mg/day each week until the final dose is reached.

Orthopedic treatment. Despite what appears to be adequate pharmacologic therapy (see following Note), some individuals have persistent lower-limb bowing and torsion, which may lead to misalignment of the lower extremity. In these individuals, surgical treatment is frequently pursued. No control trials of the different surgical techniques have been undertaken; the literature consists of case series. Note: Poor compliance with pharmacologic therapy during childhood and the teen years may be one factor for persistent lower-limb deformities.

In prepubertal children who have not yet reached their peak growth velocity (generally before age 10 years), stapling or toggle plate insertion can be considered as a minimally invasive method of reversible hemi-epiphysiodesis [Novais & Stevens 2006]. Note: The risk with this procedure is prematurely stopping growth.

In older children and adults, surgical techniques reported include distraction osteogenesis by external fixation, acute correction by external fixation with intramedullary nailing, internal fixation with intramedullary nailing, and acute correction by intramedullary nailing [Song et al 2006, Petje et al 2008].

Additionally, total hip and knee arthroplasty is sometimes required because of degenerative joint disease and enthesopathy. Treatment in adults has not been shown to influence enthesopathy [Connor et al 2015].

Craniofacial treatment. Although hypophosphatemic rickets is a rare condition, a recent review from three neurosurgical centers reported on ten patients treated over twenty years and recommended prompt referral to a craniofacial specialist when head shape abnormalities are seen in patients with this disorder [Vega et al 2016].

Dental treatment. Because individuals with XLH are susceptible to recurrent dental abscesses which may result in premature loss of decidual and permanent teeth, good oral hygiene with flossing and regular dental care and fluoride treatments are the cornerstones of prevention. Pit and fissure sealants have been recommended but have not been well studied. A recent study has suggested that treatment of adults with phosphate and calcitriol can improve the severity of dental disease [Connor et al 2015].

Sensorineural hearing loss has been reported in persons with XLH; individuals with this complication are treated in a standard manner. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview, Management.
Corrective surgeries may be required for repair of:

Cryptorchidism

Abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal position

Cleft lip/palate

Hormone therapy may be helpful for males with micropenis. Injection of human chorionic gonadotropin and testosterone improved penile length and testicular volume in three boys with severe micropenis [Soliman et al 1998]. Hormone therapy should be initiated and monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Orthodontic treatment is typically required.
Corrective surgeries may be required for the following:

Syndactyly repair

Severe scoliosis secondary to hemivertebrae and rib abnormalities

Cleft lip and cleft palate repair

Although it was not possible to detach the abnormal insertion of the penile crura, which can cause a normal-sized penis to be buried in the scrotum and thus appear small (see Clinical Description), Wilcox et al [1997] improved the cosmetic appearance by transposing the scrotum downward.

Injection of human chorionic gonadotropin and testosterone therapy improved penile length and testicular volume in three boys with severe micropenis [Soliman et al 1998]. Hormone therapy should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Orthodontic treatment is usually required

Growth hormone deficiency in children with Robinow syndrome responds to growth hormone therapy [Castells et al 1999].
No treatment is required.
Cystoid macular edema (CME). Some therapeutic success has been reported with both systemic and topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (oral acetazolamide [Diamox] or topical dorzolamide); however, rebound edema can occur with continued use [Fishman & Apushkin 2007].

Cataracts. Approximately 50% of individuals with RP develop cataracts that eventually require lens extraction (with visual improvement in the majority). However, since visual acuity can be reduced because of the incipient cataract or concomitant macular sequela of RP (CME or defects of the retinal pigment epithelium), determining which is the major cause of reduced vision can be difficult. In the presence of macular disease, extraction of lenses when cataracts are in the early stage may not always improve the quality of vision, particularly in younger individuals who still have reasonable accommodation for near tasks.

The timing of lens extraction may change as an individual ages and the visual field becomes more constricted: most individuals with RP with a visual field greater than 10° are not greatly incapacitated by mild to modest posterior subcapsular cataracts, whereas those with a visual field of less than 10° usually report significantly improved vision following lens extraction [Jackson et al 2001].

Patients with retinitis pigmentosa are at a greater-than-average risk for postoperative inflammation and induced CME. Thus, it is important at the time of lens extraction to avoid unnecessary manipulation of the iris; following surgery it is important to administer anti-inflammatory agents longer than would be indicated for individuals who do not have RP.

Optical aids. Because of the concern of acceleration of retinal degeneration from short wave-length light exposure, use of UV-A and UV-B blocking sunglasses is recommended. Use of CPF 550 lenses (Corning Photochromic Filter, developed by Corning Medical Optics), which filter out 97%-99% of the spectral and ultraviolet energy below 550 nm wavelength, has been promoted for individuals with RP to increase eye comfort by reducing glare and internal light scatter, to improve contrast, and to reduce adaptation time from light to dark and vice versa.

Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks.

Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields.

Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with RP. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.

Google Glass® allows minification of the visual field so that a wider field of view can be seen by patients with loss of peripheral vision. A relatively new wearable device called eSight® provides a live video stream which can be adjusted in terms of magnification, contrast, color, and brightness, to allow optimal vision for the wearer. However, its current cost limits widespread use.

Retinal prostheses. A number of retinal prosthetic devices that can be implanted in an epiretinal, subretinal, or suprachoroidal location to electrically stimulate either the bipolar cells or retinal ganglion cells have been developed for (for review, see Hadjinicolaou et al [2015]). These devices have had varying success in facilitating the perception of light, shapes, and movement in patients with end-stage RP. One such device, the Argus II®, has been FDA approved and is in clinical use in a limited subset of patients with vision of light perception or worse (no light perception) in the United States and Europe. As such, this is the first FDA-approved treatment for retinitis pigmentosa [da Cruz et al 2016].

Agencies for the visually impaired. In the US, publicly funded agencies at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living.

Other. Prolonged light deprivation is not effective in altering the progression of RP.
Detailed evaluations are outlined in Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research Clinical Guidelines.

To date, there are no known cures and few effective treatments for any forms of mitochondrial disease, including RRM2B-related mitochondrial disease. Treatment modalities currently focus on symptomatic management and supportive care, and are best implemented by a multidisciplinary team.

General management guidelines for those with systemic involvement:

Nutritional support (e.g., nasogastric tube, gastrostomy) as needed for significant gastrointestinal involvement

Early referral to a pediatric renal specialist for those with proximal renal tubulopathy

Early referral to a pediatric pulmonologist for children with evidence of reduced respiratory function. Management may include consideration of tracheostomy and artificial ventilation.

Physical therapy to maintain muscle strength and mobility and to prevent contractures

Referral to a pediatric neurologist for seizure management. Of note, seizures may be refractory to treatment.

Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness for discussion of management issues)

General management guidelines for those with progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO):

Ptosis surgery for cosmesis and/or symptomatic relief in those with good residual orbicularis oculi muscle strength

ECG in all individuals with PEO to screen for significant cardiac conduction defects which may warrant placement of a pacemaker, particularly in those with the Kearns-Sayre syndrome phenotype

General management guidelines for both those with systemic involvement and those with PEO:

Aggressive management of fever and infection
Growth. Children with any condition associated with body differences and/or short stature are often sensitive about body image. These factors can play a significant role in self-image, peer relationships, and socialization. Thus, psychological counseling is frequently helpful for children with RSS.

Human growth hormone therapy in children with intrauterine growth retardation of all causes has significantly improved growth and final height [Albanese & Stanhope 1997, Azcona et al 1998, Czernichow & Fjellestad-Paulsen 1998, Saenger 2002]. Specifically, children with RSS have benefited from growth hormone supplementation even in the absence of growth hormone deficiency [Albanese & Stanhope 1997], including significant growth acceleration and improved final height [Azcona et al 1998] and continued normal growth rate after the discontinuation of growth hormone therapy [Azcona & Stanhope 1999].

Such treatment is best undertaken in a center with experience in managing growth disorders.

One study demonstrated significant increase in height in children with RSS treated with growth hormone, but without a change in body or limb asymmetry [Rizzo et al 2001].

Children with RSS with UPD7 had more gain in height with growth hormone therapy compared to children with 11p15.5 epimutations possibly because children with 11p15.5 methylation abnormalities showed elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor II (product of IGF2); children with RSS with UPD7 had response characteristics similar to other children who were small for gestational age [Binder et al 2008].

A later study looking at both IGF1 and IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) levels revealed no correlation between changes in the levels of these proteins and growth velocity after treatment with growth hormone; however, the diagnosis of RSS was based solely on clinical presentation and no data regarding testing for 11p15 methylation defects or maternal UPD7 were reported [Beserra et al 2010].

In a recent long term outcome study of 26 children with RSS treated with growth hormone for a median period of 9.8 years, a significant response was noted with median height of -2.7 SD at the beginning of therapy and a median height of -1.3 SD at the conclusion of therapy [Toumba et al 2010].

Unfortunately it is difficult to interpret the results of many studies of children with RSS who have received growth hormone, given the known genetic heterogeneity of the disorder and lack of etiologic data included in these studies. Also, it will be important to look at the long-term effects of growth hormone therapy on children with RSS, especially with respect to influence on final adult height and any possible changes in orthopedic management for those individuals with limb-length asymmetry.

Growth hormone deficiency. Treatment with human growth hormone is necessary in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency.

Skeletal abnormalities. Lower-limb length discrepancy exceeding 3 cm can lead to compensatory scoliosis and thus requires intervention. Initial treatment is use of a shoe lift. In older children, distraction osteogenesis or epiphysiodesis can be considered.

Neurodevelopment

For infants with hypotonia, referral to an early-intervention program and physical therapist

For children with evidence of delay, referral for early intervention and speech and language therapy

For school-age children, working with the school system to address learning disabilities through appropriate neuropsychological testing and an individualized educational plan

Hypoglycemia should be treated in a standard manner with dietary supplementation, frequent feedings, and use of complex carbohydrates.

Gastrointestinal disorders should be aggressively managed.

Treatment of gastroesophageal reflux initially with positioning and thickened feeds is recommended along with use of acid blocking medications (preferably proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole or patoprazole) as needed. Surgical management with fundoplication may be necessary in more severe cases or in instances in which conservative measures are unsuccessful.

Feeding aversion can be addressed with therapy by a speech pathologist and/or occupational therapist.

Craniofacial anomalies. For those children with severe micrognathia or cleft palate, management by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team is recommended. Orthognathic surgery is rarely required.

Dental hygiene and dental crowding can be appropriately managed in a routine manner by pediatric dentists and orthodontists.

Genitourinary abnormalities

Referral of males with cryptorchidism to a urologist; surgery as required

Referral of males with micropenis to an endocrinologist; androgenic hormone therapy as indicated

Neoplasia. The risk for malignancies in individuals with RSS is low. Although body asymmetry may be present, it appears not to be hemihypertrophy, as seen in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome; therefore, routine serial abdominal and renal sonograms are not indicated for children with RSS.
The following are appropriate:

Early intervention programs, special education, and vocational training to address developmental disabilities

Standard treatment for refractive errors, strabismus, glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye abnormalities if identified

Standard treatment for hearing loss if identified

Standard treatment for cardiac defects if identified

Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux and constipation

Standard treatment for cryptorchidism if identified

Surgical repair of significantly angulated thumbs or duplicated halluces

Appropriate treatment for sleep apnea if identified

Behavior management strategies including referral to a behavioral specialist/psychologist and consideration of medication if needed

Referral of the family to support groups and other resources
Dermatologic. Pulsed dye laser has been used for cosmetic management of the telangiectatic component of the rash [Potozkin & Geronemus 1991].

Hematologic. Individuals with clinical evidence of anemia or cytopenias should be evaluated by CBC and bone marrow biopsy if clinically indicated.

Cataract. Visually significant cataracts require surgical removal.

Cancer. Affected individuals who develop cancer should be treated according to standard chemotherapy and/or radiation regimens. Doses should be modified only if the individual experiences significantly increased toxicities.
All symptomatic persons should be treated (see Priori et al [2013]). Complete cessation of symptoms is the goal. Management is focused on the prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death through use of the following:

Beta blockers are the mainstay of therapy for LQTS, including asymptomatic individuals with prolonged QT intervals and individuals who have a pathogenic variant on molecular testing with a normal QTc interval [Priori et al 2004, Schwartz et al 2009]. Some individuals have symptoms despite the use of beta blockers [Moss et al 2000]. However, a majority of cardiac events that occur in individuals with LQTS type 1 phenotype “on beta-blockers” are not caused by failure of the medication, but in fact by failure to take the medication (non-compliance) and/or the administration of QT-prolonging drugs [Vincent et al 2009]. It is suspected that the same holds true for individuals with LQTS type 2, but that has not been systematically studied. It is therefore important that:

Inadequate beta blocker dosing is prevented by regular adjustments in growing children with evaluation of the efficacy of dose by assessment of the exercise ECG or ambulatory ECG;

Beta blockers are taken daily, and strategies are in place in case of missed doses;

QT-prolonging drugs (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) are not administered to persons with LQTS without careful consideration of risk versus benefit by the individual(s) and physician(s).

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) are recommended in individuals with LQTS resuscitated from a cardiac arrest, although children with a LQTS type 1 phenotype with an arrest while not receiving beta blockers can be treated with beta blockers or with left cardiac sympathetic denervation [Alexander et al 2004, Vincent et al 2009, Jons et al 2010]. ICDs can be useful for those individuals with beta-blocker-resistant symptoms or a contraindication for beta blocker therapy (severe asthma) [Zareba et al 2003, Priori et al 2013].

Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) is recommended for high-risk patients with LQTS in whom ICD therapy is refused or contraindicated and/or in whom beta blockers are either not effective, not tolerated, not accepted, or contraindicated [Schwartz et al 2004, Priori et al 2013]. LCSD can be useful in individuals who experience events while on therapy with beta blockers or ICD [Priori et al 2013].

Sodium channel blockers can be useful as additional pharmacological therapy for individuals with a LQTS type 3 phenotype with a QTc interval >500 ms in whom this additional compound is shown to shorten the QTc interval by >40 ms [Priori et al 2013].
Treatment involves prompt management of disease manifestations using a multidisciplinary approach that includes specialists in pediatric neurology, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, orthopedics, cardiology, and pulmonology.

Stretching exercises and physical therapy help prevent contractures and promote mobility. Assistive mechanical devices including orthotics, canes, and walkers can be used as needed.

Attention to education by providing school technical aid is important since cognition is normal. Stimulation and emotional support can improve school performance and the sense of social involvement.

Parents and/or caregivers should be made aware of the symptoms of heart failure, arrhythmia (including presyncope and syncope), and thromboembolic disease, and of the need to urgently seek medical care when any of these symptoms appear.

Training of caregivers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be suggested once the symptoms of cardiomyopathy start.

Adequate posture should be maintained when lying prone and sitting. Garchois brace (made of plexidur, a rigid but light and heat-deformable material) is used to reduce the degree of deformity and slow the progression of scoliosis [Wang et al 2010].

Cardiac transplantation should be considered for progressive dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure refractory to medical therapy.
Hematologic manifestations

Management of hematologic impairment is based on the severity of cytopenias and consists of red cell or platelet transfusions as needed.

Evaluate and treat for unrelated causes of anemia such as iron and vitamin deficiencies.

Marrow transplantation for myelodysplasia was successful in two individuals to date.

Note: There are no data to support use of erythropoietin or granulocyte-stimulating factor in SAMD9L-related ATXPC syndrome; these growth factors may increase the risk for myelodysplasia and myeloid leukemia.

Neurologic manifestations. Management of ataxia is supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

Individuals should continue to be active and use canes and walkers to prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
Treatment is symptomatic:

Deafness. Hearing aids, speech therapy, and sign language to support social adaptation and prevent educational problems in children with IOSCA. Computers may be a valuable aid in support of communication and learning.

Sensory axonal neuropathy. Physiotherapy and orthoses to prevent foot and spine deformity; supportive shoes, splints, and braces; orthopedic surgery for foot deformities (pes cavus) and spine deformities (scoliosis); foot care to treat calluses and ulcerations

Ataxia. A walker, wheelchair, physiotherapy, occupational therapy

Epilepsy. Conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (phenytoin and phenobarbital) are ineffective in most patients [Lönnqvist et al 2009].

Some patients have benefited from lamotrigine or levetiracetam.

Benzodiazepines, especially midazolam-infusion, when started early in status epilepticus, were occasionally effective.

Oxcarbazepine has some effect, but hyponatremia is a troublesome side effect.

Psychiatric symptoms. Antipsychotics (neurolepts, risperidone, olanzpine) to prevent psychotic behavior and antidepressants (SSRIs) for severe depression
Management of individuals with SCA1 remains supportive, as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists. Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists, physical and occupational therapists, and other specialists as needed.

Studies have shown that intensive rehabilitation (or coordinative physiotherapy) improves motor function in a heterogeneous group of individuals with various types of cerebellar degeneration [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010, Miyai et al 2012]. Although these studies did not include individuals with SCA1, intensive coordinative training may be recommended for persons with SCA1 because of symptom improvement with limited adverse events. However, further studies that include individuals with SCA1 will need to be performed to determine the efficacy of such training.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Repeated aspiration or significant weight loss may point to the need for a feeding device in some.
Control of seizures is the most important management issue, as uncontrolled seizures may lead to potentially fatal status epilepticus. Conventional anticonvulsants such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid achieve reasonable control, although occasional breakthrough seizures may occur.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Severe dysphagia may require percutaneous placement of a gastric tube for prevention of aspiration and maintenance of nutritional intake.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Although not specifically studied in SCA10, intensive coordinative training has shown sustainable improvements in motor performance in individuals with degenerative ataxias [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010].

Canes and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.
The following are appropriate:

Speech and language therapy to address dysarthria and swallowing problems and to teach patients strategies to improve their articulation and to avoid aspiration

Occupational therapy, including home adaptations

Physiotherapy and assessment for cane and wheelchair

Ankle-foot orthotics (AFOs) for those with neuropathy

Ophthalmology consultation is often helpful for individuals with nystagmus as prism glasses can help double vision
Symptomatic treatment including the following may be of great value:

Pharmacologic agents, including beta-blockers, clonazepam and phenobarbital derivatives, and benzodiazepines to decrease tremor amplitude. Modest success has been observed in some affected individuals.

Supplements of antioxidants, which may have some beneficial effects. However, their effect on disease outcome has not been validated through clinical trials.

Treatment of psychiatric syndromes as needed

Physical therapy to help maintain strength, flexibility, and independent mobility

Technical assistance with writing and other fine-motor tasks
Epileptic seizures can be improved by treatment with anticonvulsive medications.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Note: Tremor-controlling drugs are not effective for cerebellar tremors.
Axial myoclonus may be improved by clonazepam or valproic acid [Yamashita et al 2000].

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should continue to be active.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.
Education for affected individuals and their families is the cornerstone of management.

Physical and occupational therapy, as used for ataxic syndromes of any etiology, may be employed.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

To date significant dysphagia has not been an issue for individuals with SCA15; however, if significant dysphagia were to develop, a speech pathologist expert in the management of neurogenic dysphagia should be asked to help guide management.
The following are appropriate:

Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications

Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs)

Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia

Treatment of dystonia with local injections of botulinum toxin
Management of individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Improvement of severe tremor with thalamic stimulation has been reported in one individual [Pirker et al 2003]. Another individual showed improvement with stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus [Freund et al 2007].
Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity.

Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria or dysphonia.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, videofluoroscopic swallow evaluation can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.
At present, only symptomatic treatments are available. These include the following:

Crutches (less often canes) and walkers

Home adaptations including grab bars for the bathtub or shower chairs and raised toilet seats as needed

Speech/language therapy for dysarthria and swallowing difficulties

Physical therapy to ameliorate coordination difficulties, especially with tasks such as eating, dressing, walking, and bathing

Surgical intervention as needed for severe ptosis
Management of individuals with SCA3 remains supportive as no medication has been proven to slow the course of disease [D’Abreu et al 2010].

However, some symptoms may respond –in some cases dramatically – to certain drugs:

In particular, the extrapyramidal syndromes resembling parkinsonism may benefit from levodopa or dopamine agonist [Subramony et al 1993, Nandagopal & Moorthy 2004].

Symptoms of restless legs syndrome may respond to these agents.

Other manifestations, including spasticity, drooling, and sleep problems, also respond variably to appropriate agents such as lioresal, atropine-like drugs, and hypnotic agents.

Botulinum toxin has been used for dystonia and spasticity [Freeman & Wszolek 2005].

Daytime fatigue, a common problem in individuals with SCA3, may respond to psychostimulants used in narcolepsy such as modafinil.

Depression is common in individuals with SCA3 and should be treated with antidepressants [Cecchin et al 2007]. A trial of occupational therapy in SCA3 showed that depression scores improved as a consequence of therapy, underscoring the fact that non-pharmacologic measures may also improve affective disorder in SCA3 [Silva et al 2010].

Clik here (pdf) for a review of clinical trials of medications that have not shown a definite benefit for those with SCA3.

Non-pharmacologic therapy is important in SCA3:

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy slows the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falling, and motorized scooters later in disease can help maintain independence. Intensive coordinative training or a course of combined physical and occupational therapy focused on gait and incoordination can lead to symptomatic improvement [Ilg et al 2009, Miyai et al 2012]

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.
Specific treatment for SCA36 is currently not available. The therapeutic approach should be multidisciplinary and include the following:

Physical and occupational therapy to improve gait, balance, and fine motor coordination. Special attention should be paid to activities of daily life.

Regular physical exercise and weight control to reduce the effect of future balance and walking problems

Walking aids to facilitate ambulation and mobility. The use of a wheelchair is rare; however, it may be necessary in advanced disease stages. Living space may need to be adapted to help with accessibility.

Speech therapy and communication devices for those with dysarthria

Dietary assessment and feeding therapy programs to improve dysphagia and reduce the risk of aspiration

Depending on the severity of hearing loss and the relative impairment at different levels of the auditory tract, consideration of hearing aids on a case by case basis. The utility of cochlear implants in SCA36 is unknown; however, they have been proposed for central auditory impairment in other neurodegenerative ataxias [Frewin et al 2013]. Audiologic rehabilitation and speech therapy can help improve the ability to distinguish words and speech patterns from background sounds, while also taking into account the dysarthria in the therapy program.

Management of emotional and cognitive decline through cognitive therapy, treatment of depression, and psychological support.
Management is supportive.

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Acetazolamide may eliminate episodes of ataxia, but does not delay or slow the overall progression.

Vestibular suppressants may reduce vertigo and/or osscilopsia.

Ophthalmology consultation is indicated for refractive or surgical management of diplopia.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy stems the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Physical therapy should be targeted to maximizing compensation and strength.

Canes, walking sticks, and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech disturbances occasionally occur and may be managed as in other settings. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Before dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify safest behaviors and the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Clonopin may be used for REM sleep behavior disorders (RBD) unless sedative effects increase imbalance in the morning. Note: RBD is rare in individuals with SCA6.

Continuous positive airway pressure may be used for sleep apnea.
Management of affected individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists.

Cerebellar ataxia. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals with spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Note: Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.

Retinal degeneration. Use of sunglasses and limitation of UV exposure are encouraged in order to limit damage to the retina.

Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks.

Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields.

Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with retinal degeneration. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.
Use of canes and walkers helps prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy, communication devices such as writing pads, and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain some degree of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, a video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination, individuals with SCA8 should try to remain active in order to maintain their muscular and cardiopulmonary conditioning.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.
Since most individuals with SCAD deficiency are asymptomatic, the need for treatment when well is unclear.

Given the paucity of research, especially long-term follow up studies, there are no generally accepted recommendations for dietary manipulation or the use of carnitine and/or riboflavin supplementation in SCAD deficiency.

However, since the risk for episodes of metabolic decompensation is increased above background risk, increased alertness for dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia during times of otherwise minor illness is prudent.

Basic management of acute metabolic acidosis should be similar to that for other fatty acid oxidation disorders: promoting anabolism and providing alternative sources of energy, both of which can be accomplished by administration of intravenous fluids with high dextrose concentrations with or without insulin. Usually 10% dextrose is given at a rate to provide 8-10 mg/kg/min of glucose. This approach is especially important if nausea and vomiting prevent the oral intake of fluids.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon but can be treated in the same fashion as acute metabolic acidosis.

Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is an essential cofactor for SCAD function. Thus, riboflavin (vitamin B2) supplementation has been suggested as a possible therapy for SCAD deficiency. In one study, a Dutch cohort of 16 individuals with confirmed SCAD deficiency and at-risk genotypes (biallelic for pathogenic variants; compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant; biallelic for susceptibility variants) were treated with riboflavin 10 mg/kg/day for a maximum dose of 150 mg divided three times daily [van Maldegem et al 2010b].

FAD levels were within normal range in all individuals throughout the study, though they were the lowest in the subgroups with genotypes that were either compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant or biallelic for a susceptibility variant.

Plasma levels of C4-C (butrylcarnitine) remained essentially unchanged throughout the study period across all subgroups.

Urine EMA levels decreased only in the subgroup of compound heterozygotes for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant.

Four of 16 demonstrated biochemical changes and exhibited clinical improvement per parent report. Of note, these four individuals had the lowest baseline FAD levels and maintained biochemical and clinical improvements even after riboflavin supplements were discontinued. No genotype-phenotype correlations for riboflavin responsiveness could be identified.

In another retrospective study, 15 individuals with SCAD deficiency ascertained over a period of seven years were challenged with fasting and fat-loading tests [van Maldegem et al 2010a]. Three genotypic subgroups were defined: biallelic for pathogenic variants, heterozygous for a pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant, and biallelic for susceptibility variants.

Free carnitine levels were normal in all individuals.

When fasted, three individuals developed ketotic hypoglycemia associated with decreased insulin levels and increased levels of growth hormone and cortisol. Lactate, pyruvate, and plasma ammonia concentrations were normal and plasma amino acid concentrations were consistent with normal gluconeogenesis and normal proximal urea cycle function [van Maldegem et al 2010a].

Note: In contrast, in disorders of medium- and long-chain fatty acid oxidation, fasting has been associated with a Reye-like illness with elevated plasma ammonia concentrations and severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia, suggesting impairment of gluconeogenesis and the proximal urea cycle.

Fat loading elicited a normal ketogenic response without a rise in urine EMA, confirming previous speculation that ketogenesis is likely normal in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].

In the two studies described above as well as previous case reports, hypoglycemia occurred in fewer than 20% of individuals with SCAD deficiency and normal ketogenesis was observed, ensuring cellular energy during some physiologic stressors.
Prostheses, walking aids, and wheelchairs are helpful for mobility depending on disabilities.

Physical therapy may be helpful in maintaining a more active lifestyle.
No published treatment guidelines exist.

Seizure control should be managed by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy management who is familiar with the pharmacotherapy for SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy and how it differs from treatment of similar disorders (e.g., Dravet syndrome; see SCN1A-Related Seizure Disorders and Differential Diagnosis).

Vigorous attempts to control seizures with drug polytherapy are warranted because children with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy are at risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) as well as prolonged acute seizures that may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010].

Sodium channel blockers. Several studies suggest that patients with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy respond favorably to the class of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that block sodium channels; these include phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, lacosamide, lamotrigine, rufinamide, and oxcarbazepine [Kong et al 2015b, Larsen et al 2015, Boerma et al 2016]. The effectiveness of sodium channel blockers is consistent with the activating effects of most SCN8A pathogenic variants [Wagnon & Meisler 2015, Wagnon et al 2015a, Wagnon et al 2015b]. Most patients are maintained on multiple medications with incomplete seizure control. One study of four patients reported a positive response to high doses of phenytoin [Boerma et al 2016].

Other AEDs

Clobazam, part of the standard of care for epilepsy in Europe, is now FDA-approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009].

Phenobarbital, while effective for seizure control, is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition.

Levetiracetam (Keppra®) has been reported by several families to be ineffective or occasionally associated with an increase in seizure frequency [M Hammer, unpublished data].

Other. When seizures are not responsive to conventional AEDs, the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective based on anecdotal information:

Corticosteroids

Immunoglobulins

Vagus nerve stimulator

Ketogenic diet

Cannabinoids

Sleep hygiene. As described for Dravet syndrome, sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN8A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected.

Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.
As with all children with functional craniofacial malformations, management through an established craniofacial team is recommended.

While management protocols are likely to differ among craniofacial teams, it is generally accepted that individuals with SCS should undergo cranioplasty in the first year of life.

Cranioplasty involves extensive surgery to release fused sutures including repositioning and reconstruction of the malformed calvaria. It prevents the following:

Progressive facial asymmetry that can develop in individuals with unilateral or asymmetric coronal fusion

Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) that can develop in individuals with multiple sutural synostosis (bicoronal or other sutures)

Progressive hypertropia resulting from overaction of the ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle in cases of unilateral coronal synostosis [Weiss & Phillips 2006].

In some circumstances, midfacial surgery is necessary during childhood to address dental malocclusion, swallowing difficulties, or respiratory problems.

If cleft palate is present, it is treated as in other disorders, including surgical closure, assurance of adequate feeding and weight gain, and speech therapy. In most cases, cranioplasty precedes palatal repair.

Orthodontic treatment and/or orthognathic surgery may be required at or near the completion of facial growth.

If developmental delay is identified, early intervention and/or special education are appropriate.

Hearing loss, if present, should be treated in a standard manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in a standard fashion. Ptosis and strabismus should be corrected during early childhood to prevent amblyopia, either with patching or surgery.
A multidisciplinary team including specialists from the following fields is recommended: hematology, gastroenterology, medical genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, immunology, dentistry, child development, psychology, and social work as needed [Dror & Freedman 2002, Rothbaum et al 2002, Durie & Rommens 2004, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a].

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be treated with the same oral pancreatic enzymes commonly used in treatment of cystic fibrosis; dose should be based on results of routine assessment of pancreatic function and nutritional status. Steatorrhea often resolves in early childhood, but pancreatic enzyme levels can remain low; routine monitoring (see Surveillance) is recommended.

Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) is recommended.

Blood and/or platelet transfusions may be considered for anemia and bi- or trilineage cytopenia.

Hematologic abnormalities. If recurrent infections are severe and absolute neutrophil counts are persistently 500/mm3 or less, treatment with prophylactic antibiotics and granulocyte-colony stimulation factor (G-CSF) can be considered.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) should be considered for treatment of severe pancytopenia, bone marrow transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome, or AML. Chemotherapy can be utilized as a bridge to HSCT in individuals with SDS and AML; however, sustained complete remission is problematic and prompt continuation to HSCT remains imperative. Although earlier reports indicate that survival is fair, cautious myeloablation and newer reduced intensity regimens have demonstrated improved outcomes in small cohorts [Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007, Bhatla et al 2008].

Note: Bone marrow abnormalities are not treated unless severe aplasia, myelodysplastic changes, or leukemic transformation are present.

Skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal manifestations of SDS may range from clinically asymptomatic to severe, and can evolve or progress over time. Severe manifestations such as asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy due to rib cage restriction will require subspecialty care including pediatric pulmonary and orthopedic specialists. Other rib and joint abnormalities may require surgical intervention if severe and consultation with an orthopedic surgeon familiar with SDS for those with skeletal dysplasia may be beneficial.

Growth. Children with poor growth and delayed puberty benefit from ongoing consultation with an endocrinologist, who may also consult with orthopedists regarding possible surgical management of asymmetric growth and joint deformities.

Other

Bone densitometry should be considered if clinically indicated, or in early adulthood.

Cognitive, learning, and behavioral complications can be features of SDS, and remedial interventions are considered beneficial.
Surgical intervention may include joint replacement (hip, knee, shoulder) or spine surgery (correction of scoliosis or kyphosis).

Chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.
Persons with sialuria need symptomatic and supportive management, including treatment of anemia, prolonged but mild jaundice, and convulsions. Barbiturates have been more effective in treating the occasional convulsion in early childhood than other antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).

Affected individuals benefit from early developmental intervention and appropriate educational programs.
The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia if present

Prompt treatment of upper airway obstruction resulting from macroglossia, micrognathia, and/or glossoptosis

Referral of children to the following pediatric specialists as needed:

Craniofacial team for management of cleft lip and/or palate, or macroglossia and related feeding difficulties

Audiologist, otolaryngologist, and speech therapy for management of hearing loss

Ophthalmologist for management of vision problems

Cardiologist for management of congenital heart defects and/or cardiac conduction defects

Orthopedist for the treatment of vertebral malformations and scoliosis if present

Urologist for surgical correction of anomalies such as hypospadias and cryptorchidism

Neurologist if seizures are present

Oncologist if a tumor is identified

Neurodevelopmental follow up for individual treatment plan that may include special education, occupational therapy, and physical therapy
Management of SGS is best conducted through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and craniofacial team.

The following are appropriate:

Cardiovascular

If aortic dilatation is present, treatment with beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications should be considered in order to reduce hemodynamic stress.

Surgical intervention for aneurysms may be indicated.

Hernia

Surgical repair of abdominal hernias may be indicated.

Craniofacial

Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team; treatment is the same as in all disorders with these manifestations.

Skeletal

Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary.

Clubfoot deformity may require surgical correction.

Pectus excavatum may be severe; rarely, surgical correction is indicated for medical reasons.

Physiotherapy

Physiotherapy may help increase mobility in individuals with joint contractures.

Special education

A developmental assessment will help with placement in a special education center or in a special education program in a regular school.
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly or related anterior chamber ocular anomalies. Treatment by an ophthalmologist experienced in management of developmental eye disorders or glaucoma is indicated to reduce and stabilize ocular pressures and to preserve vision.

Dental anomalies. Treatment of dental anomalies is standard and may include crowns and dental prostheses.

Insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment for glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus with diet, lifestyle, oral medication, and insulin under the supervision of a specialist in diabetes care is recommended.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.
Lifelong comprehensive care is necessary to minimize morbidity, reduce early mortality, and maximize quality of life. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Education of parents, caregivers, and affected individuals is the cornerstone of care:

Families must appreciate the importance of routine health maintenance visits, prophylactic medications, and early intervention for both acute and chronic complications.

Warning signs of acute illness such as fever, respiratory symptoms, pallor, lethargy, splenic enlargement, and neurologic changes must be reviewed regularly and must include education for the affected individual, as developmentally appropriate.

A systematic approach to pain management should be reviewed regularly. This includes identifying and reversing common triggers for sickle cell pain (and distinguishing it from other etiologies of pain), hydration, warmth, ambulation, distraction, and other comfort maneuvers. Initiation of NSAIDs and appropriate use of opiates should be reviewed.

All families should have a plan in place for 24-hour access to a medical facility that can provide urgent evaluation and treatment of acute illnesses such as fever, acute chest syndrome, splenic sequestration, and stroke.

Families should be provided baseline (steady state) laboratory values for purposes of comparison, as values often change during acute illness.

General management of specific problems [NHS 2010, Bender & Seibel 2012, Brousse et al 2014, Yawn et al 2014] includes the following:

Vaso-occlusive pain episodes (including dactylitis)

The initial focus should include the reversal of inciting triggers (e.g., cold, dehydration).

Pain episodes are optimally managed using a multi-model approach that may include warmth, hydration, massage, distraction, acupuncture, biofeedback, self-hypnosis, and pharmaceuticals.

Uncomplicated pain episodes may be managed at home with oral hydration and oral analgesics including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates.

More severe pain episodes require hospitalization and administration of parenteral fluids and analgesics in addition to adjunctive treatments such as massage and physical therapy.

Optimal analgesia is generally achieved with morphine (or other opiate) given around the clock by a patient-controlled analgesia device (PCA) or by continuous infusion.

NSAIDs (e.g., ketorolac, ibuprofen, naproxen) may be used to augment the analgesic effect of opiates. NSAIDs can also decrease inflammation, which is part of the pathophysiology.

Adequate, but not excessive hydration with IV fluids should be provided to maintain euvolemia, and individuals should be monitored closely for the development of other complications such as acute chest syndrome (ACS), splenic sequestration, or opiate-induced constipation.

A thorough evaluation for infection, including blood culture, urine culture, and chest x-ray should be considered based on the clinical scenario.

Note: Transfusion and hydroxyurea are not useful treatments for acute pain episodes (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Fever/suspected infection. Individuals with temperature greater than 38.3° C or persistent temperature elevation above baseline require:

Rapid triage and physical assessment;

Urgent CBC and reticulocyte count;

Blood culture (and other cultures as clinically indicated) and a low threshold for chest x-ray when respiratory symptoms are present, as ACS can often present with a normal physical examination;

Parenteral broad-spectrum empiric antibiotics such as ceftriaxone pending culture results. A macrolide antibiotic should be added if pneumonia/ACS is a concern. Additional antibiotics should be added only for proven or suspected meningitis or other severe illness.

Note: With the changing natural history of fever and sepsis in individuals with SCD in the US there is increasing evidence that empiric treatment with parenteral antibiotics without obtaining cultures may be appropriate for well-appearing, fully immunized children with fever <39 C; however, this work has not yet been replicated nor has it become accepted practice [Baskin et al 2013, Ellison et al 2015].

Acute chest syndrome (ACS). The index of suspicion for ACS should be high when individuals with SCD have fever, chest pain, or respiratory signs or symptoms. Given the high mortality associated with ACS, an aggressive multimodal treatment strategy should be initiated [Miller 2011]:

Perform chest x-ray examination.

Provide aggressive treatment with oxygen, analgesics, and antibiotics (including a macrolide).

Incentive spirometry should be encouraged.

Hypoxemia can progress to need for intubation and mechanical ventilatory support.

Blood transfusion may be required for those who are critically ill, have multi-lobar disease, or have progressive disease despite conservative therapy.

Aplastic crisis. Monitoring of hematocrit (both absolute and compared with the individual's baseline), reticulocyte count, and cardiovascular status are required. Blood transfusion may be necessary. Aplastic crisis caused by parvovirus B19 will often spontaneously resolve; however, if the reticulocyte count does not improve, intravenous gamma-globulin can be considered to assist in viral clearance. Any sibs or other close contacts with SCD should be monitored for red blood cell aplasia because the parvovirus is easily transmissible.

Splenic sequestration. Severe episodes of splenic sequestration may progress rapidly to cardiovascular collapse and death; thus, emergency red blood cell transfusion is indicated when signs of cardiovascular instability are present. Parents should be taught how to monitor for splenic enlargement and recognize symptoms of sequestration and when to seek medical attention. Individuals who experience multiple severe episodes of splenic sequestration may require splenectomy.

Pulmonary hypertension. Diagnostic criteria, as well as when and how to intervene, are becoming increasingly controversial [Hassell et al 2014, Klings et al 2014a, Klings et al 2014b, Hebson et al 2015]. Existing consensus guidelines are not fully accepted by experts in the field. Thus, discussion with local sickle cell and pulmonary hypertension experts should be used to guide care. The following general approach is reasonable:

Aggressive evaluation and treatment of additional etiologies contributing to pulmonary hypertension (e.g., thrombotic disease, obstructive sleep apnea)

Optimization of SCD-related therapy to stop progression (e.g., chronic transfusions, hydroxyurea, oxygen therapy if hypoxemic)

Stroke. Any history of an acute neurologic symptom or event warrants emergent evaluation including a CBC with reticulocyte count and a non-contrast brain CT examination. Cerebral hemorrhage requires immediate neurosurgical consultation. An MRI/MRA to define injury should be obtained as soon as available, but definitive treatment with exchange transfusion should never be delayed for these results.

Treatment for children with acute ischemic stroke includes the following:

Monitor neurologic status and aggressively treat increased intracranial pressure and seizures, if present.

Exchange transfusion with the goal of decreasing HbS percentage to <30% of the total hemoglobin followed by a chronic transfusion program can significantly decrease repeat risk for stroke [Wang et al 2000]. Without continued therapy, as many as 60%-90% of individuals who have had a stroke have a second stroke within three years. Thus, in most individuals a preventive chronic transfusion protocol is initiated after a CNS event and continued indefinitely [Adams & Brambilla 2005] (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Hydroxyurea has been studied as an alternative to transfusion therapy [Ware & Helms 2012]. While it does not provide the same protection as transfusion therapy, it may be an alternative for affected individuals who are unable to receive transfusion therapy (e.g., those living in limiting resource settings such as the Third World) or are difficult to transfuse due to alloimmunization [de Montalembert 2012].

Chronic transfusion has been shown to reduce silent infarcts; however, unlike for overt infracts, there is not a universally accepted consensus regarding the management of individuals with silent infarcts [DeBaun et al 2014, Estcourt et al 2017].

Priapism. Episodes of severe priapism require urgent evaluation and treatment, including hydration and analgesia, and may require aspiration and irrigation by an urologist.
There is no effective treatment for XLSA/A.

Males with ataxia benefit from early physical therapy to facilitate acquisition of gross motor skills. Adaptive devices such as ankle fixation orthoses and walkers may be needed.

Weighted eating utensils may help promote independent skills in childhood.

Speech therapy may improve intelligibility problems resulting from dysarthria.

Difficulty with handwriting may be managed with computers for word processing.

The anemia is usually mild and asymptomatic and does not require treatment; hepatic and systemic iron overload does not occur.
Renal manifestations

The renal disease progresses from proteinuria to ESRD at variable rates and is not prevented by any known drug therapies, although a few affected individuals treated with cyclosporin A, tacrolimus, or corticosteroids have had a transient reduction in the rate of renal disease progression.

Renal transplantation effectively treats the nephropathy and neither nephropathy nor arteriosclerosis recurs in the graft [Lücke et al 2004, Elizondo et al 2006, Clewing et al 2007a]. Mild immunosuppressive therapy, such as immunosuppressive monotherapy, appears to improve outcome after renal transplantation [Lücke et al 2009].

Orthopedic manifestations

Some affected individuals who have survived beyond childhood have required hip replacement.

Treatment of scoliosis and/or kyphosis is standard.

Immunologic manifestations

Neutropenia usually responds well to supplementation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

One affected individual has been successfully treated by bone marrow transplantation (BMT) [Petty et al 2000, Thomas et al 2004], and four affected individuals have died after BMT [Baradaran-Heravi et al 2013].

Individuals with autoimmune problems have had variable responses to treatment.

A few individuals have been transfusion dependent because of anemia or thrombocytopenia.

In one affected individual with thrombocytopenia, the autoimmune features resolved spontaneously; in one they resolved after steroid and IVIG treatments, and in one they cleared after splenectomy. All other affected individuals, excepting one with Evans syndrome, were successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy such as steroids, cyclophosphamide, or IVIG. The individual with Evans syndrome was resistant to treatment with steroids, cyclosporin A, and rituximab [Zieg et al 2011].

Infectious disease manifestations. Individuals with recurrent infections, opportunistic infections, or declining lymphocytes or T-cell counts frequently require the care of an immunologist.

Affected individuals with recurrent herpetic infections benefit from treatment with acyclovir.

A few affected individuals have developed severe disseminated cutaneous papilloma virus infections that have improved with imiquimod and cidofovir.

Neurologic manifestations

Individuals with transient ischemic attacks or strokes usually show temporary improvement on treatment with agents that improve blood flow or decrease coagulability (pentoxifylline, acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, warfarin, heparin). To date, no curative or effective long-term therapies have been identified.

Migraine headaches are often difficult to treat since response to anti-migraine medication is variable. Medications that have helped some individuals include ergotamine, sumatriptan, verapamil, and propranolol. Note: Use of ergotamine and sumatriptan is contraindicated in individuals with SIOD with severe vasoocclusive disease or cerebral ischemic events.

Hypothyroidism can be treated with levothyroxine supplementation; however, supplementation does not have an ameliorative effect on the renal disease or T-cell deficiency.
Symptomatic treatment. Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices.

Support by a speech and language/feeding specialist and nutritionist is indicated to assure adequate nutrition and to reduce the risk of aspiration. When an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required to prevent aspiration pneumonia.

Note that symptomatic treatment with L-dopa and antispasticity medications including benzodiazepines, baclofen, and botulinum toxin has been attempted with limited success. There has been partial but poorly sustained response to trihexyphenidyl at high doses of 20 mg/day and intrathecal baclofen of 1,500-2,000 µg/day in two older sibs reported by Tuschl et al [2016].

Chelation therapy. Disodium calcium edetate, which primarily promotes the urinary excretion of manganese, was given intravenously (20 mg/kg/dose) twice daily for five days each month to a female age five years with SLC39A14 deficiency [Tuschl et al 2016]. After six months of treatment, neurologic manifestations improved and the child regained the ability to walk.

In contrast, treatment of a female age 17 years with advanced disease (severe generalized dystonia with prominent oromandibular involvement, contractures, and scoliosis) did not affect disease progression as she continued to deteriorate with worsening tremor and stiffness. Hence, it is likely necessary to initiate chelation treatment early in the disease course.

It is anticipated that chelation therapy will need to be lifelong.

Potential adverse effects of disodium calcium edetate chelation therapy include thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, nephrotoxicity, hepatoxicity, hypocalcemia, and trace metal and vitamin deficiencies [Lamas et al 2012]. Monitoring includes the following:

Complete blood count

Assessment of renal function including urinalysis assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose.

Assessment of liver function

Measurement of the concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate

Measurement of the concentrations of trace metals (manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium)

Assessment of iron status

Treatment may need to be discontinued if:

White blood count is <3.5x109/L

Neutrophil count is <2.0x109/L

Platelet count is <150x109/L

>2+ proteinuria is detected on more than one occasion (with no evidence of infection)

The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent early death and reduce morbidity in SLC39A14 deficiency, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. For each affected individual, the benefits of clinical treatment need to be carefully weighed against the risk of adverse effects.
A multidisciplinary approach to the long-term management of this progressive disorder is optimal [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015].

As first principle, risk factors that exacerbate the movement disorder should be avoided, including patient discomfort, poor body positioning, and pain (e.g., from constipation, urinary retention, pressure sores, undetected fractures). Early referral for nasogastric feeding or percutaneous gastrostomy is appropriate if oral feeding becomes problematic.

Treatment for the palliative control of symptoms includes the following [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015]:

Tetrabenazine and benzodiazepines may be useful in controlling chorea and dyskinesia in early stages of the disease. Chloral hydrate may also help during exacerbations or to aid sleep.

Dystonia is more difficult to control and treatment often includes pramipexole and ropinirole as first-line agents (as few patients respond to levodopa/carbidopa and any response is usually modest and not sustained).

Adjuncts, such as the anticholinergic trihexyphenidyl, are often needed. Baclofen, gabapentin, and clonidine may also be tried for severe dystonia.

Benzodiazepines and chloral hydrate can be useful for exacerbations of dystonia or status dystonicus. Although the role of atypical tranquilizers (e.g., zopiclone) is not yet established, they have been used successfully in individual cases.

Surgical interventions such as intrathecal baclofen and deep brain stimulation have been used on rare occasions late in the disease course when dystonia is severe; therapeutic benefit is limited [Kurian et al 2009].

Optimum management of tone with medical therapies and regular physiotherapy evaluation reduce risk of contracture development. Focal botulinum toxin may be considered for emerging limb contractures and to prevent hip dislocation.

For the treatment of vomiting, anti-emetics such as the anti-serotoninergic agents (e.g., ondansetron) potentially have fewer side effects than other agents.

Treatment of status dystonicus. Standard protocols are used in an intensive care setting. Anesthetic agents, GABA-ergic medication (including GABA-A receptor agonists such as benzodiazepines, GABA-enhancing medications such as gabapentin or phenobarbitone, and GABA-B receptor agonists like baclofen), further anticholinergics, and alpha adrenergic agents such as clonidine may be used. For severe life-threatening or medically intractable status dystonicus, intrathecal baclofen and pallidal deep brain stimulation may be considered.
Cholesterol Supplementation

Devising a treatment strategy for SLOS has been difficult as all factors contributing to the clinical phenotype are not yet known with certainty. It is likely that both low cholesterol levels and elevation of the cholesterol precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC contribute to many of the clinical findings in affected individuals. Therefore, treatment strategies to date have focused on supplying exogenous cholesterol (either as egg yolks or as crystalline cholesterol in either an oil-based or aqueous suspension) in an attempt to raise cholesterol levels and secondarily decrease the levels of the precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC. In general, affected individuals with a more severe biochemical defect require larger doses of cholesterol.

It should be emphasized that dietary studies on cholesterol supplementation have not been conducted in a randomized fashion.

There are multiple reports of dietary cholesterol treatment for SLOS [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997, Linck et al 2000, Chan et al 2009]. Improved growth [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997], reduced photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001, Starck et al 2002a], and increased nerve conduction velocity [Starck et al 2002a] have been objectively documented. However, dietary therapy does not appear to increase the levels of cholesterol in CSF to effect therapeutic effects [van Rooij et al 1997]. There is objective evidence that cholesterol supplementation may alleviate skin photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001]. Additional studies have shown improved tone and achievement of ambulation as well as developmental cognitive and behavioral changes [Irons et al 1997, Tierney et al 2000, Tierney et al 2001]. However, these studies did not have well-defined clinical outcome measures [Svoboda et al 2012].

Nonetheless, cholesterol supplementation should be considered in all individuals with SLOS because it may result in clinical improvement and has minimal side effects [Elias et al 1997, Nwokoro & Mulvihill 1997, Battaile & Steiner 2000].

Other Treatments

Referral to appropriate early intervention and physical/occupational/speech therapies is often required for identified disabilities.

Many infants have difficulty with suck and/or swallow and may require gastrostomy for feeding and support of a nutritionist to help monitor caloric intake and growth. Infants with severe feeding problems generally require the insertion of gastrostomy tubes and/or the use of hypoallergenic, elemental formulas. Because children with SLOS have low muscle mass, careful monitoring of weight gain and growth is necessary so that overconsumption of calories does not lead to obesity.

For those with frequent vomiting or apparent gastroesophageal reflux, a diagnosis of pyloric stenosis should be considered and treated as in the general population. Gastrointestinal reflux and/or constipation require treatment by a gastroenterologist.

Neonatal cholestatic liver disease often resolves with cholesterol and/or bile acid therapy.

Surgical repair may be required for cataracts, ptosis, and/or strabismus.

Syndactyly of hands and/or feet and/or polydactyly may require surgical repair.

Orthopedic management of the early hypotonia and later hypertonia includes the use of AFOs and other orthotics, as well as physical and occupational therapy.

Tendon release surgery or Botox® therapy may be indicated in older children with significant hypertonia.

Dental management can be challenging. Proper positioning, choice of dental devices, and sedation techniques need to be considered [Muzzin & Harper 2003].

Recurrent otitis media may require tympanostomy tube placement.

Photosensitivity can be severe and many children cannot tolerate any exposure to sunlight; others can tolerate varying periods of exposure if properly clothed and protected with a UVA- and UVB-protection sunscreen.
Management is similar to that for classic SMA type 0 and SMA type I, caused by mutation of SMN. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

Feeding/growth

If oral intake is not adequate, consider higher-calorie feeds and fat supplementation.

If weight gain is inadequate or the child cannot feed appropriately, consider nasogastric and possibly gastrostomy-tube placement.

Watch for swallowing dysfunction and consider a formal swallowing evaluation, especially if coughing or choking and/or recurrent pneumonias are evident as they may be signs of aspiration.

Manage gastroesophageal reflux disorder in the standard manner.

Manage constipation (resulting from weak abdominal musculature and poor motility) with diet (fiber and water content).

Respiratory

Provide rigorous pulmonary toilet, supplemental oxygen, and noninvasive ventilatory support.

Assist cough through mechanical devices or other means if the patient has ineffective cough.

Secretion mobilization may be achieved through chest physiotherapy and postural drainage.

Use oral suctioning as needed.

Use oximetry to monitor the patient’s oxygen exchange status [Wang et al 2007].

In some cases artificial ventilation and tracheostomy may be employed.

As in classic SMA, discuss "do not attempt to resuscitate" status with the family before respiratory failure occurs. This discussion may begin earlier, but is appropriate when abdominal breathing is present and/or the forced vital capacity is less than 30%. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy for further discussion of respiratory support in SMA.

Sleep. Perform a sleep study if sleep-disordered breathing is suspected. Manage accordingly.

Orthopedic. Orthopedic management and physical and occupational therapy are indicated to manage contractures and prevent development of further contractures related to muscle weakness.
The management of children with SMA starts with the diagnosis and classification into one of the five categories. A consensus document on the diagnosis and treatment of children with SMA has been developed [Wang et al 2007] (full text).

Health Issues Specific to SMA

Nutrition. Bulbar dysfunction is universal in SMA I and gastrostomy should be considered early in the course of the disease. The bulbar dysfunction eventually becomes a serious problem for persons with SMA II and only very late in the course of disease for those with SMA III. Gastrointestinal dysmotility results in constipation, delayed gastric emptying, and potentially life-threatening gastroesophageal reflux.

Pulmonary. Children with SMA I and II, and more rarely type III, have progressive decline in pulmonary function. Formal consultation with a pulmonologist familiar with SMA is indicated. Guidelines for assessment and intervention are published as part of the Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007].

Options for management (depending on family preference) include no respiratory support, noninvasive ventilation, and tracheotomy with mechanical ventilation. These options should be discussed with the parents/care providers before respiratory failure occurs. The type of respiratory support is dependent on the individual’s respiratory status, quality-of-life goals, and reduction in respiratory complications. Palliative care, with or without noninvasive ventilator support, is an option for the most severely affected individuals.

Indications for noninvasive ventilation in SMA include hypoventilation, as demonstrated by decreased oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry or obstructive sleep apnea. Noninvasive ventilation has been shown to improve sleep breathing parameters in SMA I and II [Petrone et al 2007]. Noninvasive ventilation with BiPAP is commonly used in SMA as it may improve chest wall and lung development and is proposed to reduce lung infections and pulmonary comorbidity in SMA. Tracheotomy for chronic ventilation is an option that can be discussed with individuals and their families; however, it is controversial, especially in SMA I.

Airway clearance can be addressed with a mechanical in-exsufflator in conjunction with suctioning and chest physiotherapy, especially in the setting of acute illness. Use of mechanical in-exsufflation in the treatment of children with neuromuscular diseases, including children with SMA, appears to reduce pulmonary complications [Chatwin et al 2003, Miske et al 2004].

Scoliosis occurs frequently in individuals with SMA II. Surgical repair should be considered based on progression of the curvature, pulmonary function, and bone maturity. Use of spinal orthosis prior to surgical intervention is common; however, there is insufficient evidence that spinal orthotics alter scoliosis.

Use of the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib (VEPTR) is a possible treatment for severe scoliosis. Chandran and colleagues described the use of VEPTR in 11 children with SMA types I and II who were followed for an average of 43 months after the initial surgery [Chandran et al 2011]. The average age at time of surgery was six years. No surgical complications were identified. Medical complications were seen in two affected individuals: postoperative pneumonia and anemia.

A newer technology involving magnetically controlled growing rods (MAGEC rods) allows for gradual outpatient distractions controlled by an external remote device. Early case reports for this device are becoming available, although experience is not specific to SMA [La Rosa et al 2017].

Hip dislocation is another orthopedic concern in SMA. A retrospective review of a large series of affected individuals suggests that asymptomatic hip dislocation does not require surgery [Sporer & Smith 2003].
The following are appropriate:

Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations

From early infancy, referrals for early childhood intervention programs, followed by ongoing special education programs and vocational training in later years

Therapies including speech/language, physical, occupational, and especially sensory integration:

During early childhood, speech/language pathology services should initially focus on identifying and treating swallowing and feeding problems as well as optimizing oral sensorimotor development.

Therapeutic goals of increasing sensory input, fostering movement of the articulators, increasing oral motor endurance, and decreasing hypersensitivity are needed to develop skills related to swallowing and speech production.

The use of sign language and total communication programs, such as computer assisted devices and tablets, as adjuncts to traditional speech/language therapy is felt to improve communication skills and also to have a positive impact on behavior. The ability to develop expressive language appears dependent on the early use of sign language and intervention by speech/language pathologists.

Atypical patterns of sensory processing may become more prominent with increased age. Insight about the vulnerabilities and relative strengths in patterns of sensory processing may aid caregivers of individuals with SMS in adapting activity demands, modifying the environment, and facilitating appropriate and supportive social interactions. In addition, the potential for more problematic or atypical behaviors with increased age underscores the need for early and ongoing intervention and caregiver education. [Hildenbrand & Smith 2012].

A comprehensive behavior support plan for home and school should be considered as soon as problem behaviors arise, typically starting in early elementary school. A structured school program with one-on-one support and curricula matched to the known cognitive and behavioral profile of SMS can be effective in addressing the needs of these students.

The combination of intellectual disability, severe behavioral abnormalities, and sleep disturbance takes a significant toll on parents and siblings. Parents report high rates of depression and anxiety, and family stress is significantly higher in families of people with SMS than in those of children with nonspecific developmental disabilities [Hodapp et al 1998, Foster et al 2010]. Family support services and resources should be included as essential components of a holistic management plan for people with SMS.

Use of psychotropic medication to increase attention and/or decrease hyperactivity. No single regimen shows consistent efficacy [Laje et al 2010a]. Based on an extensive review of psychotropic medication use in a large cohort of individuals with SMS (n=62), use of polypharmacy and/or serial trials with minimal effectiveness was observed. Benzodiazepines obtained the lowest mean efficacy score in the ‘‘slightly worse’’ range, suggesting that use of these drugs may be detrimental to individuals with SMS [Laje et al 2010a].

Behavioral therapies including special education techniques that emphasize individualized instruction, structure, and routine to help minimize behavioral outbursts in the school setting

Therapeutic management of the sleep disorder. Sleep management in SMS remains a challenge for physicians and parents. No well-controlled treatment trials have been reported:

Early anecdotal reports of therapeutic benefit from melatonin taken at bedtime remain encouraging, providing variable improvement of sleep without reports of major adverse reactions. Dosages should be kept low (≤3 mg). However, melatonin dispensed over the counter is not regulated by the FDA; thus, dosages may not be exact. No early and controlled melatonin treatment trials have been conducted. A monitored trial of four to six weeks on melatonin may be worth considering in affected individuals with sleep disturbance.

A single uncontrolled study of nine individuals with SMS treated with oral β-1-adrenergic antagonists (acebutolol 10 mg/kg) reported suppression of daytime melatonin peaks and subjectively improved behavior [De Leersnyder et al 2001]. This treatment, however, did not restore nocturnal plasma concentration of melatonin.

A second uncontrolled trial by the same group [De Leersnyder et al 2003] combined the daytime dose of acebutolol with an evening oral dose of melatonin (6 mg at 8pm) and found that nocturnal plasma concentration of melatonin was restored and nighttime sleep improved with disappearance of nocturnal awakenings. Parents also reported subjective improvement in daytime behaviors with increased concentration. Contraindications to the use of β-1-adrenergic antagonists include asthma, pulmonary problems, some cardiovascular disease, and diabetes mellitus.

Prior to beginning any trial, the child's medical status and baseline sleep pattern must be considered.

Enclosed bed system for containment during sleep

Respite care and family psychosocial support to help assure the optimal environment for the affected individual

Monitoring of hypercholesterolemia (recognized in >50% of individuals with SMS); treatment with diet or medication as indicated

Treatment with corrective lenses as indicated for ophthalmologic abnormalities

Treatment of recurrent otitis media with tympanostomy tubes as needed

Auditory amplification if hearing loss is identified

Management of seizures in accordance with standard practice

Treatment of cardiac and renal anomalies and scoliosis in accordance with standard medical care. While growth hormone treatment has been reported [Itoh et al 2004, Spadoni et al 2004], controlled studies have not evaluated its effectiveness.
Speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy may be helpful. Some individuals have performed appropriately in special education programs, learned to follow commands, and held simple jobs [Arena et al 1996]. In contrast, others showed no improvement of psychomotor skills with special education [Becerra-Solano et al 2009].

Calcium supplementation has slightly improved bone mineral density in a few patients [Becerra-Solano et al 2009]. The mechanism of decreased bone mineral density is not well understood. Calcium supplementation should be started once decreased bone mineral density is noted.

Seizures have shown varying responses to anti-seizure medications [Arena et al 1996, de Alencastro et al 2008]. Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and clobazan have been used successfully to control seizures in some individuals.
The bones in sclerosteosis are thick and dense; surgical intervention may be difficult and prolonged. Standard neurosurgical instruments may not be sufficient (i.e., drill bits may be too short and power tools may be damaged by the dense bone) [du Plessis 1993]. In addition, bone regrowth occurs and may cause recurrence of symptoms.

Management is based on surgical decompression of the entrapped cranial nerves that can cause recurrent facial paralysis similar to Bell's palsy (from age two years onwards). Trigeminal nerve decompression can help if facial pain is severe.

Craniectomy is required if intracranial pressure becomes elevated (from age five years onwards but usually in young adulthood). In South Africa this procedure is undertaken at an increasingly younger age.

Middle ear surgery to correct conductive hearing loss and the provision of hearing aids may be helpful. Brain stem implantation of electrodes is indicated if there is obliteration of the internal auricular canal and damage to the auditory nerve.

Spinal cord decompression may occasionally be needed in adulthood to alleviate backache.

Surgical correction of syndactyly may be necessary in early childhood in order to improve function and cosmetic appearance in those with sclerosteosis.

Mandible reduction may be performed for cosmetic reasons or if mouth closure is impaired as a result of overgrowth of the mandible. Tooth extraction may be difficult. Management by an orthodontic or craniofacial team is recommended.
When clinical problems (e.g., cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, scoliosis, seizures) or difficulties with learning/behavior/speech are identified, referral to the appropriate specialist is recommended.

If MRI has been performed and ventricular dilatation demonstrated, shunting should not usually be necessary as the "arrested hydrocephalus" associated with Sotos syndrome is typically non-obstructive and not associated with raised intracranial pressure. If raised intracranial pressure is suspected, investigation and management in consultation with neurologists and neurosurgeons would be appropriate.

Some children in North America have been prescribed methylphenidate with varying success; in Europe, behavioral management strategies are more commonly used, again with varying success.
Visual impairment. The general management of visual impairment is not specific to anophthalmia or microphthalmia (see Anophthalmia/Microphthalmia Overview). Care includes:

Early referral to an experienced multidisciplinary team

Consideration of use of expanders to stimulate growth of the orbit and periorbital tissues. Because accurate assessment of visual function is necessary, optically clear expanders should be used.

Referral to special educational services for visually impaired infants

Other

Referral to endocrinologist for growth or hypogonadism concerns

Referral to physiotherapist if any evidence of motor impairment exists

Referral to special educational services for neurodevelopmental problems as needed

Consideration of use of melatonin for regulation of circadian rhythm if sleep pattern is abnormal

Parent/caregiver training in seizure management
No specific drug treatment or cures exist for SPG11.

Care by a multidisciplinary team that may include a general practitioner, neurologist, medical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Symptomatic treatment to reduce pyramidal hyperactivity in the lower limbs includes the following:

Physiotherapy for stretching of the spastic muscles to prevent contractures

Anti-spastic drugs such as baclofen and tizanidine

Botulin toxin and intrathecal baclofen, which can be considered when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling

When sphincter disturbances become a problem, urodynamic evaluation should be performed in order to adapt treatment and monitor follow up. Anticholinergic drugs are indicated for urinary urgency.

Psychiatric manifestations should be treated in accordance with standard practice.
Treatment remains symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, medical geneticists, and physical and occupational therapists.

Physiotherapy is appropriate.

Orthopedic treatment includes orthopedic shoes and calipers (polypropylene devices that fit between the thighs and hold the legs and hips in a balanced position for standing, used in conjunction with crutches or a walker) to stabilize gait. Foot deformities are corrected by surgical treatment.
Treatment for spasticity is presently limited to reducing muscle spasticity through exercise and medication, especially Lioresal®, which is given either orally or via intrathecal pump. Dosages need to be individualized as some patients have mainly weakness with less spasticity (and thus do not benefit from large doses), while others have significant spasticity and require high doses. Tizanidine, dantrolene (see, however, Agents/Circumstances to Avoid), and Botox® have also been useful in reducing muscle spasticity.

It is recommended that affected individuals participate in daily physical therapy designed to:

Maintain and improve muscle flexibility and range of motion (stretching exercises);

Improve muscle strength (through resistance exercise);

Maintain walking reflexes (walking on a slowly moving treadmill with arm supports or walking in a swimming pool); and

Improve cardiovascular fitness.

These recommendations are based on the experience of approximately 200 persons with hereditary spastic paraplegia, who nearly unanimously reported benefit from daily physical exercise [Fink 2003].

Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics as needed are appropriate.

Oxybutynin is helpful in reducing urinary urgency.

Antidepressants or mood stabilizers can be prescribed to manage emotional lability.

See also Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.
Therapy for spasticity, distal weakness, and urinary bladder dysfunction, the primary manifestations of SPG3A, is symptomatic.

Spasticity can be treated with:

Oral baclofen or tizanidine

Chemodenervation with botulinum A or B toxins; may be tried in those who do not tolerate oral antispasticity medications

Intrathecal baclofen pump; a good alternative for patients who improve on oral baclofen but cannot tolerate a therapeutic dose because of systemic adverse effects

Each of the above therapies should be combined with intensive physical therapy focused on stretching and strengthening exercises.

The role of surgical therapy for spasticity (including hamstring and heel cord lengthening and release of the adductor longus) remains unknown, but such treatment should be considered if contractures appear. See also Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Distal weakness, typically affecting foot dorsiflexion, can be ameliorated by ankle-foot orthoses; referral to orthotic services may be helpful.

Urinary urgency can be treated with anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs.
Care by a multidisciplinary team that includes a general practitioner, neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Symptomatic treatment includes use of the following:

Antispastic drugs for leg spasticity

Anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs for urinary urgency

Regular physiotherapy for stretching of spastic muscles. Stretching should be done manually at all levels (hips, knees, ankles) and preceded by heat conditioning.

Botulinum toxin and intrathecal baclofen can be proposed when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling. One open-label study with botulinum toxin injections showed an increase in gait velocity in persons with HSP after six months [Rousseaux et al 2007].

Urodynamic evaluation should be performed early in all affected individuals complaining of urgency or other problems, such as voiding difficulties, urine retention, and/or frequent urinary infections. Such symptoms should be monitored and treated according to individual needs and disease evolution. At the present time there is no consensus on treatment of sphincter disturbances (both urinary and anal) and management remains therefore symptomatic [Braschinsky et al 2010].
No specific drug treatments or cures exist for SPG7.

Drugs to reduce spasticity and muscle tightness include baclofen, tizanidine, dantrolene, and diazepam — preferably administered one at a time.

Management of spasticity by intrathecal baclofen or intramuscular botulinum toxin injections may be an option in selected individuals [Young 1994].

A combination of physical therapy and assistive walking devices are often used to reduce contractures, provide support, and promote stability.

Occupational therapy is often helpful in managing activities of daily living.
No cures or specific drug treatments exist for hereditary spastic paraplegia. An approach to management of spasticity is reviewed by Young [1994]:

Daily regimen of physical therapy directed toward improving cardiovascular fitness, maintaining and improving muscle strength and gait, and reducing spasticity is recommended.

Physical therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics are often used.

Antispasmodic drugs (e.g., baclofen, BOTOX®, dantrolene, tizanidine), used one at a time, are usually helpful, especially early in the disease course. Baclofen can be tried first, and can be used with an intrathecal pump in some cases. The entire therapeutic range of doses in all four drugs is used. The drugs are administered before sleep if nocturnal cramps are problematic, otherwise three to four times per day. These drugs alleviate symptoms by decreasing cramps and making leg muscles less tight, which can facilitate walking. It usually takes a few days for their effects to become evident. No significant toxicity limits their use.
In the majority of individuals treatment is conservative because the vertebral and rib malformations cause progressive difficulties:

Respiratory support, including intensive care as needed, to treat acute respiratory distress and chronic respiratory failure

Routine treatment of inguinal herniae

Surgical intervention as needed if scoliosis is significant. External bracing, for example by use of an expandable prosthetic titanium rib [Ramirez et al 2010], may be attempted but experience is limited.
Therapy is aimed at correcting central nervous system (CNS) neurotransmitter deficits.

Recommended treatments are based on the few reported cases in the literature and extrapolation from strategies employed in treatment of other neurotransmitter disorders.

While the medications discussed below reduce manifestations of SRD, response can range from complete resolution to partial improvement. These medications most consistently correct motor abnormalities while in some cognitive manifestations remain more refractory.

Often, medications must be prescribed “off-label” without established pediatric dose ranges [Friedman et al 2012]:

L-dopa (0.1-16 mg/kg/day) in combination with 10%-25% carbidopa (or another peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor) is the main therapy to correct CNS dopamine deficiency. Optimal therapeutic level is determined by clinical response. Note: (1) Dose-related dyskinesias may occur [Abeling et al 2006, Neville 2007, Arrabal et al 2011, Friedman et al 2012]; they can be eliminated in most instances with reduced dosage or addition of a dopamine agonist to reduce fluctuations in dopaminergic stimulation [Lohmann et al 2012]. (2) Gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea may be reduced by increasing the proportion of administered carbidopa. (3) Although not reported, it is theoretically possible that individuals with SRD receiving high-dose L-dopa could develop cerebral folate deficiency and require supplementation with folinic acid (as has been observed in L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase deficiency [Brun et al 2010]).

5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) (1-6mg/kg/day) also in combination with carbidopa to correct CNS serotonin deficiency has shown additional clinical benefit in some.

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4; sapropterin dihydrocloride) may in theory be of benefit, although none was reported in four patients treated for only a short time [Friedman et al 2006, Friedman et al 2012]. Note that it is difficult to achieve adequate CNS levels of BH4 due to limited transport across the blood brain barrier.

Other agents used when L-dopa/5HTP/carbidopa are not tolerated or sufficiently effective which have shown benefit in single or small numbers of patients include:

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (selegeline)

Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline)

Melatonin

Dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, pramipexole)

Anticholinergics

Methylphenidate
The management of SSADH deficiency is most often symptomatic, directed at the treatment of seizures and neurobehavioral disturbances.

Seizures. Antiseizure medications employed for the treatment of SSADH deficiency tend to be broad spectrum, although valproate is avoided when possible because of inhibition of potential residual enzymatic activity [Shinka et al 2003]. Vigabatrin, an irreversible inhibitor of GABA-transaminase, inhibits the formation of succinic semialdehyde [Matern et al 1996]. However, vigabatrin has shown inconsistent results [Howells et al 1992, Gropman 2003], suggesting that it is not effective at inhibiting peripheral GABA-transaminase, leading to a peripheral supply of 4-hydroxybutyric acid to the brain and thus decreasing its own efficacy. Brain MRI signal changes, particularly prominent in the thalamus and basal ganglia, have been seen in infants treated with relatively high doses of vigabatrin [Pearl et al 2009c].

However, reports of uncontrolled, nonblinded trials of vigabatrin in two affected children described a decrease in plasma GHB concentrations and clinical improvement (specifically in verbal communication) in one child age eight years [Casarano et al 2012] and slow clinical improvement (although not unexpected based on natural history) in a child age 2.5 years [Escalera et al 2010].

Neurobehavioral symptoms. Methylphenidate, thioridazine, risperidal, fluoxetine, and benzodiazepines have been used for the treatment of increased anxiety, aggressiveness, and inattention [Gibson et al 2003].

Beneficial non-pharmacologic treatments include physical therapy directed at developing strength, endurance, and balance; occupational therapy for improvement of fine motor skills, feeding, and sensory integration; and speech therapy [Gropman 2003].
Craniofacial. Infants with Robin sequence need immediate attention from specialists in otolaryngology and pediatric critical care, as they may require tracheostomy to ensure a competent airway. It is recommended that evaluation and management occur in a comprehensive craniofacial clinic that provides all the necessary services, including otolaryngology, plastic surgery, oral and maxillofacial surgery, pediatric dentistry, orthodontics, and medical genetics.

In most individuals, micrognathia tends to become less prominent over time, allowing for removal of the tracheostomy. However, in some individuals, significant micrognathia persists, causing orthodontic problems. In these individuals, a mandibular advancement procedure is often required to correct the malocclusion.

Ophthalmologic. Refractive errors should be corrected with spectacles.

Individuals with Stickler syndrome should be advised of the symptoms associated with retinal detachment and the need for immediate evaluation and treatment when such symptoms occur.

Audiologic. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview. Otitis media may be a recurrent problem secondary to palatal abnormalities. Myringotomy tubes are often required.

Joints. Treatment of arthropathy is symptomatic and includes using over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications before and after physical activity.
Treatment aims to reduce plasma concentration of plant sterols to as close as possible to normal concentrations (i.e., <1 mg/dL), to control plasma concentration of cholesterol, and to prevent xanthoma formation and/or reduce the size and number of xanthomas.

Historically, treatment strategies included dietary restriction of intake of both animal- and plant-based sterols, ileal bypass surgery, and/or hepatic transplantation [Salen et al 2004, Wang et al 2004, Miettinen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010]. Some of these treatments have only been partially effective.

Current treatment therapies focus on the following:

A diet low in shellfish sterols and plant sterols (i.e., avoidance of vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, seeds, avocados, chocolate, and shellfish) in conjunction with ezetimibe or other medications

The sterol absorption inhibitor: ezetimibe (10 mg/d) [Salen et al 2004, Salen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Musliner et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010], which alone may be sufficient

Bile acid sequestrants such as cholestryramine (8-15 g/d) which may be considered in those with incomplete response to ezetimibe

Treatments should begin at the time of diagnosis. When tolerated, the combined treatments can decrease the plasma concentrations of cholesterol and sitosterol by 10% to 50%. Often existing xanthomas regress.

Partial ileal bypass surgery (i.e., shortening of the ileum) has been used to increase intestinal bile acid loss. Partial or complete ileal bypass surgery in persons with sitosterolemia has resulted in at least 50% reduction of plasma and cellular sterol and stanol levels [Nguyen et al 1988, Nguyen et al 1990].

Arthritis, arthralgias, anemia, thromobocytopenia, and/or splenomegaly require treatment, the first step being management of the sitosterolemia, followed by routine management of the finding (by the appropriate consultants) as needed.

Sitosterolemia does not respond to standard statin treatment.
Global developmental delay, cognitive dysfunction and intellectual disability. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech-language therapy can be beneficial.

Seizure management is symptomatic. The most commonly used AEDs were phenobarbital, valproic acid, and vigabatrin. Clobazam, zonisamide, lamotrigine, and oxcarbamazepine have also been used.

In single cases, a response to vigabatrin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, or valproic acid and levetiracetam has been reported [Hamdan et al 2009, Deprez et al 2010, Saitsu et al 2010, Mignot et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Barcia et al 2014, Romaniello et al 2014, Keogh et al 2015, Romaniello et al 2015, Dilena et al 2016, Yamamoto et al 2016].

In more than 20% of affected individuals two or more AEDs were used in combination.

About 25% of affected individuals were refractory to AED therapy.

In approximately 20% of affected individuals, seizures were controlled with one or more than one combined anti-seizure medication. In individuals who became seizure free, AEDs were discontinued between one month and 5.5 years after treatment began [Deprez et al 2010, Romaniello et al 2015, Sampaio et al 2015]. The longest seizure-free period documented following discontinuation of AEDs was approximately 11 years [Deprez et al 2010].

In about 1% of affected individuals the ketogenic diet was used for seizure management. Response to the ketogenic diet was either slight or none [Saitsu et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013].

Epilepsy surgery was the treatment of choice in two affected individuals: one became seizure free following corpus callosotomy [Otsuka et al 2010]; the other had a significant reduction in seizure frequency following resection of focal cortical dysplasia [Weckhuysen et al 2013].

Other neurologic findings

Severe dystonia, dyskinesia, or choreoathetosis can be treated with monoamine depleters or dopaminergic agents.

Hypotonia may lead to feeding difficulties and associated recurrent aspiration pneumonia which may require G-tube placement.

Behavior disorders can be managed symptomatically with behavioral therapies by psychologists or behavior therapists.
Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in neurology, audiology, child development, gastroenterology, nutrition, and clinical genetics. Treatments include the following:

Physical therapy to help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures

Standard treatment with antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Nutritional support by a dietitian and the use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings to address feeding difficulties and failure to thrive

Chest physiotherapy, aggressive antibiotic treatment of chest infections, and artificial ventilation (including assisted nasal ventilation or intubation and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator) for respiratory insufficiency

Bracing for scoliosis and kyphosis

Blepharoplasty for significant ptosis

Hearing aids and/or cochlear implantation for sensorineural hearing loss
Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in neurology, audiology, child development, gastroenterology, cardiology, nutrition, and clinical genetics. Treatments include the following:

Physical therapy to help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures

Standard treatment with antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Nutritional support by a dietitian and the use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings to address feeding difficulties and failure to thrive

Chest physiotherapy, aggressive antibiotic treatment of chest infections, and artificial ventilation (including assisted nasal ventilation or intubation and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator) for respiratory insufficiency.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hepatopathy, when present, require standard management by cardiologists and hepatologists, respectively.
Individuals with ARCA1 should be followed by a neurologist and eventually a physiatrist as well.

As the disease progresses, individuals need walking aids such as a cane, a walker, and ultimately a wheelchair.
Pain

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates help control pain. Agents such as gabapentin should be considered.

Gentle handling may reduce pain that is worsened with movement. Splinting of affected joints may provide comfort.

When passive movement of joint contractures is painful, physiotherapy should be carried out with care; in some cases physiotherapy is not tolerated because of pain.

Consultation with a pain management specialist may be helpful. Palliative care may be an option in severe cases.

Failure to thrive

Early consideration should be given to nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feeding.

Nutrition should be tailored for the possibility for malabsorption or lymphangiectasia.

A nutritionist should follow affected individuals.

Protein-losing enteropathy

Chronic diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy with subsequent edema are treated with hydration and albumin infusions; an effective long-term treatment is lacking.

The effectiveness of dietary therapies with intestinal lymphangiectasia is not known.

Skin nodules, gingival thickening, and lesions of the mouth. Lesions that obstruct the airway or interfere with oral intake are particularly problematic; surgical excision is an option that has been used, but lesions may recur.

Dermatitis. Intertriginous, perianal, and neck areas appear to be particularly prone to dermatitis and should be treated appropriately.

Perianal masses may be excised, but may recur.

Joint contractures. Contractures are typically progressive. Treatment of contractures with physiotherapy should be performed with care because of pain.

Immune system/Infections

Infections are treated based on the site of infection and causative agent.

An immunology evaluation should be considered given the possibility of impaired cellular immune responses and immunoglobulin levels [Klebanova & Schwindt 2009].

Other. Given the chronic nature of this disorder in an individual with normal intelligence, family counseling should be considered in order to develop coping strategies for both the patient and the immediate family.
The treatment for thrombocytopenia is platelet transfusion as needed. Bone marrow transplantation is generally not indicated, given the transient nature of the thrombocytopenia.

The use of central venous catheters as an alternative to venipuncture has been suggested to reduce the pain associated with repeated procedures [Coccia et al 2012].

Orthopedic intervention is indicated to maximize function of limbs, with such intervention including prostheses, orthoses, adaptive devices, and surgery [McLaurin et al 1999, Al Kaissi et al 2015].
The management of TARDBP-related ALS is identical to that of ALS resulting from other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 2009a, Miller et al 2009b].

Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine.

Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan.

Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands.

Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression.

Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for TARDBP-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use [Miller et al 2007].

Note: See Author Notes, Miller Laboratory for a link to investigative reports on accurate assessments of the risks and benefits of specific proposed therapies.
For the most part, treatment for Tay-Sachs disease is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious disease, protecting the airway, and controlling seizures.

Seizure control can usually be achieved using conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as benzodiazepines, phenytoins, and/or barbiturates. However, seizures are progressive and change in type and severity; thus, over time changes in the dose or type of AEDs may be necessary for optimal seizure control.

For older individuals with adult-onset hexosaminidase A deficiency who have psychiatric manifestations, conventional antipsychotic or antidepressant therapy may be used; but the clinical response is unpredictable and generally poor.

Treatment with lithium salts and electroconvulsive therapy has been reported to be beneficial, at least in ameliorating for a period the episodes of psychotic depression.
Deafness. Consider hearing aids or cochlear implants as needed for hearing loss (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview). Cochlear implants at age one have been beneficial in one individual with DOORS syndrome [Campeau et al 2014].

Developmental delay. Early educational intervention, physical, occupational and speech therapy is recommended because of the high risk for motor and cognitive delay.

Seizures. Symptomatic pharmacologic management is warranted, as no controlled studies have compared the efficacy of different antiepileptic drugs in TBC1D24-related disorders.

The management of epilepsy in many genetic epilepsies is complex; general recommendations from the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence are available online.

Renal anomalies. Refer to an urologist or nephrologist as indicated.

Heart defects. Manage according to the anomalies detected.
The following are indicated:

Imperforate anus. Immediate surgical intervention is required.

Hearing loss. Significant impairment requires early treatment, typically with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Thumb malformations. Severe malformations of the hands may require surgery (e.g., removal of additional thumbs).

Renal. Impaired renal function requires continuous monitoring, hemodialysis, and possibly kidney transplantation.

Heart defects. Congenital heart defects may require surgery or medical treatment by a cardiologist.
Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of each individual and preferably done by a multidisciplinary craniofacial management team that typically comprises a medical geneticist, plastic surgeon, head and neck surgeon, otolaryngologist, oral surgeon, orthodontist, audiologist, speech pathologist, and psychologist.

Major management issues can be stratified by three age groups and graded for severity [Hayashi et al 2007, Thompson et al 2009]:

Birth to 2 years: airway and feeding difficulties

3 years to 12 years: speech therapy and integration into education system

13 years to 18 years: orthognathic surgery

Procedures for surgical intervention for the airway, if needed, are standard, primarily for improving the respiratory function or restoring patency of the nostrils and distraction of the mandible [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006, Jayasekera 2007]. If a diagnosis of TCS is suspected prenatally, airway management at birth should be considered [Morillas et al 2007]. Management of the airway in neonates typically includes special positioning of the infant or tracheostomy. With proper management, life expectancy approximates that of the general population.

Gastrostomy may be needed to assure adequate caloric intake while protecting the airway [Marszalek et al 2002].

Bone conduction amplification, speech therapy, and educational intervention are indicated for treatment of hearing loss. The bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA) is an alternative for individuals with ear anomalies [Marres 2002].

Craniofacial reconstruction is often necessary [Posnick 1997, Zhang et al 2009]. Generally, bone reconstruction precedes soft tissue corrections. Reconstruction can prevent the progression of facial asymmetry. Recommendations by Posnick [1997] for reconstruction include the following:

Repair of cleft palate, if present, at age one to two years [Kobus & Wojcicki 2006]

Zygomatic and orbital reconstruction when the cranio-orbitozygomatic bony development is complete (~age 5 to 7 years)

Maxillomandibular reconstruction

Type I (mild) and type IIA (moderate) malformation: age 13 to 16 years

Type IIB (moderate to severe malformation): at skeletal maturity

Type III (severe malformation): age six to ten years

Orthognathic procedures are typically indicated before age 16 years.

Misaligned teeth often require orthodonture.

Nasal reconstruction, if needed, should follow orthognathic surgeries.

External ear reconstruction should be performed after age six years and should precede reconstruction of the external auditory canal or middle ear.

External auditory canal and middle ear reconstruction should be performed for affected individuals with bilateral microtia and/or narrow ear canals.

Coloboma of the lower eyelid may be treated with botulinum toxin and subsequent surgery, if necessary [Warner et al 2008].
Management concerns are limited to the parents' desire for extreme life-support measures and provision-of-comfort care for the newborn.

Newborns require respiratory support (with tracheostomy and ventilation) to survive.

Anesthesia management concerns are described by Thompson et al [2011] and include:

Intubation with the cervical spine in a neutral position using a flexible fiber-optic scope

Utilization of evoked potential monitoring (somatosensory evoked potentials [SEPs] and motor evoked potentials [MEPs]) during the procedure to evaluate safety during intraoperative manipulations

Avoidance of volatile anesthetic agents and muscle relaxants which could affect the evoked potential recordings

Other measures:

Medication to control seizures, as in the general population

Shunt placement, when hydrocephaly is identified

Suboccipital decompression for relief of craniocervical junction constriction

Hearing aids, when hearing loss is identified
Initial postnatal intervention, aimed at minimizing the risk of aspiration pneumonia, typically includes the elimination of oral feeds, placement of a suction catheter to allow continuous drainage of secretions, and elevation of the head of the bed to minimize reflux [Clark 1999]. Intravenous (IV) glucose and fluids should be provided; supplemental oxygen should be administered as needed. When intubation cannot be avoided, a possible complication is the collection of air in the stomach, which in severe cases can only be removed by gastrostomy.

Surgical repair consists of closure of the TEF and anastomosis of the esophageal segments [Sharma & Duerksen 2012]. Surgical repair may need to be delayed in infants with low birth weight, pneumonia, or other major congenital anomalies. When surgical repair is delayed, infants may be treated with parenteral nutrition, gastrostomy tube placement, and upper pouch suctioning until they become surgical candidates.

The most common complications after surgical repair include leakage at the site of the anastomosis, recurrent fistula, structure formation, and gastroesophageal reflux [Clark 1999, Sharma & Duerksen 2012, Kronemer & Snyder-Warwick 2013].
In nearly all reported cases, the pregnancy was terminated on diagnosis of tetra-amelia syndrome or infants died shortly after birth as a consequence of other malformations including pulmonary hypoplasia. Data on the management of tetra-amelia syndrome therefore do not exist.

It should be noted that (complete) absence of all extremities is principally not incompatible with life. Persons without extremities depend on extensive, life-long assistance with most daily activities. They would require specifically designed wheelchairs with assistive electronic technology and input control devices operated by head, chin, or tongue movements. Other individualized ambulatory devices may be indicated.

Should individuals with tetra-amelia syndrome survive, management depends on the presence and severity of associated malformations and may involve multiple interdisciplinary surgical interventions and the support of several medical disciplines.
The following are appropriate:

Carpal tunnel release surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome

Vitrectomy for vitreous involvement

Cardiac pacemaker implantation for second-degree or third-degree AV block and sick sinus syndrome.
The following recommendations are based on guidelines proposed for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis in Europe [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text) and an expert review [Adams & Barton 2010]. However, it should be emphasized that since TFR2-HHC is rare and may progress differently from HFE-associated hemochromatosis, individual treatment is important.

Individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration should be treated by the same protocol as for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.

Therapeutic phlebotomy. Periodic phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective way to remove excess iron. Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron.

The usual therapy is weekly phlebotomy; however, twice weekly phlebotomy may be useful initially to accelerate iron depletion. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women.

Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the serum ferritin concentration is 100 ng/mL or lower. Serum ferritin concentration should be measured following each phlebotomy or every other phlebotomy [Adams & Barton 2010]:

Once the serum ferritin concentration is approximately 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate.

If the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or higher despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, phlebotomies need to be spaced further apart.

Note: Although experience is limited because of the small number of affected individuals identified worldwide, it should be noted that transferrin saturation remains high in TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis when serum ferritin concentration is low (<50 ng/mL), even after intensive phlebotomy [Girelli et al 2011; Camaschella & Roetto, unpublished observation].

Maintenance therapy. The goal is to maintain serum ferritin concentration around 50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation below 50%. Phlebotomy to prevent reaccumulation of iron is performed about every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women.

Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. Iron chelators such as subcutaneous desferrioxamine are used as a first choice in case of concomitant anemia [Riva et al 2004] or cardiac dysfunction.

Note: At present, oral iron chelators are not available to treat hemochromatosis. However, a phase I/II trial has been completed with daily administration of deferasirox in persons with newly diagnosed HFE-HHC with iron overload and without evidence of liver cirrhosis. The trial demonstrated that treatment is feasible, safe, and effective; side effects were mostly related to the GI tract [Phatak et al 2010].

Treatment of clinical complications

Cirrhosis should be treated and followed up as in other conditions. Although cirrhosis is not reversible by phlebotomy, individuals with cirrhosis benefit from iron removal in that it reduces the risk of hepatocellular cancer.

Hypogonadism is irreversible and requires lifelong hormone replacement therapy in males and females. Use of gonadotropins has successfully restored fertility and induced pregnancy in women who have been treated for other forms of hemochromatosis.

Arthropathy requires nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and is barely influenced by phlebotomy. In some cases, joint replacement has been performed.

Cardiac failure is treated with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, cardiac glycosides, and iron chelation by intravenous or subcutaneous deferioxamine.

Diabetes mellitus may require lifelong insulin treatment. Iron removal may improve control of diabetes mellitus but cannot reestablish normal glucose metabolism.
The following treatment is appropriate:

Physical, occupational, and speech therapies, if necessary

Medications, such as anticholinergics, L-DOPA, carbamazepine, or lioresol, for the treatment of dystonia

Glycopyrolate or scopolamine to improve drooling

Standard anticonvulsant medication to control seizures, if present

Placement of permanent feeding tube to avert malnutrition

Note: Thyroid hormone treatment with replacement doses during childhood has no beneficial effect. However, combined treatment with high doses of levothyroxine (L-T4) and propylthiouracil (PTU), which inhibits deiodinase 1, has been shown to ameliorate the hypermetabolic state, with beneficial effects on body weight and heart rate, as seen in several affected individuals [Wémeau et al 2008, Visser et al 2013]. See also Therapies Under Investigation.
In individuals with TH deficiency, initial use of a levodopa (combined with a decarboxylase inhibitor) dose of 0.5-3 mg/kg (body weight)/day, divided into three to six doses, has been recommended [Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Pons et al 2013]. Nevertheless, it is possible that even at the lowest initial dosage recommended (i.e., 0.5 mg/kg/day), some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency (see Table 2) will develop intolerable dyskinesias [Zafeiriou et al 2009, Pons et al 2013].

When tolerated, the dose of levodopa can be increased gradually. However, with the exception of those with mild TH-deficient DRD (see Table 2), it is often difficult to increase levodopa doses smoothly in affected individuals due to the risk of developing severe dyskinesias. In such individuals, combined administration of levodopa and selegiline (a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, which inhibits dopamine degradation) has been recommended [Dionisi-Vici et al 2000, Häussler et al 2001, Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Leuzzi et al 2017].

As reported in compound heterozygotes for GCH1 pathogenic variants [Furukawa et al 2004a], amantadine (an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist) can suppress dopa-induced dyskinesias, which develop at initiation of levodopa therapy, in some individuals with TH deficiency [Pons et al 2013].

Mild form (TH-deficient DRD). Individuals demonstrate complete responsiveness of symptoms to levodopa treatment. Such an excellent response without any motor adverse effects of chronic levodopa therapy for more than 30 years has been confirmed in some individuals with TH-deficient DRD [Swaans et al 2000, Schiller et al 2004].

Severe form (TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay). Individuals show a marked response to levodopa. However, in contrast to TH-deficient DRD, the responsiveness is generally not complete and/or it takes several months or even years before full effects of treatment become established. Some individuals with the severe form of TH deficiency are hypersensitive to levodopa and are prone to intolerable dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa therapy; this hypersensitivity necessitates use of very low initial doses of levodopa [Grattan-Smith et al 2002, Yeung et al 2006, Clot et al 2009, Doummar et al 2009, Yeung et al 2011].

Very severe form (TH-deficient progressive infantile encephalopathy). Individuals are extremely sensitive to levodopa. Accordingly, treatment with levodopa is often limited by severe dyskinesias. Some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency develop intolerable dyskinesias even at doses of 0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg/day levodopa and no or only minimal improvement is observed [de Lonlay et al 2000, Hoffmann et al 2003, Zafeiriou et al 2009].
Note: All medical procedures requiring anesthesia should be performed with caution (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Long QT interval

Beta-blockers. While most individuals with Timothy syndrome are treated with beta-blockers to maintain QT interval stability and thereby prevent ventricular tachyarrhythmia, no data concerning the effectiveness of beta-blockers are available. Verapamil and ranolazine have been reported effective in case reports. However, no cohort-based analysis of the efficacy of pharmacologic therapy is available.

Pacemaker. To control 2:1 AV block and resultant bradycardia, a pacemaker can be placed with general success within the first days of life.

Implants. The implantable cardioverter defibrillator is most important in preventing sudden cardiac death in individuals with Timothy syndrome. An implant should be considered in every individual with confirmed diagnosis as soon as body weight allows the procedure (as determined by the treating clinician).

Congenital heart defects. Standard treatment is indicated.

Respiratory infections. Standard treatment (antibiotic therapy, steroids) is indicated. The possibility of reduced immune response should be considered.

Surgical release of syndactyly. Standard treatment is indicated.
Currently there is no definitive treatment. Management should involve a multidisciplinary team.

Feeding difficulties should be managed aggressively, including use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube when the risk of aspiration is high.

Physical therapy can help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures. A physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) specialist can be helpful for individuals with walking difficulty. As mobility becomes increasingly restricted, the use of a wheelchair should be considered.

Early referral to a pediatric pulmonologist is recommended for assessment of pulmonary function and the need for chest physiotherapy to improve pulmonary function and reduce the risk of pulmonary infection. Pulmonary infection should be treated urgently in a standard manner to prevent deterioration in pulmonary function capacity. Once the patient becomes ventilator dependent due to respiratory compromise, chest physiotherapy can help reduce the risk of pulmonary infection.
Management of TRPS is principally supportive.

Ectodermal Features

Hair. Practical advice on hair care and the use of wigs can be beneficial.

Dental. Extraction of supernumerary teeth can be considered [Kantaputra et al 2008, Lubinsky & Kantaputra 2016].

Skeletal

Short stature. In those with short stature and proven growth hormone deficiency, human growth hormone therapy may be considered; however, reported results vary. Treatment has infrequently led to an increase in growth velocity [Riedl et al 2004, Stagi et al 2008, Sarafoglou et al 2010, Sohn et al 2012].

Note: When the growth pattern of a child with TRPS is below the normal range for age and sex and is of concern to the family, growth hormone stimulation tests can be performed. If the result is subnormal, GH therapy may be considered [Marques et al 2015] despite reported variable results.

Hands. In a single report resection arthrodesis with tension band osteosynthesis stabilized painful ulnar dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints in digits with cone-shaped epiphyses [Brenner et al 2004]. Of note, no follow-up or other similar reports are available.

Joint pain. Regular simple analgesia (e.g., NSAID or other non-opiates) is the mainstay treatment for joint pain.

Physiotherapy may aid mobility. Exercise is to be encouraged, but high-impact or contact sports may pose a risk to those with already impaired mobility. Patients may require support with mobility at school and work.

Occupational therapy can benefit many fine-motor tasks and mechanical aids such as electric can openers may ameliorate problems caused by joint anomalies.

Prosthetic hip implantation should be considered in those with severe hip dysplasia. Prosthetic hip implantation may be required as early as age 30 years. Such prostheses may require multiple revisions due to their limited life span. Obtaining functional improvement through prosthetic joint surgery can be challenging given the presence of damage to other joints – either in the form of TRPS-related osteoarthritis-like changes or secondary to long-term compensatory stress.

Osteopenia. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with TRPS I and bone fragility [Macchiaiolo et al 2014].

Other. Peer support and (if indicated) psychological counseling can be beneficial for individuals who are self-conscious about their physical differences.

For TRPS II Only

Exostoses. In case of clinical problems such as pain, restricted range of motion, or nerve compression, resection of exostoses should be considered [Payne et al 2016, Hereditary Multiple Osteochondromas].
Strategies for the treatment of primary trimethylaminuria summarized below are covered in detail in Cashman et al [2003] and in "best-practice" guidelines [Chalmers et al 2006] (full text).

Restriction of dietary trimethylamine and its precursors. In some instances the disorder can be successfully managed by dietary restriction of precursors of trimethylamine. This is particularly true of "mild" or moderate forms of primary trimethylaminuria. Affected individuals respond differently to different forms of dietary restriction; thus, urinary excretion of trimethylamine and trimethylamine N-oxide should be monitored to identify the most effective dietary regimen for an individual.

Choline. One of the most important dietary sources of trimethylamine is choline. Dietary choline is absorbed through the small intestine; however, when the absorptive capacity of the small intestine is overloaded, gut bacteria metabolize choline into trimethylamine, which is readily absorbed into the blood stream.

Foods rich in choline include eggs, liver, kidney, peas, beans, peanuts, soya products, and brassicas (Brussels sprouts, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower) as well as rapeseed products such as oil and flour. Nutritionally balanced, choline-restricted diets suitable for the treatment of trimethylaminuria have been developed [Busby et al 2004].

Affected individuals should avoid lecithin (an important dietary source of choline) and lecithin-containing fish oil supplements.

Trimethylamine N-oxide. Affected individuals should avoid eating seafood (fish, cephalopods, and crustaceans) because of its high content of trimethylamine N-oxide, which is reduced to trimethylamine in the human gut. Babies with trimethylaminuria who are breastfed after their mothers have eaten seafood may develop a fishy odor.

Note: Freshwater fish have a lower content of trimethylamine N-oxide and thus are not a problem.

Other. Milk obtained from wheat-fed cows may have significant amounts of trimethylamine and thus should be avoided.

In addition to being a source of trimethylamine precursors, brassicas (Brussels sprouts, broccoli, cabbage, and cauliflower) contain indoles, which may inhibit FMO3 enzyme activity and thus increase urinary excretion of trimethylamine [Cashman et al 1999]. Intake of such vegetables should be restricted.

Use of acid soaps and body lotions. Trimethylamine is a strong base (pKa 9.8). Thus, at pH 6.0, less than 0.02% of trimethylamine exists as the volatile free base. The use of soaps and body lotions with a pH close to that of normal skin (pH 5.5-6.5) helps retain secreted trimethylamine in a less volatile salt form that can be removed by washing.

Sequestering of trimethylamine produced in the gut. When taken as dietary supplements, activated charcoal (750 mg 2x/day for 10 days) and copper chlorophyllin (60 mg 3x/day after meals for 3 weeks) decrease the concentration of free trimethylamine in the urine [Yamazaki et al 2004].

Suppression of intestinal production of trimethylamine. A short course of antibiotics to modulate or reduce the activity of gut microflora, and thus suppress the production of trimethylamine, is effective in some cases [Fraser-Andrews et al 2003, Chalmers et al 2006]. Such treatment may be useful when dietary restriction needs to be relaxed (e.g., for important social occasions), or when trimethylamine production appears to increase (e.g., during menstruation, infection, emotional upset, stress, or exercise). Three antibiotics with different target organisms have been used: metronidazole, amoxicillin, and neomycin. Neomycin appears to be the most effective in preventing formation of trimethylamine from choline [Chalmers et al 2006].

Enhancement of residual FMO3 enzyme activity. Supplements of riboflavin, a precursor of the FAD prosthetic group of FMOs, may help maximize residual FMO3 enzyme activity [Manning et al 2012]. Recommended intake is 30-40 mg 3-5x/day with food. Children given riboflavin should be monitored closely because excessive amounts may cause gastrointestinal distress.

Counseling. Affected individuals and their families benefit from counseling. Realization that the problem is the result of a recognized medical condition may help. As well as receiving dietary advice, affected individuals should be advised that the condition may be exacerbated during menstruation and by factors that promote sweating, such as fever, exercise, stress, and emotional upsets.
See Table 3.

Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

Manifestation

Treatment

Considerations/Other

Dental crowding /

Malocclusion

Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist

Poor weight gain / Failure to thrive

Feeding therapy; gastrostomy tube placement may be required for persistent feeding issues.

Dietary diary & calorie counts may be requested.

GERD and/or constipation

Standard treatment(s)

Seizures

Standard treatment(s) as recommended by neurologist

Scoliosis / Kyphosis

Standard treatment as recommended by orthopedist

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district may be considered. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).

For ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function can be developed by the local public school district. Severely affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst. Effectiveness should be evaluated on an individual basis.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications (e.g., to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.
Thiamine

Management focuses on lifelong use of pharmacologic doses (50-100 mg/day) of oral thiamine (vitamin B1) in affected individuals regardless of age.

High-dose thiamine supplementation:

Invariably improves the hematologic picture;

Did not prevent the development of hearing loss in infants with TRMA in some studies [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2009, Akın et al 2011]. The efficacy of high-dose thiamine in improving hearing or delaying hearing loss has been difficult to study and remains unclear.

May delay onset of diabetes mellitus, and may ameliorate diabetes mellitus in the short term and perhaps even for decades [Valerio et al 1998]. Insulin requirements are reduced with thiamine therapy in some cases [Neufeld et al 1997].

Has not been evaluated as a treatment for optic atrophy, cardiovascular abnormalities, or neurologic abnormalities associated with TRMA.

Additional Treatment

Red blood cell transfusion for severe anemia is indicated.

See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for treatment strategies for hearing loss. Treatment has included cochlear implant [Hagr 2014].

Diabetes, cardiovascular abnormalities, and neurologic disorders should be treated in the standard manner.
Although there is no curative treatment for TUBB4A-related leukodystrophies, quality of life can be improved in the following ways.

Spasticity that is functionally disabling can lead to joint contractures and scoliosis; both require physical therapy (stretching and positioning) and medical management. Oral GABA agonists such as baclofen and diazepam can be used. In some instances intrathecal baclofen pumps can be considered. For focal spasticity, intramuscular botulinum toxin may be helpful.

Dystonia can be managed with:

Baclofen or intramuscular botulinum toxin when associated with spasticity;

Trihexyphenidyl or tetrabenazine;

High doses of levodopa and carbidopa [Wakusawa et al 2006, Tonduti et al 2016].

When dystonia is refractory to medical management, a baclofen pump may be considered. Of note, to date deep brain stimulation has not been studied in TUBB4A-related leukodystrophy.

Swallowing dysfunction may result in use of a gastrostomy for feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration.

Dysarthria may warrant augmentative communication tools.

Anticonvulsant medications should be used when seizures are present.

Constipation, commonly due to neurologic dysfunction and poor intestinal motility, can be treated with diet, laxatives, and stool softeners.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease is common and should be considered in the evaluation of pain.

Functional ability can be improved by use of walkers or wheeled mobility devices and other necessary equipment.

Accommodations in school such as an individual educational plan are often needed. With such accommodations many children with the classic H-ABC phenotype perform at or near grade level for many years, although cognitive decline may be seen later.

Family support and advocacy groups can provide needed psychosocial support for affected individuals.
Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs). Early identification of an enlarging giant cell astrocytoma permits medical therapy with mTOR inhibitors [Franz et al 2006, Krueger et al 2010], which may obviate the need for neurosurgical intervention in many individuals. However, neurosurgery may still be indicated when the size of the SEGA causes life-threatening neurologic symptoms.

Seizures. Early control of seizures is thought to prevent subsequent epileptic encephalopathy and reduce cognitive behavioral consequences [Muzykewicz et al 2009a, Bombardieri et al 2010]. The efficacy of different treatments for infantile spasms varies among individuals. Despite earlier studies suggesting the contrary, a retrospective review found that vigabatrin controlled infantile spasms in 73% of children with TSC [Camposano et al 2008] (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

The seizures in TSC may be resistant to polydrug therapy with anticonvulsants. A number of small studies have reported excellent results after epilepsy surgery [Avellino et al 1997, Baumgartner et al 1997, Weiner et al 1998, Romanelli et al 2002, Thiele 2004].

Jarrar et al [2004] found that unifocal-onset seizures and mild to no developmental delay at the time of surgery predict excellent long-term outcome.

Romanelli et al [2004] discussed the use of electroencephalographic techniques, functional neuroimaging, and invasive cortical mapping to aid the surgeon in evaluating options for surgical resection in individuals with TSC who have multifocal epileptogenic zones.

Kagawa et al [2005] found that increased radiolabeled alpha-methyl-L-tryptophan uptake on PET scans identifies epileptogenic tubers with 83% accuracy, thus enhancing successful epilepsy surgery.

Weiner et al [2006] used a three-staged bilateral surgical approach in 22 persons with TSC. They suggest that this approach can help identify both primary and secondary epileptogenic zones in young persons with multiple tubers.

Case reports and clinical trials assessing the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of intractable epilepsy in individuals with TSC have been published with encouraging results [Muncy et al 2009, Krueger et al 2013b]; additional trials are underway to confirm these preliminary findings.

Renal angiomyolipoma

For asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipoma measuring >4 cm in diameter or >3 cm and growing rapidly, treatment with an mTOR inhibitor is currently recommended as the most effective first-line therapy in the short term [Davies et al 2011, Bissler et al 2013]. The demonstrated tolerability to date is far preferable to the renal damage caused by angiomyolipoma progression or surgical and embolitic/ablative therapies, though studies are still needed to confirm long-term benefits and safety [Krueger et al 2013b].

Selective embolization followed by corticosteroids, kidney-sparing resection, or ablative therapy for exophytic lesions are acceptable second-line therapy for asymptomatic angiomyolipomas [Bissler et al 2002].

For acute hemorrhage, embolization followed by corticosteroids is more appropriate [Mourikis et al 1999]. Nephrectomy is to be avoided because of the high incidence of complications and increased risk for future renal insufficiency and end-stage renal failure, and the poor prognosis that results from chronic kidney disease.

Facial angiofibromas. Topical mTOR inhibitor formuations have been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of facial angiofibromas.

Cardiac rhabdomyomas. Previous standard of care for the treatment of newborns with cardiac rhabdomyomas resulting in life-threatening complications (i.e., outflow tract obstruction) was surgery. There have now been several reports of off-label use of mTOR inhibitors to treat cardiac rhabdomyomas in infants with TSC with encouraging results [Tiberio et al 2011, Dogan et al 2015, Goyer et al 2015, Mlczoch et al 2015]. These reports indicate that mTOR inhibitors may be a better alternative than surgery for clinically significant cardiac rhabdomyomas.

LAM affects almost exclusively women of childbearing age in whom estrogen is suspected to be involved in stimulating growth of smooth muscle cells in the lung. Medroxy-progesterone treatment and/or oophorectomy reduce the production of estrogen; however, response to treatment is highly individual. Oxygen therapy is necessary with impaired lung function. Persons with severe disease require lung transplantation.

Other trials have demonstrated efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for renal angiomyolipomas and LAM [Bissler et al 2008, McCormack et al 2011]. The FDA approved use of mTOR inhibitors for treatment of the lung issues in people with TSC (May 28, 2015).
A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of children with multiple disabilities and medically refractory epilepsy is recommended for long-term management.

Supportive management, including an individualized therapy plan that includes physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy for oculomotor deficits and/or strabismus should begin at the time of diagnosis to ensure the best possible functionality and developmental outcome. Of note, it is appropriate to institute measures early on to manage potential complications of spasticity (i.e., joint contractures or reduced range of motion), which can increase the risk for decubitus ulcers as well as affect mobility and hygiene.

Failure to thrive in infants with the more severe brain malformations (i.e., lissencephaly, generalized polymicrogyria) is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, followed by gastrostomy tube placement as needed.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for seizures based on the specific epilepsy type are indicated. In general, seizures should be treated promptly by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently worsens feeding and increases both the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed and the risk for pneumonia.

Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

For those with CFEOM, see detailed discussion of nonsurgical and surgical treatment (including extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery) in Congenital Fibrosis of the Extraocular Muscles.

For patients with severe cortical malformations (lissencephalies, polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia, microlissencephaly), it is usually appropriate to discuss the level of care to be provided in the event of a severe intercurrent illness.
Management guidelines have been published. US recommendations include Chinsky JM et al [in press]; European recommendations include de Laet et al [2013].

Acute management of liver failure. Children may require respiratory support, appropriate fluid management, and blood products for correction of bleeding diathesis.

Nitisinone (Orfadin®). 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoro-methylbenzyol) 1,3 cyclohexanedione (NTBC) blocks parahydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase (p-HPPD), the second step in the tyrosine degradation pathway, and prevents the accumulation of FAA and its conversion to succinylacetone (Figure 1).

Nitisinone should be prescribed as soon as the diagnosis of tyrosinemia type I is confirmed.

Nitisinone is generally prescribed at 1.0 mg/kg/day; individual requirements may vary. Dosage should be adjusted to maintain blood nitisinone levels between 40 and 60 µmol/L, which theoretically blocks more than 99% of p-HPPD activity. Rarely, an individual may require higher blood levels of nitisinone (70 µmol/L) to suppress succinylacetone excretion. As long as blood concentration of nitisinone is within the therapeutic range, urine succinylacetone does not need to be measured.

Nitisinone is typically given in two divided doses; however, because of the long half-life (50-60 hours), affected individuals who are older than one year and stable may maintain adequate therapy with 1x/day dosing [Schlune et al 2012].

Rare side effects of nitisinone have included: transient low platelet count and transient low neutrophil count that resolved without intervention; and photophobia that resolved with stricter dietary control and subsequent lowering of blood tyrosine concentrations.

Low-tyrosine diet. Nitisinone increases blood concentration of tyrosine, necessitating a low-tyrosine diet to prevent tyrosine crystals from forming in the cornea.

Dietary management should be started immediately upon diagnosis and should provide a nutritionally complete diet with controlled intakes of phenylalanine and tyrosine using a vegetarian diet with low-protein foods and a medical formula such as Tyrex® (Ross) or Tyros-1® (Mead Johnson).

Phenylalanine and tyrosine requirements are interdependent and vary from individual to individual and within the same individual depending on growth rate, adequacy of energy and protein intakes, and state of health. With appropriate dietary management, plasma tyrosine concentration should be 300-600 µmol/L, regardless of age; plasma phenylalanine concentration should be 20-80 µmol/L (0.3-1.3 mg/dL). If the blood concentration of phenylalanine is too low (<20 µmol/L), additional protein should be added to the diet from milk or foods.

Liver transplantation. Prior to the availability of nitisinone for the treatment of tyrosinemia type I, the only definitive therapy was liver transplantation.

Liver transplantation should be reserved for those children who (1) have severe liver failure at clinical presentation and fail to respond to nitisinone therapy or (2) have documented evidence of malignant changes in hepatic tissue [Bartlett et al 2014].

Transplant recipients require long-term immunosuppression. Mortality associated with liver transplantation in young children is approximately 10%.

Transplant recipients may also benefit from low-dose (0.1mg/kg/day) nitisinone therapy to prevent continued renal tubular and glomerular dysfunction resulting from persistence of succinylacetone in the plasma and urine [Bartlett et al 2013].
Usually no specific treatment is needed other than orthoses to counteract foot drop.

In individuals in their 40s and 50s with severe drop foot, tibial posterior tendon transposition can be performed to replace lost function of the anterior tibial muscle and long toe extensor muscles.
Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency

Manifestation

Treatment

Ocular abnormalities (nystagmus/strabismus)

Ophthalmologic management

Oral feeding difficulties

G-tube feeding

Constipation

Standard management

Orthopedic abnormalities (club feet, scoliosis, joint contractures)

Braces and/or corrective surgery

Seizures

Antiepileptic drugs

Self-injurious behavior

Behavior modification therapy

Hypo/hypertonia, gross motor delays, sensory processing difficulties

Physical therapy, occupational therapy

Absent speech

Sign language instruction; consider alternate forms of communication

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, lifts, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.
Urinary tract. No evidence base exists for treatment of the urinary tract abnormalities of UFS.

Urinary tract infections warrant rapid and complete treatment. Urosepsis should be treated as per the general population with antibiotic use directed by culture; antibiotic prophylaxis may also be considered.

Anticholinergic and α1-adrenergic blockers have been used in the medical management of urinary incontinence and bladder dysfunction [Aydogdu et al 2010, Stuart et al 2013].

Intermittent catheterization or vesicostomy to reduce residual urine volumes and achieve continence with a reduced risk of infections have been used.

Surgical management of hydroureteronephrosis and bladder augmentation to slow progression of renal impairment have been used; their efficacy is not known [Ochoa 2004, Stuart et al 2013].

Early recognition of renal impairment should initiate intensive management to prevent or slow progression. Renal impairment and hypertension are managed as per clinical status. Successful renal transplantation has been reported [Ochoa 2004].

Bowel. Constipation is managed as for the general population.
Hearing. Hearing aids are usually ineffectual in individuals with Usher syndrome type I because of the severity of the hearing loss.

Cochlear implantation should be seriously considered, especially for young children [Damen et al 2006, Pennings et al 2006, Liu et al 2008].

Communication skills may be optimized if all family members, as well as affected children, receive specialized training from educators of the hearing impaired.

Balance. Tunnel vision and night blindness can combine with vestibular areflexia to predispose affected individuals to accidental injury.

Well-supervised sports activities may help a person with Usher syndrome type I to compensate by becoming more adept at using the somatosensory component of the balance system.

Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management.

Communication by sign language and lip reading becomes increasingly difficult over time as the retinitis pigmentosa (RP) progresses. Vision loss may progress to the point that the individual with Usher syndrome type I can only communicate through tactile signing.
Hearing. Hearing aids are helpful. Young children can benefit from early fitting of hearing aids and speech training to normalize language.

Environmental trauma (e.g., noise) or a genetic susceptibility (e.g., presbycusis) in addition to the congenital, stable deficit of USH2 may combine to produce severe-to-profound hearing loss in older individuals with USH2; in such individuals, cochlear implantation may be warranted.

Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management.

Tunnel vision and night blindness can increase the likelihood of accidental injury.
No guidelines exist for the management of VHL lesions.

CNS hemangioblastoma

Most central nervous system hemangioblastomas can be surgically removed completely and safely [Lonser et al 2003].

Some advocate early surgical removal of both symptomatic and asymptomatic CNS lesions, while others follow asymptomatic lesions with yearly imaging studies.

Surgical intervention of cysts/syrinx in the spinal cord is recommended.

Preoperative arterial embolization may be indicated, especially for extensive spinal tumors.

The position of stereotactic therapy is still questionable [Oldfield 2015]. Gamma knife surgery may be useful with small solid tumors or those in inoperable sites [Asthagiri et al 2010, Simone et al 2011]. While this technique may reduce the size of the solid tumor, it does not appear to prevent cyst formation. In a study with nearly six years of follow up of 40 hemangioblastomas in 20 patients treated with stereotactic therapy, no progression was described in 33% [Asthagiri et al 2010]. Similar results are found when analyzing the natural history of the hemangioblastomas (25%) [Lonser et al 2014]. The unpredictable growth pattern makes it difficult to determine when to start stereotactic therapy, to avoid unnecessary intervention. A recent study demonstrates a local tumor control with stereotactic therapy of 93% after three years, 89% after five years, and 79% after ten years [Kano et al 2015]. Factors associated with tumor control are solid, smaller, VHL-associated lesions and higher margin dose. Thirteen of the 186 (7%) experienced complications, 11 patients needed steroid therapy and one person died of refractory peritumoral edema. Two patients required additional surgery.

Retinal hemangioblastoma

Most ophthalmologists favor prospective treatment of retinal (but not optic nerve) angiomas to avoid blindness, although spontaneous regression has occurred.

Therapeutic modalities used to treat retinal hemangioblastomas include diathermy, xenon, laser, and cryocoagulation, with variable degrees of success depending on the location, size, and number of lesions. Recurrent tumors have been noted, even after many years, but some may be new tumors in the same general area rather than recurrent disease.

External beam radiotherapy has been shown to be useful when standard therapy has not prevented progression [Raja et al 2004].

Renal cell carcinoma

Early surgery is the best option for renal cell carcinoma, although close monitoring is recommended for lesions smaller than 3 cm. Depending on the size and location of the tumor, nephron-sparing or partial nephrectomy may be possible without compromising survival [Grubb et al 2005].

Nephrectomy should leave the adrenal gland in situ, as is done in individuals with renal cell carcinoma who do not have a confirmed diagnosis of VHL. If contralateral pheochromocytoma occurs, the remaining adrenal gland will prevent or delay steroid replacement therapy.

Cryoablation is being increasingly used for small lesions or in individuals who are likely to require multiple surgical procedures [Shingleton & Sewell 2002].

Radio frequency ablation therapy is often applied to smaller tumors, particularly <3 cm [Best et al 2012]. However, smaller lesions treated with radio frequency ablation need frequent intervention [Joly et al 2011]. The major complication rate (need for a radiologic, surgical, or endoscopic intervention) for laparoscopic and percutaneous radio frequency ablation therapy was 7.3% and 4.3%, respectively [Young et al 2012].

Renal transplantation has been successful in individuals in whom bilateral nephrectomy has been necessary. It is imperative to evaluate any living related potential donor for VHL syndrome and to exclude those found to have VHL syndrome.

Pheochromocytomas

Pheochromocytomas should be surgically removed. Laparoscopic approaches have been shown to be effective.

Preoperative treatment with alpha-adrenergic blockade, and optional additional beta-adrenergic blockade for seven to ten days is appropriate even in individuals with no known hypertension.

Partial adrenalectomy could be considered. One long-term follow-up study (9.25 years) of 36 affected individuals showed no metastatic disease; ipsilateral recurrence after partial adrenalectomy was seen in three individuals (11%) [Benhammou et al 2010].

Partial adrenalectomy is also therapy of choice in children. In 10 VHL patients 18 successful operations were performed. After follow up (median 7.2 years), 2 patients developed a new tumor in the ipsilateral adrenal gland [Volkin et al 2012].

Pancreatic cysts and neuroendocrine tumors

Pancreatic cysts are common, but rarely influence endocrine function and generally do not require surgical removal.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors need to be differentiated from cysts and serous cystadenomas. Pancreatic tumors are usually slow growing and are not hormonally active, although they can cause metastatic disease. Surgery should be considered when there is a high risk of metastases suggested by one of the following prognostic criteria [Blansfield et al 2007]:

A tumor of ≥3 cm

A pathogenic variant in exon 3

A tumor with a doubling rate <500 days

Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). Consideration of surgical removal of these slow-growing tumors must include discussion of the possible complication of total deafness. Early intervention with small tumors has been shown to preserve both hearing and vestibular function [Kim et al 2005, Friedman et al 2013]. Friedman et al described two patients (2/18) with postoperative decreased facial nerve function and three (3/18) patients with recurrent ELSTs (with a mean follow up of 67 months). Kim et al [2013] studied 31 patients with VHL with 33 resected ELSTs. Twenty-nine patients were symptomatic. After surgery, hearing was stabilized or improved in 97% of individuals, and tumor resection was complete in 91%. Complications occurred in three tumors: cerebrospinal fluid leakage in two (6%) and transient lower cranial nerve palsy in one (3%).

Epididymal or broad ligament papillary cyst adenomas. These generally do not require surgery, unless they are symptomatic or are threatening fertility.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize deficits such as hearing loss, vision loss, neurologic symptoms, and the need for renal replacement therapy.
Frequently updated, succinct “emergency” care plans should detail the typical clinical issues (either those already experienced by the patient or those anticipated based on the diagnosis) and the importance of early management (e.g., use of IV glucose as an energy source, monitoring for cardiac rhythm disturbance, and monitoring of rhabdomyolysis), and avoidance of triggers (fasting, long-chain fats, and irritation of the myocardium) [Arnold et al 2009].

Cardiac dysfunction is reversible with early, intensive supportive care (occasionally including extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation) and diet modification. See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.
The following are appropriate:

Physical therapy to promote ambulation

Occupational therapy to develop fine-motor skills required for activities of daily living

Educational support
Management depends largely on the size and location of the lesions. Treatment is required for any symptomatic VMCM lesion. Although sclerotherapy is the treatment of choice, sclerosing agents are not specific and can lead to ulceration if the VMCM is mucosal or involves the epidermis [Hammer et al 2001, Dompmartin et al 2010, Boon et al 2011]. Foam aethoxysclerol and bleomycin are preferentially used as sclerosing agents. Surgery gives a consistently better result if it is performed after sclerotherapy.

If lesions are painful and D-dimers are elevated, low molecular-weight heparin can be used to alleviate pain [Dompmartin et al 2008].
Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated via intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which should commence at the diagnosis of VODI or in presymptomatic sibs confirmed to have homozygous SP110 pathogenic variants. An appropriate dose is 0.4 g/kg every four weeks adjusting the dose to maintain a trough IgG level greater than 6 g/L.

Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis with cotrimoxazole pediatric suspension (5 mL = trimethoprim 40 mg and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg) should be ongoing in children with VODI who tolerate this medication. This may be administered as a single daily dose or as a single dose three days per week. The recommended dose is 5 mg trimethoprim per kg (0.625 mL/kg) or 150 mg/M2 (3.75 mL/M2).

Infections with specific agents should be treated with appropriate supportive care and antibacterials or antivirals.

Hepatic transplantation may be considered, but appears to have a high rate of complications in the VODI cohort studied to date (see Other).

Bone marrow transplantation.

Ganaiem et al [2013] reported that this may be an efficacious treatment modality with appropriate conditioning therapy (see Other).
See Nichols et al [2008] (full text) and Castaman et al [2013] (full text) for treatment guidelines.

Individuals with VWD benefit from referral to a comprehensive bleeding disorders program for education, treatment, and genetic counseling.

The two main treatments are desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]) and clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII (VWF/FVIII concentrate). Individuals with VWD should receive prompt treatment for severe bleeding episodes.

Desmopressin

Most individuals with type 1 VWD and some with type 2 VWD respond to intravenous or subcutaneous treatment with desmopressin [Castaman et al 2008, Federici 2008, Leissinger et al 2014], which promotes release of stored VWF and raises levels three- to fourfold. Intranasal preparations are also available.

Following VWD diagnosis, a desmopressin challenge is advisable to assess VWF response.

Desmopressin is the treatment of choice for acute bleeding episodes or to cover surgery.

Desmopressin has been used successfully to cover delivery in women with type 1 VWD and also for a proportion of pregnant women with type 2 VWD [Castaman et al 2010b] (see Pregnancy Management).

In persons who do not tolerate desmopressin or who have a poor VWF response, clotting factor concentrate is required.

Desmopressin is contraindicated in individuals with arteriovascular disease and in those older than age 70 years for whom VWF/FVIII concentrate is required.

Note: Because desmopressin can cause hyponatremia (which can lead to seizures and coma), fluid intake should be restricted for 24 hours following its administration to minimize this risk.

Intravenous Infusion of VWF/FVIII Clotting Factor Concentrates

In those who are non-responsive to desmopressin (i.e., VWF deficiency is not sufficiently corrected) and for those in whom desmopressin is contraindicated (see Treatment by VWD Type), bleeding episodes can be prevented or controlled with intravenous infusion of virally inactivated plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII [Federici 2007]. Such concentrates are prepared from pooled blood donations from many donors. Virus inactivation procedures eliminate potential pathogens.

Indirect Treatments

In addition to treatments that directly increase VWF levels, individuals with VWD often benefit from indirect hemostatic treatments, including:

Fibrinolytic inhibitors (i.e., tranexamic acid for treatment or prevention of bleeding episodes);

Hormonal treatments (i.e., the combined oral contraceptive pill for the treatment of menorrhagia).

Treatment by VWD Type

Type 1 VWD. Treatments that directly increase VWF levels (e.g., desmopressin or VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates) are usually only needed for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding, as with major trauma or surgery.

Indirect treatment with fibrinolytic inhibitors or hormones is often effective.

Type 2A VWD. Treatment with clotting factor concentrates is usually only required for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding episodes such as during surgery.

Responsiveness to desmopressin is variable and should be confirmed prior to therapeutic use.

Indirect treatments can be beneficial.

Type 2B VWD. Clotting factor concentrates are usually required to treat severe bleeding or at the time of surgery.

Treatment with desmopressin should be undertaken cautiously as it can precipitate a worsening of any thrombocytopenia. People with certain pathogenic variants associated with mild or atypical 2B VWD, however, do not appear to develop thrombocytopenia when exposed to desmopressin. [Federici et al 2009]

Indirect treatments (i.e., fibrinolytic inhibitors) can be useful.

Type 2M VWD. Because desmopressin response is generally poor, VWF/FVIII concentrate is the treatment of choice.

Type 2N VWD. Desmopressin can be used for minor bleeding, but because the FVIII level will drop rapidly (as FVIII is not protected by VWF), concentrate containing VWF as well as FVIII is required to cover surgical procedures.

Type 3 VWD. Treatment often requires the repeated infusion of VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates [Franchini et al 2007].

Desmopressin is not effective in type 3 VWD.

Indirect treatments may also be beneficial.

Pediatric Issues

Special considerations for the care of infants and children with VWD include the following:

Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.

Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group.

VWF levels are higher in the neonatal period; thus, phenotypic testing for milder forms of VWD should be delayed until later in childhood.
To date, the treatment of individuals with VPS35-PD does not differ from that of Parkinson disease in general. The following is a brief summary of recommended treatment for PD, based on extensive existing guidelines and recommendations for pharmacotherapy of motor and non-motor manifestations of PD as well as neurosurgical interventions for motor findings [Zesiewicz et al 2010, Oertel et al 2011a, Oertel et al 2011b, Seppi et al 2011, Ferreira et al 2013, Odin et al 2015, Trenkwalder et al 2015].

Pharmacotherapy. Drugs to treat motor manifestations include the precursor of dopamine, levodopa, in combination with a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa, benserazide), dopamine agonists, inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B), anticholinergics, and amantadine. A good levodopa response was seen in nearly all reported individuals with VPS35-PD.

General recommendations for treatment of Parkinson disease of unknown cause include the following:

To reduce or delay side effects (e.g., dyskinesias, hallucinations, impulse control disorder) of levodopa and dopaminergic medication, doses should not exceed the levels required for a satisfactory clinical response. In younger patients, dopamine agonists should be given a preference.

Dyskinesias can be treated with reduction of levodopa doses, use of dopamine receptor agonists, deep-brain stimulation, and continuous application of levodopa or apomorphine.

Patients treated with ergot-derived dopamine agonists require periodic echocardiograms. Ergot-derived dopaminergic drugs should be discontinued if fibrotic heart-valve changes are revealed [Antonini & Poewe 2007].

Deep brain stimulation to the subthalamic nucleus was repeatedly reported to be effective in the treatment of disabling motor fluctuations or dyskinesia in persons with VPS35-PD.

Other. Overall, effective treatment for neuropsychiatric and autonomic symptoms (which may be disabling) is limited. Atypical neuroleptic agents such as low-dose clozapine and reduction of dopaminergic therapy can decrease delusions and hallucinations. If depression occurs, it should be treated according to guidelines. Droxidopa may be used to treat orthostasis.

Patients also benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.
Individuals with a cleft lip and/or palate should be evaluated and treated by a multidisciplinary team of specialists. The American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] has published parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies that can guide treatment of these patients. Click here for full text.

Management is supportive/symptomatic.

Cleft lip. Management is surgical, dental, and orthodontic.

Cleft palate. In addition to surgery, dentistry, and orthodontics, speech therapy and audiologic evaluation are usually needed. Otolaryngology evaluation is needed for management of middle ear effusions.

Lip pits. Surgery may be indicated for cosmetic purposes or for lip function. The lip pits may be connected to mucous-secreting glands and may be excised for this.

Eyelid and oral synechiae (ankyloblepharon and syngnathia, respectively) may require surgical excision.

Syngnathia often requires emergent release due to feeding and respiratory concerns and may require tracheotomy.

Popliteal pterygium. Management involves physical therapy and surgical and orthopedic intervention, as necessary.

Syndactyly may require surgery.

Abnormal genitalia may require surgery especially in the presence of cryptorchidism. The genital anomalies may result in infertility.
Refractive error is corrected by spectacles or contact lenses.

Visually disabling cataract is treated by cataract surgery. Phacoemulsification and implantation of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag has become the widely adopted standard procedure; however, as emphasized by Edwards, cataract surgery in individuals with vitreoretinopathy and possibly preceding vitrectomy can be difficult and should be performed by an experienced surgeon [Miyamoto et al 2005, Edwards 2008].

Posterior capsule opacification after cataract surgery is treated with YAG laser capsulotomy.

Retinal breaks are treated with laser retinopexy or cryocoagulation if no retinal detachment is present.

Vitreoretinal surgery is indicated for retinal detachment, vitreoretinal traction involving the macula, or epiretinal membranes involving the macula.
Treatment options vary based on the predicted disease burden in a particular individual.

Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome

[Buchbinder et al 2014]

Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The only curative treatment clinically available for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is allogeneic HCT. Affected males who receive HCT from a matched healthy sib or closely matched unrelated donor before their second birthday have a greater than 90% probability of being cured of the disorder [Moratto et al 2011, Shin et al 2012].

Currently, males with a WAS pathogenic variant who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS score 3-5), have markedly decreased WASP expression, and have a suitably matched donor are candidates for HCT. Myeloablative conditioning prior to transplantation is the most widely used approach, as reduced-intensity conditioning increases the risk of partial engraftment, which may not be curative [Moratto et al 2011]. Some symptoms (e.g., autoimmune disease) may take months to resolve following complete engraftment.

Since the phenotype of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome may evolve over time, optimal timing of transplantation is challenging. Individuals with absent intracellular WASP detection in hematopoietic cells are likely to develop Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, although a minority will exhibit the milder X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) phenotype throughout their life span. HCT before development of autoimmunity and malignancy is highly desirable, and younger age at transplant is associated with improved long-term outcome following HCT; however, the use of multiple chemotherapeutic agents necessary to achieve myeloablation presents a risk in young infants.

Individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who do not have a suitably matched donor but who experience life-threatening complications are candidates for gene therapy (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Eczema. Topical steroids are the mainstay of therapy. When chronic infections of the skin worsen eczema, antibiotics may be useful.

Infection. For those individuals with clinical signs or symptoms of infection, prompt evaluation and treatment is necessary. The initiation of empiric parenteral antibiotic treatment is necessary in the majority of individuals. The evaluation should be exhaustive until the source of the infection is uncovered. This may include invasive assessments, as cultures and isolation of the offending organism should be sought in order to guide therapy. If HCT is being considered, attention to the prevention and treatment of infectious complications is necessary to limit pre-transplant morbidity.

Autoimmune disease. Treatment usually consists of judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

X-Linked Thrombocytopenia (XLT)

The primary management of individuals with XLT (WAS score 1-2) remains controversial. Although long-term survival is excellent with conservative management of presenting symptoms, event-free survival is reduced by the substantial risk of severe, life-threatening or potentially debilitating complications [Albert et al 2010]. Serious bleeding episodes are generally restricted to the first 30 years of life. In contrast, the risk of developing autoimmune disease, malignancy, or a life-threatening infectious episode is rather constant throughout the individual’s lifetime. This persistent morbidity argues for HCT as a treatment option for such individuals. Given the excellent success in young children with classic Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, HCT may be considered a viable option for individuals with XLT if an HLA–identical donor can be identified. However, one needs to carefully weigh the advantage of a possible cure against the acute risks and long-term consequences of this procedure (e.g., risk of secondary malignancy, infertility). Thus, HCT in XLT needs to be decided on an individual basis.

X-Linked Neutropenia (XLN)

Treatment of XLN is with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and appropriate antibiotics.
Educational support. For individuals with developmental delay and/or learning disability, referral for learning/behavior/speech assessment and support may be indicated.

Camptodactyly. Occasionally toe camptodactyly may require surgical intervention. Physiotherapy may also be beneficial.

Ligamentous laxity. Physiotherapy may be of some benefit to those individuals experiencing joint pain secondary to ligamentous laxity.

Scoliosis. If scoliosis is present a referral to orthopedics for further evaluation and monitoring is appropriate.

If additional clinical issues are detected through the history and/or examination, the appropriate specialist referral(s) should be made.
It is not possible to generalize the management of the ocular complications of WMS.

The medical treatment of glaucoma is difficult because of paradoxical response to miotics and mydriatics.

A peripheral iridectomy should be performed to prevent or relieve pupillary block [Chang et al 2002, Ritch et al 2003].

Lens extraction and/or trabeculectomy may be necessary in some persons with advanced chronic angle closure glaucoma [Harasymowycz & Wilson 2004].

Individuals with WMS were recently reported to have increased central corneal thickness, which needs to be considered in the diagnosis and follow-up of glaucoma because increased central corneal thickness may lead to overestimation of intraocular pressure by applanation tonometers [Razeghinejad & Safavian 2006].
The following are appropriate:

Aggressive treatment of skin ulcers with standard or novel techniques [Yeong & Yang 2004]. Bosentan has been reported to be effective in the treatment of digital ulcers in individuals with systemic sclerosis, and its use has been recently reported to be beneficial in people with Werner syndrome [Matucci-Cerinic et al 2011, Noda et al 2011].

Control of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Favorable results have been reported with use of pioglitazone and sitagliptin [Durbin 2004, Yokote et al 2004, Watanabe et al 2013].

Use of cholesterol-lowering drugs if lipid profile is abnormal. Muscle atrophy is a potential complication.

Surgical treatment of ocular cataracts. Complications are common and specific techniques can optimize outcome [Ruprecht 1989, Shintani et al 1993].

Treatment of malignancies in a standard fashion
Diabetes mellitus. Treatment follows routine practices for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Optic atrophy. Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids).

Hearing impairment

WFS. Hearing loss is managed with either hearing aids or cochlear implant depending on the degree of hearing impairment and the frequencies affected.

Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Hearing aids should be tried early on, but may not be necessary until later in the disease course when a broader range of frequencies is involved. Hearing should be assessed throughout childhood in order to provide hearing aids when clinically indicated.

Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Treatment follows routine practices.

Psychiatric difficulties. Treatment follows routine practices.

Neurogenic bladder. Treatment follows routine practices. Patients with recurrent urinary infections, urodynamic abnormalities, and incomplete bladder emptying must be treated according to established protocols for these abnormalities, like clean intermittent self-catheterizations or indwelling catheter, and frequent surveillance of presence of urinary infections.

Other

Treatment of central diabetes insipidus follows routine practices.

Treatment of gastroparesis and celiac disease follows routine practices. (See Celiac Disease.)
Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential.

Seizures. Because almost 95% of individuals with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome have multiple seizures, most often triggered by fever, and almost one third later develop valproic acid-responsive atypical absence seizures, it is appropriate to start treatment with valproic acid soon after the first seizure. Atypical absence seizures are well controlled on valproic acid alone or in association with ethosuccimide [Battaglia & Carey 2000, Battaglia et al 2009].

Sodium bromide has recently been proposed as the initial treatment for the prevention of the development of status epilepticus [Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Clonic, tonic-clonic, absence, or myoclonic status epilepticus can be well controlled by intravenous benzodiazepines (Diazepam) [Battaglia & Carey 2005, Kagitani-Shimono et al 2005].

Because individuals with WHS have distinctive EEG abnormalities not necessarily associated with seizures [Battaglia et al 2009], it seems appropriate to withdraw antiepileptic drugs in individuals who have not experienced seizures for five years.

Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is also appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices such as the "Haberman feeder" can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with a cleft palate prior to surgical repair.

Gavage feeding may be indicated in individuals with poorly coordinated swallow.

Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner.

In one study, almost 44% of individuals with WHS were managed with gastrostomy and, occasionally, gastroesophageal fundoplication [Battaglia & Carey 2000].

Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., clubfoot, scoliosis, kyphosis) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner.

Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair.

Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids.

Sleeping problems. If no medical factors (e.g., otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, eczema, obstructive sleep apnea) are involved and if sleeping problems are reinforced by parental attention, the 'extinction of parental attention' is an effective behavioral treatment [Curfs et al 1999].

Hepatic adenomas. Medical treatment (either surgery or chemotherapy) varies in relation to the number and size of the adenomas.

Other structural anomalies (e.g., diaphragmatic, gastrointestinal, dental) should be addressed in a standard manner.
Cognitive/behavioral. Developmental disabilities should be addressed by early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training. Recommended therapies include speech/language, physical, and occupational therapy. Consider hippotherapy (use of equine movement during speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy).

Verbal strengths can be used to assist in learning spatial tasks.

Phonics methods are recommended to teach reading [John & Mervis 2010].

Mastery of daily living skills contributes to adult well-being and should be encouraged.

Psychological evaluation, polysomnography, and psychiatric evaluation should guide therapy for the individual.

Behavior in young children may be addressed using techniques based on applied behavior analysis [Mervis & John 2010].

Behavioral counseling and psychotropic medication are often used to manage behavior problems, especially attention deficit disorder and anxiety, which require pharmacologic treatment in approximately 50% [Cherniske et al 2004].

Self-calming techniques can help manage anxiety.

Cardiovascular. Surgical correction of SVAS is performed in 20%-30% [Kececioglu et al 1993, Bruno et al 2003, Collins et al 2010b]. Surgical treatment of mitral valve insufficiency or renal artery stenosis may be required.

Hypertension is usually treated medically. In one series, calcium channel blockers were used successfully [Bouchireb et al 2010]. Antihypertensive therapy also results in improvement in vascular stiffness [Kozel et al 2014]. Lifelong monitoring of the cardiovascular system by a cardiologist familiar with treating WS is recommended.

Hypercalcemia. Management of hypercalcemia involves the following:

Hydration status should be assessed; increase water intake as indicated.

The diet should be adjusted with the help of a nutritionist so that the calcium intake is not higher than 100% of the recommended daily intake (RDI) [Ross et al 2011]. If the serum concentration of calcium remains elevated, dietary calcium should be reduced; but the serum concentration of calcium must be monitored. Parents should be counseled not to restrict dietary intake of calcium without medical supervision.

Vitamin supplements containing vitamin D should be avoided. If vitamin D deficiency is suspected, it is important to check vitamin D levels prior to initiating therapy, and calcium levels must be monitored during treatment. Absorption of calcium from the gut is increased in Williams syndrome (cause unknown) and vitamin D promotes calcium absorption.

Refractory hypercalcemia may be treated with oral steroids.

Intravenous pamidronate has been used successfully to treat infants with severe symptomatic hypercalcemia [Cagle et al 2004, Oliveri et al 2004].

Referral to an endocrinologist and/or nephrologist is recommended for treatment of persistent hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and/or nephrocalcinosis.

Eye, ear, nose, and throat. Hyperopia is treated with corrective lenses; strabismus is treated with patching of one eye or surgery; dacrostenosis is treated as in the general population.

Recurrent otitis media may be treated with tympanotomy tubes.

Hypersensitivity to sounds may be treated with ear protection when increased noise levels can be predicted.

Dental care may require assistance with daily brushing and flossing. Dental cleaning frequency should be increased to every four months in adolescents and adults. Orthodontic referral should be considered for treatment of malocclusion.

Gastrointestinal.The treatment of feeding problems in infancy and abdominal pain in children and adults depends on the cause (e.g., G-E reflux, hypercalcemia, hiatal hernia, and/or diverticulitis). Infants often benefit from feeding therapy.

Constipation must be aggressively managed at all ages due to the increased risk for early onset diverticulosis/diverticulitis. Treatment usually includes dietary increase in water and fiber followed by osmotic laxative treatment. Severe abdominal pain may indicate diverticulitis and/or intestinal perforation, which may occur at a young age in WS.

Urinary tract abnormalities. Individuals with febrile urinary tract infections will likely require investigation of the lower urinary tract such as voiding cystourethrogram to direct treatment.

Endocrine. Early puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist [Partsch et al 2002, Pober 2010]. Hypothyroidism is treated with oral thyroxine therapy; subclinical hypothyroidism typically is monitored but does not require treatment.
The goal of therapy is to institute treatment with chelating agents as soon as possible in individuals with symptomatic Wilson disease. See extensive review by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] (full text) and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: Wilson's disease [European Association for Study of Liver 2012] (full text).

Treatment is life long, including during pregnancy.

If one treatment modality is discontinued, an alternative modality must be substituted.

Discontinuation of all treatment leads to hepatic and neurologic decompensation, which is usually refractory to further medical intervention.

Copper chelating agents that increase urinary excretion of copper are the first-line treatment for persons with symptomatic Wilson disease. Note: Routine institution of chelation therapy before age three years has not been adequately assessed and may have adverse effects on growth.

D-penicillamine (chelator). Used since the 1950s as first-line therapy for Wilson disease [Durand et al 2001, Walshe 2003a], D-penicillamine is given as tablets by mouth two or three times daily. Pyridoxine must be given along with D-penicillamine. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to confirm chelation and increased excretion of copper. Urinary copper values should be five to ten times normal; if the values are lower, non-compliance may be an issue, or body copper stores may have been adequately depleted.

Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly during D-penicillamine therapy. Serious side effects can occur in up to 30% of individuals, and include: severe thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, aplastic anemia, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, polyserositis, Goodpasture syndrome, and severe skin reactions. An early allergic reaction with fever, rash, and proteinuria may occur. Evidence of any such side effects may require discontinuation of D-penicillamine and substitution of an alternate treatment. If such alternate therapies are unavailable, D-penicillamine-induced adverse events may be manageable by co-administration of steroids.

D-penicillamine inhibits collagen cross-linking and has some immunosuppressant properties. After decades of treatment, individuals may have abnormal skin and connective tissue collagen, and possible chronic depletion of copper and (possibly) other trace metals.

D-penicillamine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc, pending adequate clinical assessment of this treatment strategy.

Trientine (chelator), also known as triethylene tetramine dihydrochloride (2,2,2-tetramine) or trien, is the usual second-line treatment for individuals who cannot tolerate D-penicillamine. It is gaining acceptance as a first-line drug because of good efficiency and better tolerance than D-penicillamine; however, it is still not generally available in all countries.

Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly in all individuals on trientine.

Rare side effects include gastritis with nausea and, in cases of overtreatment, iron deficiency anemia.

Trientine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc pending adequate assessment of this combination. Current reports suggest that the combination of trientine and zinc, temporally dispersed throughout the day such that each drug is administered 5-6 hours apart from the other, may be effective in severely decompensated hepatic Wilson disease [Santos Silva et al 1996, Askari et al 2003].

Zinc (metallothionein inducer). High-dose oral zinc interferes with absorption of copper from the gastrointestinal tract presumably by inducing enterocyte metallothionein, which preferentially binds copper from the intestinal contents and is lost in the feces as enterocytes are shed in normal turnover. Zinc therapy is most effective after initial decoppering with a chelating agent [Brewer 2001, Brewer et al 2001]. In selected cases, it can be used as an initial treatment [Milanino et al 1992, Linn et al 2009]. Zinc is taken as tablets by mouth at least twice (usually 3x) daily, before meals. The dose is based on the elemental zinc in the tablet. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to monitor total body copper stores, which should decrease. Increase of urinary copper excretion under zinc therapy may indicate insufficient treatment efficacy [Weiss et al 2011]. The computed estimate of non-ceruloplasmin-bound copper may be used to titrate the zinc dose. Serum or urinary zinc concentration can be measured to monitor compliance in individuals taking zinc.

Note: (1) Gastritis, a common side effect, can be reduced with the use of zinc acetate or zinc gluconate; (2) zinc should NOT be used simultaneously with any chelator, pending further clinical investigation.

Antioxidants. Serum and hepatic vitamin E concentrations are reported to be low in individuals with Wilson disease [Sokol et al 1994, Ogihara et al 1995], likely because of excessive consumption to counteract free radicals produced by excess copper. Antioxidants such as vitamin E may be used along with a chelator or zinc in protecting tissues from damage.

Restriction of foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) is likely prudent, especially at the beginning of treatment. It is recommended that individuals with special dietary needs (e.g., vegetarians) consult with a trained dietitian.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is reserved for individuals who fail to respond to medical therapy or cannot tolerate it because of serious adverse side effects [Schilsky et al 1994, Emre et al 2001, Sutcliffe et al 2003]. It remains controversial whether orthotopic liver transplantation should be a primary treatment for individuals with Wilson disease who have severe neurologic disease [Medici et al 2005, Weiss et al 2013a].
Management of the hearing loss associated with WS1 depends on its severity (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Cochlear implantation has been successful in individuals with WS [Amirsalari et al 2012, de Sousa Andrade et al 2012, Koyama et al 2016].
No specific treatment exists for WSS. All treatment is symptomatic.

Endocrine

Hypogonadism. Sex hormone replacement therapy at the usual age of puberty to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and promote bone health

Note: Standard replacement hormonal treatment will not promote fertility. It may be possible to stimulate testes with gonadotropins and harvest sperm with assisted reproductive technology.

Low IGF-1. Treatment with recombinant IGF-1 not recommended: no evidence shows that it improves the clinical features of WSS [Agopiantz et al 2014]. Of note, IGF-1 levels may increase with sex hormone replacement therapy.

Diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment

Hypothyroidism. L-thyroxine replacement therapy

Ectodermal

Treatment is symptomatic and cosmetic only.

Neurologic

Movement disorders

Dystonia. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2015]:

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics such as trihexyphenidyl (moderately effective for ~40%-50% of individuals)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (~100 mg/day) in younger individuals.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam

Other medications tried alone or in combination with the above categories: levodopa, carbamazepine, and dopamine depleting agents (reserpine, tetrabenazine)

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful, and are often used in combination with oral medications.

If medications fail, surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for some forms of medically refractory primary generalized dystonia [Vidailhet et al 2007, Crowell & Shah 2016]. Its use in WSS has not been documented.

Dysarthria. Consultation with a speech therapist may be helpful.

Dysphagia. Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning. Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management by a knowledgeable nutritionist is helpful.

Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.
When adrenal insufficiency is identified in an affected male, corticosteroid replacement therapy is essential and can be lifesaving. (Corticosteroid replacement therapy has no effect on nervous system involvement.)

Affected boys benefit from the general supportive care of parents, as well as psychological and educational support.

Physical therapy, management of urologic complications, and family and vocational counseling are of value for men with adrenomyeloneuropathy, many of whom maintain successful personal and professional lives [Silveri et al 2004].
Treatment is symptomatic and should be tailored to each patient. For females with typical CDPX2 diagnosed in the newborn period:

Orthopedic management of leg length discrepancy; surgical correction of polydactyly; frequent assessment of kyphoscoliosis, which can progress rapidly at any age

Cataract extraction and correction of vision

Dermatologic management of skin lesions

Physical, occupational, and speech therapies, if necessary

Standard interventions for congenital heart defects, kidney anomalies, and hearing loss
Management of affected individuals targets the three cardinal features and is directed at optimizing psychosocial development, establishing optimal oral function, and preventing hyperthermia.

Hypotrichosis. Wigs or special hair care formulas and techniques to manage sparse, dry hair may be useful. One report describes a child with HED and alopecia who was treated with topical minoxidil to the scalp and had resultant hair growth [Lee et al 2013].

Hypohidrosis. During hot weather, affected individuals must have access to an adequate supply of water and a cool environment, which may mean air conditioning, a wet T-shirt, and/or a spray bottle of water. Some individuals may benefit from "cooling vests."

Affected individuals learn to control their exposure to heat and to minimize its consequences, but special situations may arise in which intervention by physicians and families is helpful. For example, a physician may have to prescribe an air conditioner before a school district complies, or parents may have to advocate for children who need to carry liquids into areas where they are prohibited.

Hypodontia

Dental treatment, ranging from simple restorations to dentures, must begin at an early age. Bonding of conical shaped teeth in young affected individuals improves aesthetics and chewing ability.

Orthodontics may be necessary.

Dental implants in the anterior portion of the mandibular arch have proven successful only in children age seven years and older [Kramer et al 2007, Stanford et al 2008].

Children with HED typically need to have their dental prostheses replaced every 2.5 years.

Dental implants in adults can support aesthetic and functional dentition.

Hyposalivation is present in some individuals, predisposing them to dental caries and the need for therapeutics directed at maintaining oral lubrication and caries control.

Dietary counseling may be helpful for those individuals who have trouble chewing and swallowing despite adequate dental care.

Other

Regular visits with an ENT physician may be necessary for management of the nasal and aural concretions. Commonly, nasal and aural concretions must be removed with suction devices or forceps and recommendations made about humidification of the ambient air to prevent their formation [Mehta et al 2007].

Skin care products are useful for management of eczema and rashes and for dry skin associated with certain outdoor exposures like swimming.

Lubrication eye drops can be helpful for dry eyes.
No formal management guidelines exist; the following are general considerations.

Individuals with XLP who develop fulminant EBV infection/HLH often improve with early treatment (e.g., based on HLH-1994 protocol) similar to that used in other life-threatening genetic hemophagocytic disorders including familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) [Henter et al 1997, Jordan et al 2011], typically consisting of etoposide and steroids. Rituximab (anti-CD20 antibody) [Milone et al 2005, Lee et al 2006] as well as IVIG may also be considered.

Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be strongly considered in individuals with confirmed XLP1 as early in life as is feasible [Lankester et al 2005]. Successful outcomes have been reported with the use of matched sib donors and marrow or umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors [Gross et al 1996, Filipovich 2001, Lankester et al 2005]. Overall survival appears to be approximately 80%, regardless of conditioning regimen used. However, survival of affected individuals who received a transplant was increased if they were transplanted prior to an episode of HLH [Booth et al 2011].

The outcomes of allogeneic HCT for males with XLP2 are less certain at this time. Early evidence suggests that reduced-intensity conditioning regimens should be considered due to very poor early experience with myeloablative preparative regimens [Marsh et al 2013].

Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated with IVIG.

Lymphoma associated with XLP1 is treated with the standard chemotherapy appropriate to the tumor diagnosis. Once lymphoma remission is achieved, the individual should quickly proceed to allogeneic HCT.

Colitis associated with XLP2 is treated symptomatically and with immunosuppression similar to that used for irritable bowel disease.
Refractive errors should be treated with appropriate spectacle correction as early as possible.

Photodysphoria can be relieved by sunglasses, transition lenses, or special filter glasses, although many prefer not to wear them because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses when indoors.

Abnormal head posture with dampening of the nystagmus in a null point may be modified with prismatic spectacle correction.

Strabismus surgery is usually not required but may be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus or the face turn is marked or fixed. The need for vision aids and the educational needs of the visually impaired should be addressed.

Dermatologic counseling for age-appropriate sun-protective lotions and clothing should be sought.
Management of individuals with FLNA-related PVNH is directed toward symptomatic treatment.

Treatment of epilepsy generally follows basic principles for a seizure disorder caused by a known structural brain abnormality, including:

Detailed initial history and evaluation to confirm the suspicion of a seizure disorder. Testing may include an electroencephalogram (EEG) to define the location and severity of electrical brain dysfunction that may be present in individuals with epilepsy.

Repeat imaging may be necessary only in the setting of new neurologic findings on examination.

Treatment with antiepileptic agents. Choice of antiepileptics is generally made empirically based on the clinical features of the seizure disorder. However, because no significant differences exist between medications for newly diagnosed, presumably localized epilepsy, choices may be made on the specific attributes of each antiepileptic drug (i.e., risk of teratogenicity of the antiepileptic drug during pregnancy), tolerability, and efficacy.

Because of the risk for aortic or carotid dissection, it may also be wise to ensure good blood pressure control.

Treatment of aortic/carotid dissection, congenital heart disease, and valvular disease is the same as in the general population.

Many individuals with periventricular nodular heterotopia have dyslexia. Therefore, it may be prudent for those with a family history of PVNH to have children tested for dyslexia at an early age.
The current goals of treatment include prophylaxis for infections and preemptive bone marrow transplant (BMT) prior to the development of symptoms (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

An individual diagnosed with X-SCID requires emergent treatment to provide a functional immune system.

Interim management includes treatment of infections and use of immunoglobulin infusions and antibiotics, particularly prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly Pneumocystis carinii) and, in most cases, fungal infections.

Isolation from exposure to CMV (breast milk, young children, blood products) is indicated.
Pharmacologic Treatment of Dystonia

Anticholinergic agents and benzodiazepines. In the early stages of the disease when dystonia is focal or segmental in distribution, individuals may respond significantly to anti-dystonia medications, particularly to anticholinergic agents and benzodiazepines.

The two most commonly prescribed anticholinergic drugs are trihexyphenidyl (Artane™) and biperiden (Akineton™). Trihexyphenidyl appears to have a more consistent and beneficial effect than biperiden, especially in the moderate-to-advanced stages.

The benzodiazepine associated with the best response is clonazepam.

Even greater improvement in dystonia is noted when anticholinergic drugs are combined with clonazepam.

Zolpidem. Once the dystonia is multifocal or generalized in distribution, even polypharmacy offers only partial relief of the dystonic symptoms. In such states, zolpidem has been observed to be potentially effective [Evidente 2002].

Zolpidem is particularly useful in individuals with a predominantly phasic type of generalized dystonic movements and no contractures. In such cases dramatic improvement can occur: some individuals experience nearly 100% improvement of dystonia for a few hours.

The clinical effect of zolpidem may last six to eight hours per 10-mg dose in the first few weeks. Subsequently, the effect becomes progressively shorter, decreasing to two to three hours.

Zolpidem was previously reported to have modest effects on parkinsonism in some individuals with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) [Daniele et al 1999] and Parkinson disease [Daniele et al 1997]; however, its effect on dystonia in individuals with XDP is more robust than its effect on parkinsonism.

Individuals with XDP who take frequent doses of zolpidem either overcome its soporific effects rapidly or develop tolerable daytime sleepiness.

Neuroleptics, particularly those with strong dopamine D2 antagonistic properties, are often prescribed because they are relatively cheap and widely available.

Haloperidol is often used by primary care physicians who see individuals with XDP de novo in the Panay Islands. Although haloperidol may be effective initially for mild-to-moderate dystonia, its effect in more advanced dystonia remains dubious, as it is unclear if the progression of the dystonia is caused by the disease alone or partially caused by the extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) of haloperidol.

Risperidone seems less effective than haloperidol in controlling dystonia. At doses of 6 mg/day or higher, risperidone may also be associated with EPS including tardive dyskinesias and parkinsonism.

Of the atypical neuroleptics, clozapine has the greatest potential to be effective, at least for a limited period. However, its clinical use is limited by its potential to cause aplastic anemia and the need to do frequent complete blood counts, which is impractical in the rural areas of the Panay Islands where XDP is most prevalent.

Tetrabenazine (a non-neuroleptic presynaptic dopamine depleter) also benefits some individuals with clinically advanced dystonia [Evidente et al 2002a]. Similar to zolpidem, tetrabenazine best helps individuals with phasic dystonia and no contractures.

Botulinum toxin injections improve focal dystonia, particularly cervical dystonia, blepharospasm, tongue dystonia, and jaw dystonia. It can, however, dramatically worsen swallowing in individuals with preexisting dysphagia if injected in the cervical or tongue area. The prohibitive cost of botulinum toxin also limits its use in individuals with XDP in rural areas. Rosales et al [2011] using botulinum toxin-A injections in 109 persons with XDP found substantial improvement for oromandibular and lingual dystonias and moderate improvement for truncal-axial dystonias as well as a significant reduction in associated pain.

Injections of ethanol and lidocaine for afferent blocking of muscle are far less costly than botulinum toxin and have been attempted in individuals with XDP with cervical dystonia. They only offer clinical benefits for one to two weeks and are associated with undesirable side effects including severe pain during injections and muscle fibrosis and contractures with repeated use.

Pharmacologic Treatment of Parkinsonism

Levodopa. Individuals with XDP, particularly those with pure parkinsonism, may be responsive to levodopa. Persons with parkinsonism who develop dystonia may become increasingly less responsive to levodopa as the dystonia progresses. Of note, long-term use of levodopa does not lead to development of levodopa-associated dyskinesias.

Dopamine agonists are also effective in controlling tremor in individuals with XDP but are less effective than levodopa in controlling bradykinesia or shuffling gait. Rarely, levodopa or dopamine agonists may exacerbate the dystonia in persons with XDP.

Surgical Treatment of Dystonia and Parkinsonism

Deep brain stimulation (DBS). XDP was successfully treated in one individual using DBS of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) bilaterally [Evidente et al 2007]. The individual had parkinsonism and generalized dystonia, with severe disabling jaw-opening dystonia, drooling, dysphagia, and dysarthria (speech was unintelligible). He received only partial relief of his symptoms with a combination of levodopa, piribedil (a dopamine agonist), trihexyphenidyl, and zolpidem. His generalized dystonia and parkinsonism improved markedly within the first week after surgery, with sustained benefits at seven year follow-up. Thus, it appears that bilateral pallidal stimulation may be the best option for symptomatic improvement in individuals with XDP with advanced disease and medically refractory dystonia [Wadia et al 2010, Aguilar et al 2011, Patel et al 2014].

Although dystonia uniformly improves in individuals with XDP undergoing bilateral pallidal DBS, the parkinsonism may be less responsive [Oyama et al 2010]. In one individual with XDP rapidly progressive dystonia was noted to have early and marked benefit with bilateral GPi DBS [Martinez-Torres et al 2009]. In another individual with XDP who underwent bilateral pallidal DBS, an impulse control disorder similar to what is observed in people with Parkinson disease who have undergone DBS was described [Piano & Tan 2013].
Optical devices

Correction of refractive errors as early as possible using contact lenses or appropriate refractive correction can improve visual acuity appreciably. Contact lenses not only provide optical correction but also may have a role in dampening the intensity of the nystagmus. Although the mechanism is not clear, it has been suggested that dampening of the nystagmus may be exerted through the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, which is part of the proprioceptive pathway [Dell'Osso 2002].

The use of prisms may be helpful in individuals with binocular vision whose nystagmus is dampened by convergence. There are no fixed age groups for which prisms are prescribed; however, prisms are typically used in adults, teenagers, and cooperative children.

Pharmacologic. Memantine and gabapentin have been reported to improve visual acuity, intensity of nystagmus, and foveation [Shery et al 2006, McLean et al 2007].

Surgery

The Anderson-Kestenbaum procedure consists of surgery of the extraocular muscles to shift the null zone to the primary position. As mentioned above, the cause of an anomalous head posture is an eccentric null zone. Therefore, shifting the null zone also corrects the anomalous head posture. In practice this procedure not only shifts but also broadens the null zone, as well as decreasing nystagmus outside the null zone. Abnormal head posture is only seen in approximately 15% of affected individuals.

Clinical trials to assess the role of horizontal rectus tenotomy and its effects on visual function found an improvement in nystagmus waveform and visual function [Hertle et al 2003].
Individuals with XLA should receive specialty care at a center with expertise in this disorder.

If individuals develop acute infections, they should be treated with a course of antibiotics that is at least twice as long as that used in otherwise healthy individuals. Generous use of antibiotics is recommended and treatment should be given without any unnecessary delay.
The only curative treatment currently available for HIGM1 is allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), ideally prior to onset of a life-threatening complication and organ damage [Levy et al 1997]. Currently, boys with HIGM1 who receive allogeneic HCT have a 70%-75% long-term survival rate [Tomizawa et al 2004, Tsuji et al 2006]. Modified conditioning regimens prior to HCT may be necessary in individuals with preexisting liver disease [Dogu et al 2011].

For a concise summary of current clinical management practices in this disorder, see Davies & Thrasher [2010].

Other

Total parenteral nutrition may be required.

Treat chronic neutropenia with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).

Institute appropriate antimicrobial therapy for infections.

Aggressively evaluate pulmonary infections, including the use of diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage, to define the specific etiology.

Some males with end-stage sclerosing cholangitis have been treated successfully with orthotropic liver transplantation closely associated with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

Treat lymphomas and GI cancer.

Treatment of autoimmune disorders usually involves judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

Liver disease, including primary cirrhosis and carcinomas, in addition to tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, complicate the management of older individuals with HIGM1 [Lee et al 2005].
The following treatments are recommended:

Calorie-dense formula and/or gavage feeding to compensate for poor nutritional intake

If food refusal is an issue, evaluation for gastrointestinal causes such as peptic ulcer disease

If drooling is a serious problem, treatment with anticholinergics, botulinum toxin type A injection of the salivary glands and/or surgical redirecting of the submandibular ducts

Treatment in the usual manner for gastroesophageal reflux, recurrent respiratory and urinary tract infections, seizures, severe behavior problems, anomalies (e.g., cleft palate, cardiac malformations, cryptorchidism, ambiguous genitalia, hypospadias)

Early intervention programs and special education for developmental delays
The treatment of manifestations is reviewed in Tamura et al [2010b] and Tamura et al [2014].

Skin. Premalignant lesions (e.g., small actinic keratosis) may be treated by freezing with liquid nitrogen.

Larger areas of sun-damaged skin can be treated with field treatments such as topical 5-fluorouracil or imiquimod preparations. Rarely, therapeutic dermatome shaving or dermabrasion has been used to remove the more damaged superficial epidermal layers. This procedure permits repopulation by relatively UV-shielded cells from the follicles and glands.

Cutaneous neoplasms are treated in the same manner as in individuals who do not have XP. This involves electrodesiccation/curettage or surgical excision. Skin cancers which are recurrent or in locations at high risk for recurrence are best treated with Mohs micrographic surgery. Because multiple surgical procedures are often necessary, removal of undamaged skin should be minimized. Severe cases have been treated by excision of large portions of the facial surface and grafting with sun-protected skin.

While individuals with XP are not abnormally sensitive to therapeutic x-rays, and individuals with XP have responded normally to full-dose therapeutic x-radiation for treatment of inoperable neoplasms [DiGiovanna et al 1998], cultured cells from a few individuals with XP were found to be hypersensitive to x-radiation [Arlett et al 2006]. When x-radiation therapy is indicated, an initial small dose is advisable to test for clinical hypersensitivity.

Oral isotretinoin or acitretin can be effective in preventing new neoplasms in individuals with multiple skin cancers [Kraemer et al 1988]. Because of its toxicity (hepatic, hyperlipidemic, and teratogenic effects; calcification of ligaments and tendons; premature closure of the epiphyses), oral isotretinoin or acitretin should be reserved for individuals with XP who are actively developing large numbers of new tumors. Some individuals may respond to lower doses of isotretinoin or acitretin with less toxicity.

A few case reports have described regression of skin cancers with use of imiquimod cream in individuals with XP [Giannotti et al 2003, Nagore et al 2003, Roseeuw 2003]; however, no controlled studies have been reported.

Eyes. Methylcellulose eye drops or soft contact lenses have been used to keep the cornea moist and to protect against mechanical trauma in individuals with deformed eyelids.

Corneal transplantation has restored vision in individuals with severe keratitis with corneal opacity. However, the immunosuppression necessary to prevent rejection of the transplant may increase the risk for skin cancer.

Neoplasms of the lids, conjunctiva, and cornea are usually treated surgically.

Hearing. Hearing aids can be of great help for individuals who have sensorineural hearing loss with learning difficulties in school (see Totonchy et al [2013] and Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).
Early intervention with speech and physical therapy is recommended for young children with developmental delay. Special education programs are subsequently recommended for school-aged children with intellectual disability.

Recurrent bacterial infections are treated with standard antibiotics. Children with recurrent ear infections should be referred to ENT to assess need for tympanostomy tubes.

Nutritional counseling and regular exercise are needed when obesity is an issue.

Standard management is recommended for the following:

Behavioral and psychiatric problems

Kyphoscoliosis

Cardiac malformations

Hearing impairment

Eye problems
Testosterone-replacement therapy. Management of individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD with testosterone deficiency is similar to that for other causes of testosterone deficiency. Physicians should check for the most current preparations and dosage recommendations before initiating testosterone replacement therapy.

After age 14 years, low-dose testosterone therapy can be initiated. Note: If an individual has short stature and is eligible for growth hormone therapy, testosterone therapy should be either delayed or given at lower doses initially in order to maximize growth potential.

Testosterone enanthate is given IM every three to four weeks, starting at 100 mg and increasing by 50 mg every six months to 200-400 mg. Initial high doses of testosterone should be avoided to prevent priapism. The treatment should plateau, in adulthood, at the best possible dosage, typically between 50 and 400 mg every two to four weeks.

Injection of testosterone enanthate is the preferred method of replacement therapy because of low cost and easy, at-home regulation of dosage; however, side effects include pain associated with injection and large variations of serum testosterone concentration between injections, resulting in a higher risk of mood swings.

Alternative delivery systems that result in a more stable dosing include transdermal patches (scrotal and non-scrotal) and transdermal gels. Testosterone-containing gels, however, are associated with the risk of interpersonal transfer, which can be reduced by the use of newer hydroalcoholic gels [Kühnert et al 2005].

Gynecomastia. Regression of gynecomastia may occur with testosterone replacement therapy. If it does not, and if it causes psychological distress to the individual, reduction mammoplasty can be offered.

Osteopenia. Depending on the degree of osteopenia, treatment may include: calcium, exercise, vitamin D, biphosphonates, or calcitonin. Referral to an internist, pediatrician, or endocrinologist is recommended.

Psychological support.

Sensitivity is necessary when conveying information to individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD about the genetic cause and associated sterility of the disorder. This information must be presented in a manner that helps minimize psychological distress. Providers are encouraged to anticipate the need for further psychological assistance.
A couple in which the male has Y chromosome infertility can be offered the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) [Silber 2011]. In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by IVF (in vitro fertilization).

Retrieval of sperm has been successful mainly for most males with deletions of AZFc, and rarely for males with deletions of AZFb or AZFa. The reason for this is that an autosomal copy of DAZ (DAZL) may serve as a “back up gene,” which would help preserve a tiny amount of residual spermatogenesis in males with AZFc deletions that remove the DAZ genes. There are no such autosomal “back up” copies for genes in AZFa and AZFb.

The definition of SCOS (Sertoli cell only syndrome) has been the subject of confusion in the literature. There are two main causes of non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA): maturation arrest and Sertoli cell only. With maturation arrest, there is a failure of spermatocytes to progress beyond meiosis I. But in 60% of cases, a few spermatocytes do progress to sperm and can be retrieved from the testis. Similarly, in about 60% of cases with SCOS a tiny number of tubules actually contain a few spermatozoa resulting from small foci of spermatogenesis.

It is important to discuss the possibility of transmission of Y chromosome infertility to male offspring (see Genetic Counseling) prior to attempting fertilization by ICSI and IVF [Stouffs et al 2005].

In males with retrievable spermatozoa, the presence or absence of deletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome has no apparent effect on fertilization or pregnancy rates [Oates et al 2002, Kihaile et al 2004, Silber 2011]. The risk for birth defects is not different from that of any infertile couple who achieves a pregnancy through assisted reproductive technology [Choi et al 2004, Davies et al 2012].
Treatment relies on prompt reconstitution of the individual’s immune system (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Supportive treatment includes IVIG and antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis to control and reduce the occurrence of infections.
