http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/a-mannosidosis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with alpha-mannosidosis, the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history including evidence of hearing loss, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression; change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities or in ability to walk distances; diarrhea or incontinence, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches, reduced range of movement, and bone pain Physical examination including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, auscultation of heart and lungs, neurologic status including gait, and orthopedic evaluation including joint range of motion. In children, attention to growth (plot height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts) Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections Audiometry. If intellectual disability or young age makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacity Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Clinical examination and immunologic tests (e.g., antinuclear antibodies, anti-ds-DNA antibodies) to exclude systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are recommended. Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites Bone densitometry to detect osteopenia or osteoporosis CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum, particularly if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema) 
Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Some affected individuals, including those who have had bone marrow transplantation (BMT), may require symptomatic treatment. The overall aim is to prevent complications and to optimize quality of life. 
Medical measures Early use of antibiotics for bacterial infections. A clinical consequence of the immunodeficiency is that bacterial and viral infections must be treated with vigilance. Hearing aids as early as possible for individuals with sensorineural hearing loss to improve hearing and enhance speech development and social functioning Insertion
of PE (pressure-equalizing) tubes to reduce the conductive/mechanical component of hearing loss from fluid in the middle ear Glasses (spectacles) to correct refractive error to improve vision. Although lens replacement for cataract is a standard procedure in alpha-mannosidosis, corneal transplantation can be difficult; postoperative complications include astigmatism (which may be correctable with repeat surgery, laser treatment, or optical devices). Physiotherapy including hydrotherapy to avoid strain on the joints Use of a wheelchair if necessary Treatment of osteoporosis or osteopenia identified on bone densitometry with palmidronate (Aredia®) monthly or zoledronic acid (Aclasta®) once a year Orthopedic intervention if necessary. Special shoes may help with ankle and foot support. Ventriculocaval shunt for communicating hydrocephalusNote: Ventriculoperitoneal shunts may cause ascites because of the reduced absorptive capacity of the peritoneal cavity [Malm, personal communication]. Therefore, ventriculocaval shunts are preferred. 
Educational opportunities/social considerations Use of sign language in individuals with significant hearing loss Early educational intervention for development of social skills Speech therapy to improve speech Special education to maximize learning Planning housing for possible future wheelchair use

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Most affected individuals are clinically normal at birth. Since alpha-mannosidosis can be treated with BMT, and possibly also by ERT in the future, there is a pressing need for newborn screening to identify affected individuals early, before the onset of severe, irreversible, pathology [Meikle et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of immunodeficiency, affected individuals should be included in prophylactic vaccination programs. The tendency to develop caries as a result of poor tooth quality can be reversed or delayed by good tooth hygiene or dental support [Malm, personal observation]. Regular physiotherapy to increase muscle strength may help compensate for the slowly progressive ataxia [Malm, personal observation].

Surveillance


Suggested serial monitoring to evaluate severity and rate of disease progression Medical history (every 6-12 months) including number and type of infections, hearing, weight loss, headache, fatigue, irritability, depression, change in social, domestic, school- or work-related activities, ability to walk distances; diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle pain, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain Physical examination (every 6-12 months) including otoscopy, ophthalmoscopy, assessment of liver and spleen size, heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, and orthopedic evaluation. In children, attention to growth (height, weight, and especially head circumference using standardized growth charts) Examination by an otolaryngologist to detect impaired hearing and middle-ear infections Audiometry. If intellectual disability makes cooperation difficult, brain stem evoked response testing Ophthalmologic examination to detect corneal opacities, myopia, hyperopia, and strabismus Neuropsychological testing to establish functional level and learning capacities Blood tests. PLOT and C-reactive protein for evidence of inflammation, serum concentrations of ALT for evaluation of concomitant liver disease and creatinine for assessment of renal function. Immunologic status, focusing on SLE, is recommended. Skeletal assessment. Plain radiographs of the head, knees (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view) and any symptomatic sites Bone densitometry every two to five years to assess osteopenia CT scan of the brain to evaluate the size of the ventricles and shape and size of the cerebellum if signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are present (e.g., headache, increasing gait ataxia, nausea, papilledema)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk sibs should be tested either prenatally or in the newborn period as they will benefit from early intervention (see Treatment of Manifestations). Molecular genetic testing is possible if both pathogenic variants have been identified in the family. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT), which transfers enzyme from the engrafted stem cells to the incompetent host cells via cell-to-cell contact or via the blood stream, has been attempted in alpha-mannosidosis. Early BMT attempts were unsuccessful in one child [Will et al 1987] and successful in another [Wall et al 1998]. In four untreated children with the expected slowing of neurocognitive development and sensorineural hearing loss, Grewal et al [2004] demonstrated improvement in adaptive skills and verbal memory following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in three of four individuals studied. They emphasize the importance of early diagnosis and treatment with HSCT. In a retrospective multi-institutional analysis, Mynarek et al [2012] summarize the experience of allogeneic HSCT in 17 individuals with alpha-mannosidosis. In summary, after HSCT, affected individuals made developmental progress, although normal development was not achieved. Hearing ability improved in some, but not in all. They conclude that HSCT may promote mental development in alpha-mannosidosis. Avenarius et al [2011] reported a proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic (MRS) detection method for the accumulation of abnormal metabolites in multiple parts of the brain (basal ganglia, periventricular white matter, and occipital grey matter) of individuals with alpha-mannosidosis. The spectroscopy also showed that the abnormal deposits resolved in an affected individual treated with BMT six years earlier. Thus, MRS could be a useful noninvasive method to monitor the effect of treatments such as BMT or ERT in individuals with alpha-mannosidosis. However, BMT remains a risky procedure: a retrospective study of 17 patients who had undergone BMT reported high rates of sepsis, graft-vs-host disease (GvHD), and multiple virus infections; two patients died of multi-organ failure [Mynarek et al 2012]. Chronic immune-mediated axonal polyneuropathy that followed BMT improved following plasma exchange in one individual [Mulrooney et al 2003]. Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT). A 24-month-old boy underwent uncomplicated PBSCT with his HLA-identical mother as the donor. T-cell depletion was used to reduce the risk of GvHD. Studies showed 50%-60% donor cells in blood; enzyme activity was slightly below normal. The urinary excretion of mannose-rich oligosaccharides resolved gradually and was almost absent 13 months after PBSCT. Skeletal dysplasia as judged by radiographs of the hands normalized after ten months; delayed myelination as demonstrated by MRI normalized after 12 months [Albert et al 2003]. 
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) Fibroblasts. In many in vitro studies with the purified active enzyme added to the media of mannosidase-deficient fibroblasts, the accumulation of lysosomal substrate was corrected [Abraham et al 1985]. Mouse. ERT studies in alpha-mannosidosis mouse models have found a decrease in mannose-containing oligosaccharides in tissues, including brain [Roces et al 2004]. Therefore, ERT could be an efficient treatment in humans in the future. However, in a guinea pig model, no histologic changes were seen in the brain, whereas lysosomal vacuolation decreased markedly in liver, kidney, spleen, pancreas, and trigeminal ganglion neurons [Crawley et al 2006]. Later studies in mice using higher doses (500 U/kg) of enzyme showed a distinct reduction in pathologic brain storage material [Blanz et al 2008] and even short-term ERT partially reversed the observed cerebellar pathology [Damme et al 2011]. Human. Mannosidase substitution (ERT) in humans is under investigation in the Seventh Framework EU project ALPHA-MAN. According to a press release of 10-17-2011, a Phase 2 study involving nine affected individuals found a significant improvement in the six-minute walk test, the three-minute stair case climb test, and spirometry but not intellectual ability (as measured with the Leiter test). Gene therapy for alpha-mannosidosis is a theoretic possibility that has not been investigated Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies related to alpha-mannosidosis.

Other

Because of the limited number of affected individuals with psychiatric symptoms, no conclusion about the benefit of various psychotropic drugs can be made at this time. However, to date, olanzapine 5-15 mg at bedtime, has been used in several affected individuals with some success [Malm, unpublished observations].