

Management

 In 2013, the Thalassemia International Federation published Guidelines for the Management of Non Transfusion-Dependent Thalassemia (NTDT), including beta-thalassemia intermedia, HbH disease and HbE/beta-thalassemia. Guidelines for the management of HbH disease with hemolytic crisis have been developed [Fucharoen & Viprakasit 2009] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alpha-thalassemia (α-thalassemia), the following phenotype-based evaluations are recommended: Hemoglobin Bart hydrops fetalis (Hb Bart) syndrome. See Prenatal Testing and Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis. 
            Hemoglobin H (HbH) disease
           Differentiation of deletion (mild) from non-deletion (moderate-to-severe) forms of HbH disease by appropriate molecular genetic testing of HBA1 and HBA2 is important at presentation because of varying severity. Consider referral to a hematologist. Consider consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hb Bart syndrome was previously considered a universally fatal condition, however, its prognosis is shifting because of prenatal diagnosis, intrauterine blood transfusions, improved transfusion strategies, and (rarely) curative hematopoietic stem cell transplant [Pecker et al 2017]. Although the Thalassemia International Guidelines recommend a transfusion strategy similar to β-thalassemia for these individuals; however, no reports on optimal transfusion management exist [Amid et al 2016]. Because few children with Hb Bart syndrome survive, clinical trials to assess these treatment approaches are lacking. The advances in intrauterine and postnatal therapy have resulted in ethical dilemmas for the family and health care provider. HbH disease. Most individuals with HbH disease are clinically well and survive without any treatment. Occasional red blood cell transfusions may be needed if the hemoglobin level suddenly drops because of hemolytic or aplastic crises. Chronic red blood cell transfusions should be considered in selected individuals only. Clear indications for red blood cell transfusions are severe anemia affecting cardiac function and massive erythroid expansion, resulting in severe bone changes and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Note: These events are quite rare in HbH disease. Iron chelation therapy may be needed in individuals with iron loading caused by regular blood transfusion, inappropriate iron therapy, or abnormal iron absorption. Splenectomy should be performed only in individuals with massive splenomegaly or hypersplenism; the associated risks for severe, life-threatening sepsis and venous thrombosis should be considered. Other complications, such as gallstones and leg ulcers, require appropriate medical or surgical treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 
            Hb Bart syndrome
           Because of the severity of Hb Bart syndrome and the risk for maternal complications during the pregnancy with a fetus with this disorder, prenatal diagnosis and early termination of affected pregnancies is usually considered. Future studies on the functional outcomes of children with Hb Bart syndrome who have received chronic transfusion, intrauterine transfusions, and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, will allow physicians to improve the informed decision-making process for families weighing the risk-benefit profile of present treatment options.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 
            HbH disease
           During febrile episodes, a clinical evaluation is recommended because of the increased risk of hemolytic/aplastic crisis (similar to G6PD deficiency, hemolysis in HbH disease can be triggered by infection or oxidative stresses). When chronic red blood cell transfusions are instituted for individuals with HbH disease, the management should be the same as for all individuals who have been polytransfused, including use of iron chelation therapy (see Beta-Thalassemia). In individuals with HbH disease who are not red blood cell transfusion dependent, the only iron chelator specifically approved is deferasirox, which has been shown to be superior to placebo in reducing liver iron concentration in those older than age ten years who have beta-thalassemia intermedia, HbE/beta-thalassemia, and HbH disease [Taher et al 2012]. Regular folic acid supplementation should be recommended, as for other hemolytic anemias. If splenectomy is required, antimicrobial prophylaxis is usually provided, at least until age five years, to decrease the risk of overwhelming sepsis caused by encapsulated organisms. Use of antimicrobial prophylaxis notwithstanding, a careful clinical evaluation of splenectomized individuals with fever is recommended.

Surveillance

 
            HbH disease
           Hematologic evaluation every six to 12 months to determine the steady state levels of hemoglobin In children, assessment of growth and development every six to 12 months Monitoring of iron load with annual determination of serum ferritin concentration in individuals who have been transfused, in older individuals, and in those given inappropriate iron supplementation. Since serum ferritin may underestimate the degree of iron overload, a periodic quantitative measurement of liver iron concentration is also recommended [Musallam et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 
            HbH disease
           Inappropriate iron therapy Oxidant drugs including sulphonamides; some antimalarials because of the risk of hemolytic crisis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The sibs of a proband should be evaluated as soon as possible after birth to determine if they have HbH disease so that appropriate monitoring can be instituted. Evaluations can include: Evaluation of red blood cell indices, red blood cell supravital stain for HbH inclusions and hemoglobin analysis by HPLC Targeted molecular analysis if the pathogenic variants in the family are known Molecular genetic analysis (according to the frequency of α-globin gene pathogenic variants in each geographic area) if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 During pregnancy several complications have been reported in women with HbH disease, including worsening of anemia (with occasional need of red cell transfusions), preeclampsia, congestive heart failure, and threatened miscarriage [Origa et al 2007]. Monitoring for these possible complications is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.