

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PORD, the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluations by appropriate specialists in endocrinology, clinical genetics, neurosurgery, otolaryngology, and cardiology Assessment for airway problems in individuals with skeletal malformations Functional adrenal studies (cosyntropin test) to assess glucocorticoid deficiency, regardless of the presence or absence of genital abnormalities Additional studies that may be indicated: Cranial CT scan and/or MRI to determine the degree of craniosynostosis, hydrocephaly, choanal stenosis, and orbital depth Radiographs to identify long-bone fractures and/or bowing, bony synostoses, and/or joint contractures Echocardiogram if a heart defect is suspected Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound examination to identify internal sex organs, detect any renal anomalies, and detect and monitor ovarian cysts in adolescent girls.

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Cortisol deficiency Regular hydrocortisone replacement therapy is indicated if baseline serum cortisol concentrations are low. Stress-dose steroids should be provided perioperatively and during times of physiologic stress in individuals in whom cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (cosyntropin test) is below normal [Krone et al 2012]. 
            Genital abnormalities Hypospadias and cryptorchidism may be corrected with surgery. When clitoromegaly is severe, surgical reduction and plastic reconstruction of the clitoris may be considered. Vaginal reconstruction may be performed in females with vaginal hypoplasia. Dihydrotestosterone treatment has been successful in some males with micropenis [Fukami et al 2005]. Testosterone replacement has been initiated in males in whom testosterone levels remained relatively low after onset of puberty [Hershkovitz et al 2008, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Similarly, females with absent pubertal development may require estrogen replacement therapy. Ovarian cysts. Treatment with estradiol appeared to successfully reduce the size of ovarian cysts in females with PORD [Fukami et al 2009, Idkowiak et al 2011]. Ovarian cysts in females can be a significant problem as they tend to be large and prone to spontaneous rupture; cases of girls treated with GnRH agonists and potent steroids have been reported [Idkowiak et al 2011]. Craniosynostosis. Treatment for craniosynostosis is similar to that for other syndromes associated with premature fusion of cranial sutures. Although surgical correction can be performed at any age, it is generally believed that earlier surgical correction results in better cognitive outcome. Airway management is often a primary concern in individuals with ABS as a result of choanal stenosis or atresia, small chest, narrow trachea, and/or shortening of the larynx. Endotracheal intubation is often required in the first minutes after delivery. Nasal stints or tracheotomy may be required. Tracheostomy may be necessary until age three to five years when the pharyngeal encroachment can be corrected. Hydrocephalus. If present, hydrocephalus may be treated by surgical placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Joint contractures and elbow synostosis. Physical and occupational therapy can help individuals with contractures and elbow synostosis develop fine and gross motor skills.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Supplementation with appropriate steroid hormones in individuals who are deficient has helped alleviate: Adrenal crisis Lack of or poor pubertal development in males and females Sleepiness and fatigue Early intervention services may improve the outcome for individuals at risk for developmental delays and learning difficulties.

Surveillance

 Individuals with PORD should be seen by a specialist tertiary pediatric endocrine service throughout childhood to closely monitor their development and adjust steroid supplementation. Because of the presence of developmental delays in many individuals with ABS, periodic formal developmental assessments may be indicated. However, interpretation of these assessments may be complicated by the physical limitations of the disorder. Screening evaluations are likely to underestimate cognitive abilities. Therefore, evaluations should be done in centers with expertise and experience in developmental testing.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Urinary steroid profiling using gas chromatography / mass spectrometry (GC/MS) can be done if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. The characteristic urinary steroid profile: Increased coancentration of metabolites of pregnenolone (pregnenediol) and progesterone (pregnanediol) Significantly elevated metabolites associated with: Deficiency of 17α-hydroxylase (5 α-tetrahydrocorticosterone, tetrahydrocorticosterone, and 11 dehydrometabolites) Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase (17 α-hydroxypregnanolone, pregnanetriol, and pregnanetriolone) See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Fertility may be a concern. No reports describe reproduction in individuals with PORD; thus, the prevalence of infertility among individuals with PORD remains uncertain.

Therapies under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Hepatic drug metabolism. NADPH--cytochrome P450 reductase (POR) plays an important role in the metabolism of various drugs and endogenous metabolites/hormones by hepatic microsomal (type 2) P450 cytochromes. Initial studies using bacterially expressed POR pathogenic variants and two hepatic P450 enzymes suggest that pathogenic variants in POR may alter drug metabolism [Miller et al 2009]. In these studies different pathogenic variants resulted in different effects, ranging from no apparent activity to elevated activity of the hepatic P450 enzymes; these activities were not correlated with their activity in CYP17A1 assays. In vitro activity assays on major drug-metabolizing enzymes and in vivo investigations to assess the impact of various pathogenic and non-pathogenic variants of POR have been performed by various groups [Agrawal et al 2008, Hart & Zhong 2008, Kranendonk et al 2008, Gomes et al 2009, Oneda et al 2009, Agrawal et al 2010, Flück et al 2010, Tomalik-Scharte et al 2010]. For comprehensive reviews on the pharmacogenetics of POR see Pandey & Sproll [2014] and Burkhard et al [2017]. In brief, the different pathogenic variations have different effects on microsomal P450 drug metabolizing enzymes. The common pathogenic variant p.Ala287Pro reduces the activity of the major P450 cytochrome CYP3A4 (which metabolizes ~50% of clinically used drugs) by more than 75% [Nicolo et al 2010]. In vivo cocktail phenotyping in an individual homozygous for the p.Ala287Pro pathogenic variant confirmed altered hepatic detoxification of a variety of drugs due to impaired activity of various hepatic CYP enzymes, including CYP3A4, CYP1A1, CYP2C9, and CYP2D6; the heterozygous mother of this individual also showed impaired activities of CYP1A1 and CYP2C9 [Tomalik-Scharte et al 2010]. In addition, in vitro assays suggest that some variants cause a substrate-specific modulation of CYP3A4 [Agrawal et al 2010].