

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with achromatopsia, the following evaluations are recommended: Standard clinical ophthalmologic evaluation and testing Electrophysiologic examination Color vision evaluation Dark adaptometry Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Dark or special filter glasses or red-tinted contact lenses reduce photophobia and may improve visual acuity. Low vision aids include high-powered magnifiers for reading. Children with achromatopsia should have preferential seating in the front of the class to benefit maximally from their magnifying devices. Extensive information about learning and occupational aids is available from the Achromatopsia Network (www.achromat.org).

Surveillance

 Ophthalmologic examination is indicated: Every six to 12 months in children to monitor changes in refraction and to achieve the best possible corrected visual acuity; Every two to three years in adults.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 To avoid additional light damage to the retina, it is recommended that individuals wear appropriate protective (dark) glasses in bright light.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 In July 2012 a Phase I/II clinical trial (NCT01648452) investigating the therapeutic effects and safety of an intraocular implant releasing ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) in individuals with CNGB3-related achromatopsia was started. No objectively measurable enhancement of cone function was found by assessments of visual acuity, mesopic increment sensitivity threshold, photopic electroretinogram, or color hue discrimination. Subjectively, individuals reported beneficial changes of visual function in the treated eyes, including reduced light sensitivity and aversion to bright light, but slowed adaptation to darkness, consistent with CNTF action on rod photoreceptors [Zein et al 2014]. Most recently, a clinical Phase I/II safety trial for gene replacement therapy using viral AAV vectors for CNGA3-related achromatopsia has been approved by the German legal authorities (NCT02610582). Similar trials for CNGB3-associated achromatopsia are in preparation, and recruiting individuals for clinical assessment to establish the natural history of this disease (NCT01846052). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.