

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Andersen-Tawil syndrome (ATS), the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline assessments by a neurologist and cardiologist familiar with periodic paralysis and long QT (LQT) respectively Serum potassium concentrations at baseline and during attacks of weakness 12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitor Electrophysiologic studies including the long exercise protocol [Kuntzer et al 2000, Fournier et al 2004] Verification that serum TSH concentration is within normal limits Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of individuals with ATS requires the coordinated input of a neurologist familiar with the treatment of periodic paralysis and a cardiologist familiar with the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. To date, no randomized clinical therapeutic trials have been conducted on ATS. Management of attacks of episodic weakness depends on the associated serum potassium concentration: If the serum potassium concentration is low (<3.0 mmol/L), administration of oral potassium (20-30 mEq/L) every 15-30 minutes (not to exceed 200 mEq in a 12-hour period) until the serum concentration normalizes often shortens the attack. As dysphagia is almost never a problem during attacks of paralysis, oral potassium replacement is the safest route. If intravenous potassium replacement is needed, a 5% mannitol solution instead of a saline or glucose solution (both of which may exacerbate weakness) is recommended. Close monitoring of serum potassium concentrations and ECG is necessary during potassium replacement therapy in an emergency setting to avoid secondary hyperkalemia. Whether a relative drop in serum potassium within the normal range causes episodic paralysis is not clear. If such cases are suspected, affected individuals can work with their physician to devise an individual potassium replacement regimen, with a goal of maintaining serum potassium levels in the high range of normal. Attacks of weakness when serum potassium concentration is high usually resolve within 60 minutes. Episodes may be shortened by ingesting carbohydrates or continuing mild exercise. Intravenous calcium gluconate is rarely necessary for management in an individual seen in an emergency setting. Vasovagal syncope in individuals with ATS mandates a careful cardiology assessment [Airey et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Prophylactic treatment aimed at reduction of attack frequency and severity can be achieved, as in other forms of periodic paralysis, with the following: Lifestyle and dietary modification to avoid known triggers Use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide 250-500 mg/1-2x/day or dichlorphenamide 50-100 mg/1-2x/day) Daily use of slow-release potassium supplements, which may also be helpful in controlling attack rates in individuals prone to hypokalemia. Elevating the serum potassium concentration (>4 mEq/L) has the added benefit of narrowing the QT interval, thus reducing the risk of LQT-associated arrhythmias. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator in individuals with tachycardia-induced syncope [Chun et al 2004] Empiric treatment with flecainide [Bökenkamp et al 2007, Fox et al 2008, Pellizzón et al 2008] should be considered for significant, frequent ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of reduced left ventricular function [Tristani-Firouzi & Etheridge 2010]. A prospective open label study in ten individuals with ATS and a confirmed KCNJ2 pathogenic variant tested the effect of flecainide, a type 1c antiarrhythmic, for the prevention of cardiac arrhythmias [Miyamoto et al 2015]. Outcomes included a 24-hour Holter monitor before and after treatment, and a treadmill exercise test. Flecainide was found to significantly reduce the number of ventricular arrhythmias seen on Holter monitor, and to suppress exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Individuals were then followed for a mean of 23 months and no syncope or cardiac arrest was documented. The study concluded that flecainide may reduce cardiac arrhythmias in ATS; however, the ultimate benefit of flecainide for prevention of medically significant cardiac arrhythmias is still unknown.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Cardiologists should be aware that some antiarrhythmic drugs, particularly Class I drugs, may paradoxically exacerbate the neuromuscular symptoms and should be used cautiously in individuals with ATS. Although malignant hyperthermia has not been reported in ATS, appropriate anesthetic precautions should be undertaken as with individuals with other forms of periodic paralysis.

Surveillance

 For asymptomatic individuals with a KCNJ2 pathogenic variant, annual screening including a 12-lead ECG and 24-hour Holter monitoring is desirable, followed by referral to a cardiologist if abnormalities are identified.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Affected individuals should avoid medications known to prolong QT intervals. See CredibleMeds® for a complete and updated list. Salbutamol inhalers, which may be used in the treatment of primary hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, should be avoided because of the potential for exacerbation of cardiac arrhythmias. Thiazide and other potassium-wasting diuretics may provoke drug-induced hypokalemia and could aggravate the QT interval.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures: If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, detailed neurologic and cardiologic evaluation, 12-lead ECG, and 24-hour Holter monitoring can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The rarity of ATS and the paucity of reports pertaining to pregnancy in women with ATS make an evidence-based approach to pregnancy management difficult to formulate. One case study reported an uneventful pregnancy, with increased episodes of weakness but reduced ventricular ectopy compared to the pre-pregnancy period [Subbiah et al 2008]. However, as data are limited, a multidisciplinary approach to individual care and anticipation of increased risk (as can be seen in those with long QT syndrome) seems reasonable.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.