http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/actg2-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an ACTG2-related disorder (which can range from megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome [MMIHS] to chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction [CIPO]), the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical genetics consultation with complete family history Urologic. Consultation with an expert in in pediatric urology whose evaluation may include studies of upper and lower urinary tract and renal function Gastrointestinal. Consultation with an expert in pediatric gastroenterology whose evaluation may include radiologic studies of the gastrointestinal tract based on the symptoms and onset. Of note, most individuals with an ACTG2-related disorder will have undergone extensive radiographic imaging prenatally and/or in the neonatal period including evaluation for gastrointestinal distention and/or microcolon. However, if not performed at the time of diagnosis, studies to clarify the extent of disease could include abdominal x-rays, abdominal CT, transit studies (i.e., small bowel contrast studies), and/or endoscopy. Manometry (which typically shows reduced or absent contractions) can be used as an adjunct in the evaluation to quantify the degree of hypoperistalsis and extent of gastrointestinal dysfunction [Ambartsumyan & Rodriguez 2014]. Nutrition. Consultation with a specialist in pediatric nutrition that includes plotting of height and weight on standardized growth charts and assessments of dietary intake, body mass index, and nutritional status (measurement of albumin and prealbumin, and tests of liver function)

Treatment of Manifestations

 Children with an ACTG2-related disorder require multidisciplinary management with specialists in pediatric gastroenterology, nutrition, urology, surgery, clinical genetics, and occupational therapy, among others. Adults with an ACTG2-related disorder require similar multidisciplinary care. Treatment for ACTG2-related disorders remains supportive. Urologic manifestations. Management of bladder dysfunction by an urologist is recommended. A clear link has been established between fetal urinary tract dilation such as megacystis and long-term impairment of renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012]. Patients are frequently dependent on bladder management with diversion, catheterization, and/or voiding schedules. In addition, clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections. In a review of 14 patients with visceral myopathy evaluated prior to the discovery of ACTG2, Ghavamian et al [1997] noted that clean intermittent catheterization decreased the frequency of urinary tract infection and observed that surgical approaches (construction of a catheterizable channel or a vesicostomy) were also therapeutic options. In a review of 39 children with CIPO reported before the discovery of ACTG2,
Lapointe et al [2002] identified megacystis in 26 and hydronephrosis in 14. They noted that urologic intervention to ensure adequate bladder emptying was important to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections and to preserve long-term renal function. Urologic treatment (at some point in their care) included voiding with abdominal pressure (14 children), intermittent catheterization (10), and antibiotic prophylaxis (17). Gastrointestinal manifestations. Management by a gastroenterologist and nutritionist familiar with intestinal motility disorders is recommended. Patients are frequently dependent on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) (see review by Gabbard & Lacy [2013]). Complications of long-term TPN can be progressive and include irreversible cholestasis, hepatic dysfunction, central line infections, and thromboembolic events. For this reason, individuals with an intestinal disorder that requires long-term TPN (like those seen in ACTG2-related disorders) have undergone multi-visceral transplantation including liver and intestine. In the series of Gosemann & Puri [2011] in which 12 individuals underwent such multivisceral transplants, TPN could be discontinued in the majority; however, bladder catheterization was still required. Isolated intestinal transplantation has also been reported in one individual with MMIHS [Huang et al 2013a]. Of note, use of pro-kinetic agents such as 5HT4 agonists has resulted in anecdotal evidence of improvement in bowel function [Lehtonen et al 2012, Wangler et al 2014], as well as failure to improve in bowel function in MMIHS [Hiradfar et al 2013] and some cases of molecularly confirmed ACTG2-related MMIHS [Wangler et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Establishing the correct diagnosis of an ACTG2-related disorder may help avoid unnecessary exploratory laparotomies for unexplained episodes of apparent intestinal obstruction (i.e., CIPO). Surgical procedures associated with general anesthesia can produce a post-surgical ileus which can persist for an extended period. Clean and safe practices in the use of indwelling intravenous catheters for administration of TPN and bladder catheterization can help prevent infections.

Surveillance

 Surveillance should be individualized using a multidisciplinary approach. Surveillance should take into account the link between fetal urinary tract dilation and long-term increased risk for impaired renal function [Al-Hazmi et al 2012]. Long-term dependence on parenteral nutrition requires routine surveillance of liver function.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 For those with CIPO, high-fat foods (>30% of total calories) and consumption of lactose and fructose may worsen abdominal bloating and discomfort [Gabbard & Lacy 2013]. No drugs are known to exacerbate the smooth muscle functional defect in ACTG2-related disorders.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Using molecular genetic testing for the ACTG2 pathogenic variant identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk as early diagnosis may help prevent unnecessary surgery for symptoms of intestinal obstruction and may allow early evaluation of bladder and renal function, and the urinary tract for evidence of dilation. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 When a fetus at risk for an ACTG2-related disorder has evidence of bladder distention on prenatal ultrasound examination, consultation with a maternal fetal medicine specialist is recommended. Of note, in some fetuses with prenatal detection of megacystis, vesicoamniotic shunts have been performed. The rationale for this has been questioned [Tuzovic et al 2014]. Among the limited number of mothers with an ACTG2-related disorder reported, some instances of poor labor progression and weak uterine contractions have been noted [Klar et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.