http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/adamtsl4-eyes

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with an ADAMTSL4-related eye disorder, routine ophthalmologic examination that includes the following is recommended: Determination of visual acuity and refractive error Measurement of intraocular pressure Note: Affected individuals may have increased central corneal thickness that could explain, to some extent, why some individuals have moderately elevated intraocular pressure, but few have glaucomatous damage of the optic nerve head. Slit lamp examination Ophthalmoscopy The following may also provide important information: Orthoptic examination, particularly in children Measurement of axial length Anterior segment examination with optical coherence tomography (OCT) and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) Corneal topography including measurement of central corneal thickness Gonioscopy

Treatment of Manifestations

In children, the main objective is to prevent amblyopia by early correction of refractive errors. Patching is necessary when correction of the refractive error is insufficient in restoring vision. Lensectomy should be considered in individuals with cataracts, those in whom patching does not result in improvement, those in whom the lens edge is in the middle of the pupil, and those with large degrees of astigmatism [Anteby et al 2003, Wu-Chen et al 2005]. Following lens removal, improvement of visual acuity has been observed even in individuals older than age seven years [Speedwell & Russell-Eggitt 1995]. Treatment with lensectomy must be weighed against the problems of aphakia correction in children (particularly in individuals with unilateral involvement), loss of accommodation, and the risk for secondary glaucoma and retinal detachment. All surgical procedures should therefore be planned individually by an experienced ophthalmic surgeon. Sphincterotomy (widening of the pupil by incision of the iris at the pupillary margin) can benefit individuals with small and highly displaced pupils. Increased intraocular pressure can in most cases be controlled by topical anti-glaucomatous medication. It is not clear if pathogenic variants in ADAMTSL4 increase the risk for retinal detachment. However, after lensectomy or cataract surgery, retinal detachment may occur. If typical signs (e.g., floaters, lightning, a diminished visual field) appear, evaluation by an ophthalmologist should be sought as soon as possible. Treatment of retinal detachment is by standard techniques using vitrectomy and scleral buckling if necessary. It is important to examine the fellow eye for retinal degeneration.

Surveillance

Assessment of visual acuity, refractive error, and intraocular pressure one to three times per year: adults who are stable may be examined yearly, whereas children require more frequent examinations. Ultrasonography may be necessary to evaluate for retinal detachment if the view of the fundus is limited

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Care must be taken during contact sports to avoid blunt trauma to the eye and head. Affected individuals should not participate in activities like boxing and other martial arts.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs of a proband with an ADAMTSL4-related eye disorder should undergo complete ophthalmologic evaluation (determination of visual acuity, measurement of intraocular pressure, slit lamp examination, and ophthalmoscopy) to allow early diagnosis and treatment of findings, primarily to prevent amblyopia. If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, molecular genetic testing is likely to be more helpful that clinical examination in clarifying the genetic status of at-risk sibs, given the wide phenotypic variability even within the same family. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.