http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/adcy5-dysk

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADCY5-related dyskinesia, the following are recommended: Neurologic consultation with particular attention to documenting the findings on neurologic examination, and response or lack of response to medications Consideration of cardiac evaluation, as cardiomyopathy may be a manifestation of ADCY5-related dyskinesia [Chen et al 2011] Social services consultation (depending on the severity of the paroxysms), as disease severity may qualify some patients for disability or social security benefits Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Medication has been variably effective in suppressing debilitating symptoms. Treatment trials should be determined by the individual’s physician, taking into account potential risk/benefit, other medical conditions, allergies, and potential drug-drug interactions. Response to medication is difficult to evaluate in an individual because some patients have long periods (weeks) of remission of the dyskinesia. Acetazolamide, which induces a mild alkalosis, has been shown previously to improve the dyskinesia [Chen et al 2015]. In one individual 15 mg/kg/day completely alleviated episodes of dyskinesia for an extended, but non-sustained, period of time [Fernandez et al 2001]. Propanolol, which has suppressed dyskinesia in other disorders (including essential tremor, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, and episodic ataxia type 1), has had variable success in ADCY5-related dyskinesia. Levetiracetam, an anti-convulsant, helped decrease the severity of adventitious movements in one patient [T Bird, personal observation; J Friedman, personal observation]. Tetrabenazine, which has been used as a symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, resulted in subjective symptom improvement in two patients [Mencacci et al 2015; FM Hisama, personal observation]. Benzodiazepines, which have been used in symptomatic treatment for other hyperkinetic disorders, have been associated with variable improvement in ADCY5-related dyskinesia [J Friedman, personal observation]. Trihexylphenidyl, an antimuscarinic compound used in treating Parkinson disease, was observed to decrease the intensity and frequency of episodes of dyskinesia in one patient, when paired with tetrabenazine [Mencacci et al 2015]. Of note, little to no improvement was observed after administration of primidone, chlordiazepoxide, amitriptyline, trifluoperazine, trihexylphenidyl, vitamin C, coenzyme Q10, carbamazepine, and valproic acid. Stress management. The only exacerbating factor that is observed consistently across affected individuals is the presence of anxiety and exposure to typical life stressors. Further investigation is needed to determine whether stress management techniques or limitation of stressful activities may reduce the number and frequency of movements.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Physical and occupational therapy may assist patients in maintaining mobility and function.

Surveillance

There are no published guidelines for surveillance. Most affected individuals are reevaluated in neurology clinics and/ or clinical genetics clinics annually (or more frequently if medication trials are undertaken) to document disease progression and determine if other interventions are necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

All patients have reported that anxiety and stress worsen disease manifestations. Less commonly reported triggers include intercurrent illness, prolonged inactivity, fatigue, and excitement.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Potential teratogenic effects of medications given for treatment of ADCY5-related dyskinesia should be discussed with affected women of childbearing age, ideally prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.