http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/adnfle

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE): In addition to the evaluation for epilepsy, cognitive and behavioral assessment to help determine the extent of disease Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

In about 70% of individuals with ADNFLE, carbamazepine is associated with remission of seizures, often with relatively low doses. However, individuals with ADNFLE associated with the CHRNA4 pathogenic variant p.Ser284Leu respond only partially to carbamazepine and are more responsive to zonisamide [Provini et al 1999, Ito et al 2000, Combi et al 2004]. Exposure to quinidine significantly reduces gain of function for KCNT1 pathogenic variants implicated in ADNFLE and EIMFS [Milligan et al 2014]. Clinical treatment with quinidine was reported in a child with EIMFS [Bearden et al 2014], and correlated with a marked reduction in seizure frequency. In the future, it may be also possible to treat KCNT1-related ADNFLE with quinidine. Resistance to AEDs occurs in about 30% of affected individuals. Intrafamilial variation in pharmaco-responsiveness occurs; therefore, all appropriate AEDs should be tried. Vagal nerve stimulation may be considered for individuals with resistance to AEDs [Carreño et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daytime complaints such as morning tiredness and somnolence may be caused by sleep fragmentation due to seizure-related arousals. To prevent this, it is important to provide diagnosis and treatment for ADNFLE appropriately.

Surveillance

Serial evaluation of EEGs to monitor disease progression is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a medical history to seek evidence of affected status should be elicited from relatives at risk. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.