http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/aec

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TP63 related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical genetics to aid in diagnosis, coordination of health surveillance, and genetic testing and counseling Dermatology to evaluate and treat related skin issues, especially erosions Gastroenterology for growth and nutrition issues Dietary if there are concerns about failure to thrive Ophthalmology for evaluation and treatment of ocular issues including ankyloblepharon, lacrimal duct atresia/obstruction, dry eyes and blepharitis Plastic surgery to evaluate and repair cleft lip and palate or breast/nipple assymetry Otolaryngology for evaluation and treatment of recurrent otitis media and speech issues Audiology to evaluate for hearing loss Dental to evaluate and address issues of hypodontia Prosthodontics to address potential need for dental implants Psychology/psychiatry to address developmental issues and provide support for the individual and family by assisting in dealing with the impact of the phenotype on a normal life

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach is recommended including regular evaluations with specialists in clinical genetics, dermatology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, audiology, dentistry and prosthodontics, plastic surgery, gastroenterology, and psychiatry. Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum. These strands of tissue between the upper and lower eyelids are often small and autolyse shortly after birth; larger ones may require surgical separation by an ophthalmologist. 
Ectodermal defects Wigs can be used, if desired, for the sparse hair and alopecia. There are no known therapies for the nail or skin pigment changes. Dentures should be considered in early childhood and the possibility of dental implants should be considered in the teens or early adult years. Sweating is not severely impaired and does not require special care. Skin erosions. The skin erosions are difficult to treat and prone to excessive ineffective granulation response; they are at increased risk for secondary infection and are not responsive to most standard wound care regimens or antibiotic therapy [Julapalli et al 2009]. Skin erosions should be treated with gentle wound care and periodic, dilute bleach soaks (Dakins solution) to prevent secondary infection. Occlusive dressings should not be used as they tend to stimulate granulation tissue. Secondary infections should be treated with topical or oral antibiotics or antifungal agents when appropriate. Empiric treatment (i.e., use of antibiotic without culture-proven infection) is not recommended. Cleft lip/palate. Clefting should be addressed as soon as developmentally possible. Typical feeding issues associated with clefting are seen and include: poor suck, difficulty coordinating feeding and breathing, and excessive air intake. A nurse, nutritionist, pediatrician, speech therapist, or other specialist familiar with the management of feeding issues in children with cleft lip/palate should be consulted. Early referral to a craniofacial surgeon for planning for surgical cleft repair is indicated. 
Other Weight should be followed closely with assessment for signs of failure to thrive. If optimization of oral caloric intake fails to improve growth, gastrostomy tube placement may be considered. Myringotomy is indicated as needed for conductive hearing loss resulting from chronic otitis media. Significant breast asymmetry in women may be corrected through plastic surgery. Psychological impact of the phenotypic features of the disorder on patient and family should also be considered and referrals made to psychiatry or psychology as appropriate.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Infants with severe skin erosions should be monitored and treated aggressively for dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, malnutrition, and secondary infection and sepsis.

Surveillance

Regular evaluation with a multidisciplinary team is recommended for evaluation and prompt treatment of disease manifestations. In particular: Dental findings over time may warrant use of dental prosthetics. Periodic hearing evaluations should be performed as conductive hearing loss is common.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Prolonged exposure to sunlight should be avoided to prevent sunburn of hypopigmented areas and to prevent increasing the contrast between the patchy areas of hyper- and hypopigmentation seen in AEC syndrome. Reduced sun exposure can minimize freckling of skin in individuals with ADULT syndrome.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the TP63 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

No specific trials for therapies are being conducted at this time. An investigational product developed to activate mutated p53 in cancer therapy has been tested for its ability to activate mutated p63 protein carrying EEC3-associated amino acid substitutions. This compound, denoted APR-246/PRIMA-1MET, showed a beneficial effect on skin differentiation [Shalom-Feuerstein et al 2013, Shen et al 2013]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasias (NFED) (www.nfed.org) is an excellent resource for affected individuals, their families, and clinicians who care for these individuals.