http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ags

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Developmental assessment

Assessment of feeding and nutritional status

Ophthalmologic examination

EEG to evaluate for seizures, if suspected

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Chest physiotherapy and vigorous treatment of respiratory complications

Attention to diet and method of feeding to assure adequate caloric intake

Management of seizures using standard protocols

Surveillance



Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring for signs of diabetes insipidus in the neonatal period

Assessment for glaucoma at least for the first few years of life

Monitoring of the spine for the development of scoliosis

Monitoring for signs of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and hypothyroidism

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Research into the role of immunosuppressive agents in the treatment of AGS is ongoing [Crow & Rehwinkel 2009, Crow et al 2014].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Corticosteroids can lower the CSF concentration of interferon [PG Barth 2003, personal communication]; the clinical benefit of such treatment is unproven.

Note: The description of intracranial large-vessel disease in association with biallelic pathogenic variants in SAMHD1 raises important questions about the management of such individuals. The occlusive and aneurysmal arteriopathies described could be amenable to treatment (revascularization for the former and coiling or clipping for the latter). Moreover, the likely inflammatory basis of the arteriopathy suggests that immunosuppression may play a role in management. A key question is whether inflammatory disease is active at the time of clinical presentation, or whether the arterial abnormalities observed represent the end result of a now-quiescent inflammatory process.

Given the lack of evidence, no definitive statement about these issues can be made at present. However, the potential for intervention exists, and it could be argued that some individuals (e.g., those with lesser psychomotor problems) warrant such intervention and should be actively screened for intracranial arteriopathy, if only by close inspection of the vasculature at the base of the brain seen on routine MRI. Chilblains were present in all the affected individuals described by Ramesh et al [2010], and it may be that their presence predicts an increased risk for intracranial vasculopathy.