http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ahc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To assess the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC), the following evaluations are recommended: Serum and urine concentrations of electrolytes Assessment of renal function, including measurement of serum BUN and creatinine Serum concentration of glucose, cortisol and ACTH Assessment of arterial blood gases in those who are unwell Measurement of aldosterone and plasma renin activity Note: Typically, affected individuals who are in shock have hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, acidosis, very elevated serum concentration of ACTH, and increased urinary excretion of sodium. Some samples may need careful handling (e.g., ACTH) and results may only be available some days later. Therefore, it is important to document the child’s clinical condition at the time of sample collection, the source of the sample (e.g., venous, arterial), and the quality of the sample (e.g., hemolyzed) to help with future interpretation of the results.

Treatment of Manifestations



Adrenal Insufficiency

Acute episodes. Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency are usually treated in an intensive care unit with close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Correction of hyperkalemia may be needed. Individuals are treated by the IV administration of saline, glucose, and hydrocortisone (e.g., Solu-Cortef®). If the serum concentration of electrolytes does not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of Solu-Cortef® is increased. Adequate sodium must be provided. Chronic treatment. Once the initial acute episode has been treated, affected individuals are started on replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, and oral supplements of sodium chloride (NaCl) in younger children. Steroid doses need to be adjusted to allow normal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis. Maintenance hormone treatment is best managed in growing children by a pediatric endocrinologist. Treatment during stress. Steroid dosage must be increased during periods of stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgery, trauma); glucose and sodium may be needed. Local hospitals should provide parents with a plan for emergency treatment and instruction regarding when extra oral or injected hydrocortisone is needed. Parents should have access to rapid medical advice; guidelines for hospital admission should be clear. Children should carry appropriate documentation indicating that they are steroid deficient. Death from acute adrenal insufficiency in individuals known to have X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita may still occur if steroid replacement therapy is not adequate, particularly during times of stress. Steroid replacement therapy is monitored clinically and hormonally by an endocrinologist. ACTH levels should normalize when replacement therapy is adequate. A sudden rise in ACTH despite steroid treatment has revealed the presence of a pituitary adenoma in one case [De Menis et al 2005]. The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

If there is evidence of HH, treatment with increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty may be necessary and should be monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Surveillance

If puberty has not started by age 14 years, serum concentrations of LH and FSH (basal concentration and GnRH-stimulated concentration), testosterone, and inhibin B are monitored to evaluate for the possibility of HH. Some children and parents prefer the induction of puberty at the same time as the affected boy’s peer-group; this should not be delayed unnecessarily. If puberty does start spontaneously it is likely to arrest; thus, careful monitoring of testosterone levels is needed. Psychological counseling should be available for families and young people if needed to discuss the issues related to hormone replacement therapy and future fertility.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Unnecessary physiologic stress is to be avoided, if possible, and any surgical procedures should be carefully planned. If physiologic stress is unavoidable (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, trauma), the dosage of steroids should be increased two- to threefold following local guidance for sickness/emergencies.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the genetic status of an at-risk male relative has not been established during pregnancy, genetic testing should be performed as soon as possible after birth to clarify genetic status so that glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid hormone replacement therapy can be initiated without delay and adrenal crises can be avoided. Biochemical testing after birth should be undertaken if the genetic status of an at-risk male is unknown and the child should be closely monitored in the first few days of life. A salt-losing crisis usually takes at least seven days to manifest, during which the child is continuing to lose sodium. Initial biochemical tests of electrolytes and basal cortisol may be within normal ranges but may gradually change. The aim is to avoid a clinical salt-losing crisis. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.