http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/aic

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 The following are appropriate: Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis and segmentation abnormalities of the vertebrae and ribs Dermatologic evaluation to look for vascular malformations and pigmentary lesions at risk for malignant transformation Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 A pediatric neurologist with expertise in the management of infantile spasms and medically refractory epilepsy is essential for long-term management of seizures. Individuals with Aicardi syndrome usually require multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for adequate seizure control. Improved outcome with vigabatrin [Chau et al 2004] and vagus nerve stimulators has been reported; however, these treatments do not work for all [Van den Veyver & Sutton, unpublished observation]. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and vision therapy should begin at diagnosis to ensure the best functionality and developmental outcome possible. An individualized therapy plan should be developed and implemented by the therapists and caregivers. Resection of large choroid plexus papillomas has been reported for management of hydrocephalus [Taggard & Menezes 2000]. Improvement of seizures was also noted in the individual reported. Whether this improvement was related to resolution of the hydrocephalus or whether the choroid plexus papillomas may have been epileptogenic is not clear.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Spasticity can result in contractures or limited range of motion affecting not only mobility but hygiene care as well. Patients benefit from evaluation by physicians specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation as well as physical, occupational, and speech therapists. Costovertebral defects can lead to scoliosis. Appropriate musculoskeletal support and treatment for prevention of scoliosis-related complications is indicated. Constipation and gastrointestinal problems are frequent and require ongoing management at regular physician visits.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine dermatologic evaluation to monitor for vascular and other malignancies Monitoring for and treatment of gastrointestinal complications at regular physician visits Regular monitoring of the spine to assess the degree of scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to genetic counseling of relatives at risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.