

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) the following evaluations are recommended: Full clinical history and examination, including neurologic evaluation if symptomatic Review of medications to assess risk versus benefit (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) Quantitation of urine porphobilinogen excretion to establish a baseline for comparison with future measurements taken during symptoms suggestive of active porphyria Referral to a porphyria specialist for more detailed clinical advice on AIP Referral to clinical genetics for counseling

Treatment of Manifestations



Acute Neurovisceral Attack

 Immediate treatment of an acute neurovisceral attack does not require confirmation of the specific type of acute porphyria. Clinical assessment should include a full neurologic evaluation. In persons known to have AIP consider other causes of abdominal pain in addition to porphyria. Investigations should include: Full blood count (FBC); Measurement of serum/plasma concentrations of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes; Serum and urine osmolality; Urine sodium concentration if hyponatremic; Other blood tests as indicated by the patient’s condition and possible cause of the attack, e.g., CRP, blood cultures, CK, magnesium. MRI should be considered if CNS symptoms are present. 
              General measures
             Review all medications and discontinue any that can exacerbate acute porphyria [Elder & Hift 2001]. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid. Restore energy balance using an enteral route if possible. When required, intravenous fluid should contain a minimum of 5% dextrose; however, hypotonic dextrose-water solutions should be avoided because of the risk of hyponatremia. Treat intercurrent infections and other diseases promptly. 
              Supportive treatment
             Pain relief. Effective analgesia should be provided as soon as possible, usually in the form of parenteral opiates (morphine, diamorphine, and fentanyl are safe). Very large quantities may be required in a severe acute attack. Consider patient-controlled analgesia and support from a pain team. Nausea and vomiting. Prochloperazine, promazine or ondansetron are considered safe. Hypertension. Beta blockers are considered safe. Convulsions can be terminated with intravenous diazepam, clonazepam, or magnesium sulphate. Fluid balance and electrolytes. Dextrose saline is preferred. Severe hyponatremia should be treated with intravenous saline rather than fluid restriction [Hift & Meissner 2005]. 
              Specific treatment
             For mild acute neurovisceral attacks, a high carbohydrate intake, preferably oral and together with other supportive measures (see Acute Neurovisceral Attack), may be used for up to 48 hours. If improvement is unsatisfactory or if additional and progressive neurologic features present, intravenous administration of hemin preparations is recommended. Intravenous human hemin is the most effective treatment for acute neurovisceral attacks. Intravenous administration of hemin preparations may be life-saving when employed early when neuronal damage is still reversible, and may help to avoid paresis or prevent its progression. The recommended dose for hemin is 3-4 mg/kg IV, given once daily for four days. Treatment may be extended, depending on the clinical course. Panhematin™ (Ovation Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL) is approved for treatment of acute attacks in the US. This product is supplied as a dried powder, which must be reconstituted with sterile water immediately before intravenous injection and administered over 10-15 minutes. Because the administration of Panhematin™ reconstituted with sterile water is associated with transient, mild coagulopathy, concurrent anticoagulant therapy should be avoided. Heme arginate (Normosang Orphan Europe, Paris) is an arginine-stabilized form of human hemin available in most other countries, including Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and South America. It is infused over at least 30 minutes. It has the same advantage as hemin in treating an acute neurovisceral attack, but has fewer reported side-effects [Hift & Meissner 2005, Puy et al 2010]. Note: (1) Phlebitis after intravenous injection can be minimized by reconstituting hematin in 20% human serum albumin solution and/or by using a large vein or a central catheter for infusion. Peripheral cannulas used to administer hematin should be replaced after each use. (2) An infusion set with an in-line filter is recommended to remove any undissolved particulate matter. (3) Rigorous flushing of venous catheters with boluses of saline totaling 100 mL is recommended.

Recurrent Acute Attacks

 Recurrent acute attacks are best managed with support and advice from a porphyria specialist. See information and contact details of specialist porphyria centers at porphyria.eu. Medical therapy aims to reduce the frequency and or severity of acute attacks by the following measures: Ovulation suppression with gonadorelin analogues for patients with recurrent menstrual cycle-related acute neurovisceral attacks [Innala et al 2010]. Long acting analogues can be used to prevent ovulation and should be administered during the first few days of the menstrual cycle to minimize the early stimulation effect on hormone release which can trigger an attack. Side effects can be minimized by administering estrogen, preferably by patch. Gynecological review and bone density monitoring are recommended. Prophylactic hemin infusion. The minimum effective infusion frequency should be employed, usually a weekly dose of hemin infused via an in-dwelling venous catheter. Problems include those associated with a venous access device (infection, blockage) and iron overload (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Other Treatments

 Liver transplantation is curative and reported from several centers [Soonawalla et al 2004, Wahlin et al 2010, Dowman et al 2012]. Indications include repeated life-threatening acute attacks, failure of medical therapy, and poor quality of life [Seth et al 2007]. Combined liver and kidney transplantation, which has been successful, can be considered in those with AIP with repeated severe attacks and renal failure [Wahlin et al 2010]. Kidney transplantation has been performed for renal failure in persons with overt and latent AIP [Nunez et al 1987, Warholm & Wilczek 2003]. Cimetidine has been suggested as an alternative treatment [Rogers 1997]; however, evidence for clinical efficacy remains elusive. No recent formal study has been performed, but informal feedback from experienced clinicians at international porphyria meetings indicates that few patients have benefited from this treatment. 
              Other
             Patients should be advised to register with an organization that provides warning jewelry in case of an accident (e.g., MedicAlert® or similar). Patients should be advised about support available from national patient associations where available. Good-quality information is now widely available from patient or professional organizations either in paper form or from the Internet; see Resources. Advice on safe treatment of persons with porphyria in some specific clinical situations (e.g., epilepsy, HIV, malaria, tuberculosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) is available on the European Porphyria Network Web site and/or Porphyria South Africa Web site.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 To prevent acute attacks patients are advised on the potential triggers as follows: Assure that adequate nutrition is provided by a normal balanced diet. Avoid unsupervised calorie restriction diets, particularly those that exclude carbohydrate completely. Avoid drugs and chemicals known to exacerbate porphyria, particularly prescribed medication and over the counter medication. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid. Seek timely treatment of systemic illness or infection. Avoid excessive alcohol consumption and smoking.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 End-stage renal disease, which is thought to result from chronic systemic arterial hypertension, may be delayed through effective blood pressure control [Andersson et al 2000b]. Because 100 mg of hemin contains 8 mg of iron, frequent administration of hemin may increase the risk for iron overload. Periodic monitoring of serum ferritin concentration and/or transferrin saturation is therefore appropriate in individuals treated repeatedly with hemin.

Surveillance

 In view of the high risk for HCC in individuals with AIP in Sweden, annual hepatic imaging is offered after age 50 years. It has been shown to improve survival [Innala & Andersson 2011]. A few other countries have also initiated screening. It is not yet clear whether similar testing should be offered more widely, since the risk appears to be low in some countries [Deybach & Puy 2011, Stewart 2012]. Note: Serum α-fetoprotein measurement is not helpful.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking should be avoided. Knowledge about the safety of many drugs and other over-the-counter preparations in acute porphyrias is incomplete; however, evidence-based guidelines for assessment of drug porphyrogenicity have been published [Thunell et al 2007, Hift et al 2011]. Searchable drug safety databases are available at the following Web sites: 
                    The Drug Database for Acute Porphyria
                   
                    The American Porphyria Foundation
                   
                    Porphyria South Africa
                   Safe drug lists are available at the following Web sites: 
                    European Porphyria Network
                   
                    Welsh Medicines Information Centre - Porphyria Information Service
                   Unsafe drug lists are available at the following Web sites: 
                    European Porphyria Network
                   British National Formulary (subscription required)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the HMBS pathogenic variant is known in a family, at-risk relatives can benefit from molecular genetic testing to clarify their genetic status, so that those at increased risk of developing acute attacks of AIP can be identified early and counseled about preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The majority of women with AIP have completely normal pregnancies with no clinical problems relating to the porphyria [Marsden & Rees 2010]. However, there is a small chance that pregnancy could initiate or worsen porphyria symptoms. When a woman with AIP experiences abdominal pain, hypertension, and tachycardia during pregnancy, complications of pregnancy should be excluded before the findings are attributed to an acute attack. Symptomatic treatment of an acute attack that occurs during pregnancy should take into account drug safety with respect to teratogenicity and precipitating/exacerbating an acute attack of porphyria. Intravenous human hemin (both available preparations) has been used for the treatment of acute attacks in pregnancy and appears to be safe [Anderson et al 2005, Marsden & Rees 2010]. Several women in the UK and France have received regular heme arginate infusions during pregnancy without any obvious adverse effects on mother or child [Badminton & Deybach 2006]. Prolonged fasting should be avoided during labor and delivery as should the use of unsafe drugs, for example, ergometrine. 
            Note: In an obstetric emergency, no drug should be restricted if it is likely to be of major clinical benefit or is required in a life-threatening situation.
           Stress should be minimized by providing good analgesia. Regional anesthesia, in the form of spinal or epidural anesthesia using bupivacaine, has been safely used.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A clinical trial of adeno-associated virus (AAV)-based gene therapy for AIP is underway in Europe (see cima.es/aipgene for details). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.