http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alagille

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Alagille syndrome (ALGS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Evaluation by a gastroenterologist, including a full set of liver function tests, clotting studies and if necessary, serum bile acids, fat-soluble vitamin levels, a hepatic ultrasound, a technitium-99m-DISIDA scintiscan, and liver biopsy

A full cardiac evaluation, including echocardiogram

AP and lateral chest radiographs to evaluate for the presence of butterfly vertebrae

An ophthalmologic examination to identify anterior chamber involvement

Renal function testing and renal ultrasound examination (especially in the newborn period)

Screening developmental evaluation, with more detailed evaluation if significant delays are identified

Measurement of growth parameters and plotting on age-appropriate growth charts

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with ALGS is often beneficial because of the multisystem involvement. Evaluation by specialists in medical genetics, gastroenterology, nephrology, nutrition, cardiology, ophthalmology, liver transplantation, and child development may be indicated, depending on the age and specific difficulties of the individual [Kamath et al 2010a].

Pruritus is considered the most severe of any pediatric liver disease. Pruritis and xanthomas have been successfully treated with choloretic agents (ursodeoxycholic acid) and other medications (cholestyramine, rifampin, naltrexone). Partial internal biliary diversion (PIBD) and ileal exclusions for individuals with Alagille syndrome have also been reported; however, while these procedures have the potential to relieve the intractable symptoms of liver disease (such as pruritis) and improve quality of life for those with ALGS, they are not thought to prevent the progression of liver disease [Emerick & Whitington 2002, Mattei et al 2006, Dingemann et al 2012, Sheflin-Findling et al 2012].

Liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease has an 80.4% five-year survival rate, and results in improved liver function and some catch-up growth in 90% of affected individuals; however, the catch-up growth seen in post-transplanted individuals with Allagille syndrome is still less than that observed in individuals with other cholestatic liver diseases [Quiros-Tejeira et al 2000, Kasahara et al 2003, Pawlowska et al 2010]. In a recent study on survival following liver transplant in several disorders, Kamath et al showed that the one-year survival rate for individuals with ALGS was 87%, compared to a 96% one-year survival rate for the control group (individuals with biliary atresia). The lower success rate of liver transplantation in ALGS is probably most influenced by the severity of any coexisting cardiac disease, renal disease, or vascular involvement [Kamath et al 2012c]. Additionally, the effects of long-term immosuppressants on the evolution of the other organ systems involved, including vasculature, skeleton, and kidneys, remain largely unknown [Englert et al 2006, Kamath et al 2010b, Shneider 2012]. Note: Since ALGS frequently presents with neonatal jaundice and can mimic biliary atresia, infants with ALGS may undergo an intraoperative cholangiogram and a Kasai procedure. However, a study by Kaye et al [2010] demonstrated that the Kasai procedure does not benefit children with ALGS and may worsen the outcome [Kaye et al 2010].

Cardiac involvement is treated in a standard manner.

Renal anomalies are treated in a standard manner.

Vascular accidents should be treated in a standard manner.

Head injuries and neurologic symptoms should be evaluated aggressively.

Ophthalmologic abnormalities rarely need intervention.

Vertebral anomalies are rarely symptomatic.

Note: Elisofon et al [2010] showed that health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in children with Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is impaired and that cardiac catheterization or surgery, mental health diagnoses, and poor sleep are associated with lower scores in children with ALGS [Elisofon et al 2010]. While surgeries and mental health diagnoses may be out of the control of physicians and care-givers, poor sleep in children with ALGS is often a result of severe pruritus, which can be improved with choloretic agents as discussed above.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The following are appropriate:

Optimization of nutrition to maximize growth and development

Close monitoring of plasma concentration of fat-soluble vitamins, nutritional optimization, and vitamin replacement therapy to maximize growth potential and prevent some of the developmental delay documented in early studies

For those with splenomegaly or with known chronic liver disease, use of a spleen guard during activities

Surveillance



Growth should be monitored using standard growth charts so that nutritional intake can be adjusted to need.

Regular monitoring by cardiology, gastroenterology, and a nutritionist is appropriate.

At this time, the efficacy of presymptomatic screening for vascular anomalies in individuals with ALGS has not been formally evaluated. The possibility of a vascular accident should be considered in any symptomatic individual and MRI, magnetic resonance angiography, and/or angiography to identify aneurysms, dissections, or bleeds should be pursued aggressively as warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Contact sports should be avoided by all individuals, especially those with chronic liver disease, splenomegaly, and vascular involvement.

Individuals with liver disease should avoid alcohol consumption.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Given the medical problems of this condition and their variability, it is appropriate to assess first-degree relatives for manifestations of the disorder.

If a JAG1 or NOTCH2 pathogenic variant has been identified in a proband, at-risk relatives can be evaluated using genetic testing.

If no JAG1 or NOTCH2 pathogenic variant has been identified, at-risk relatives can be assessed with measurement of liver enzymes, cardiac examination, eye examination, skeletal x-rays, and evaluation of facial features.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.