http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alkap

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alkaptonuria, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete history and physical examination with particular attention to range of motion in the spine and large joints Physical medicine and rehabilitation evaluation if limited range of motion or joint pain occurs Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram in individuals older than age 40 years Renal ultrasound examination or helical abdominal CT to evaluate for the presence of renal calculi Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Joint pain is substantial in individuals with alkaptonuria, and close attention to pain control is necessary. Optimal pain management should be tailored to the individual with close follow up and long-term management. Physical and occupational therapy are important to promote optimal muscle strength and flexibility. Knee, hip, and shoulder replacement surgeries are options for managing significant arthritis. In general, the goal of joint replacement is pain relief rather than increased range of motion. Joint replacement in individuals with alkaptonuria is associated with prosthetic survival comparable to that found in individuals with osteoarthritis [Spencer et al 2004]. Aortic stenosis may necessitate valve replacement. Treatment of prostate stones and renal stones may include surgical intervention.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Although several therapeutic modalities have been investigated, no preventive or curative treatment is available. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Maintaining joint range of motion through moderate non-weight-bearing exercise such as swimming may have beneficial effects. Younger individuals with alkaptonuria should be directed toward non-contact and lower-impact sports.

Surveillance

Cardiac. Surveillance for cardiac complications every one to two years is advisable after age 40 years and should include: Echocardiography to detect aortic dilation and aortic or mitral valve calcification and stenosis; Surveillance CT scans (according to the recommendation of a cardiologist) in affected individuals with coronary artery calcification. Urology. Urologic complications become more prevalent after age 40 years: Routine surveillance is not recommended, but awareness of this potential complication is advised. Ochronotic prostate stones appear on radiography; kidney stones can be identified by ultrasonography and helical abdominal CT.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoidance of physical stress to the spine and large joints, including heavy manual labor or high-impact sports, may reduce the progression of severe arthritis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures. Those found to have alkaptonuria should be counseled to avoid high-impact and contact sports. Career considerations include avoidance of occupations involving heavy physical labor. Instruction on joint strengthening and flexibility exercises, in conjunction with appropriate physical activity, can help preserve overall joint mobility and function. Evaluations can include: Biochemical testing for the presence of elevated urinary homogentisic acid (HGA). Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Pharmacologic treatment of alkaptonuria with oral administration of 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-1,3-cyclohexanedione (NTBC) or nitisinone has been proposed [Anikster et al 1998]. Nitisinone is a triketone herbicide that inhibits 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, the enzyme that produces HGA. Nitisinone is approved for the treatment of tyrosinemia type I. Nitisinone reduced urinary HGA excretion by at least 69% in two individuals, but at the expense of an elevated plasma tyrosine concentration [Phornphutkul et al 2002], resulting in photophobia. The only other known side effect is (rarely) corneal crystals. Theoretically, neurologic complications associated with tyrosinemia type III may develop. In a pilot study, low-dose nitisinone reduced urinary HGA by up to 95% in nine individuals with alkaptonuria. In the same study, seven individuals were treated for up to 15 weeks with nitisinone while receiving normal protein intake; all had elevated plasma tyrosine concentrations. No ophthalmic, neurologic, or severe dermatologic complications were observed. Two individuals had transient elevations in liver transaminase levels that returned to normal after stopping nitisinone [Suwannarat et al 2005]. In a three-year therapeutic trial, 2 mg of nitisinone daily reduced urine and plasma HGA by 95% throughout the study duration [Introne et al 2011]. Plasma tyrosine averaged 800μM without dietary restriction. Side effects were minimal. One affected individual developed corneal crystals that required discontinuation of nitisinone, and one affected individual had elevated liver transaminases. Statistically significant improvement in hip range of motion and measurements of musculoskeletal function were not observed in the treatment group compared to the control group; however there was a positive trend showing slowing of aortic stenosis. Additional trials are currently underway to establish clinical benefit. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No therapy is proven to prevent or correct the pigmentary changes of ochronosis. Dietary restriction of phenylalanine and tyrosine has been proposed to reduce the production of HGA, but severe restriction of these amino acids is not practical in the long term and may be dangerous. High-dose vitamin C decreases urinary benzoquinone acetic acid, a derivative of HGA, but has no effect on HGA excretion [Wolff et al 1989]. It has been hypothesized that high-dose ascorbic acid may prevent the deposition of ochronotic pigment, although it does not alter the basic metabolic defect [Wolff et al 1989]. No credible studies have demonstrated the clinical efficacy of ascorbic acid [La Du 2001]. Oral bisphosphonate therapy has been suggested to halt the progressive bone loss; however, a prospective study of four affected individuals failed to demonstrate benefit [Aliberti et al 2007].