

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a POLG-related disorder, evaluation should always include measures of functional neurologic status. In order to determine the baseline function for a given affected individual, it is reasonable to conduct the following evaluations as appropriate for the phenotypic presentation: Electroencephalogram (EEG) and video EEG monitoring Formal developmental assessment to provide a baseline of function as well as offer insights into the need for occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy Brain MRI. On occasion the first neuroimaging study may be normal, but with certain phenotypes, such as AHS, changes may be seen in a relatively short amount of time. Electrocardiogram. If a mitochondrial illness is suspected and if there is not yet genetic confirmation of a POLG disease it is reasonable to consider both electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. Formal assessment of vision and hearing Swallowing study, if bulbar signs are present Nutritional assessment Baseline pulmonary function testing Sleep polysomnogram specifically for the purpose of evaluating for central or obstructive apnea or hypopnea that result in either pCO2 elevation or O2 desaturation Liver function tests including fasting serum glucose concentration, ALT, and AST; serum concentrations of ammonia, glutamine and tyrosine (found in an amino acid panel), bilirubin, albumin, and cholesterol; and the coagulation factors (prothrombin time or INR). Liver ultrasound examination may assist in determining the presence of fibrosis. Note: AST elevation, and to a lesser extent ALT elevation, may be due to muscle disease; simultaneously obtaining a serum CK level differentiates between liver and muscle involvement, although both liver and muscle disease can be seen in individuals with POLG-related disorders. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is limited to symptom management and supportive care.

Alpers-Huttenlocher Syndrome

 Family education is critical. It is important to address the quality of life/intensity of treatment issues frequently and when major changes occur in disease status. Once the family has started the process of accepting the diagnosis, it is important to involve the family with options for supportive care that can be offered as the illness progresses. These will include (but are not limited to) the use of a gastrostomy feeding tube and the different levels of artificial ventilation that could include less invasive treatments such as CPAP or BiPAP, assisted nasal ventilation, and/or intubation, and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator. Involvement of palliative care services can assist the care team in these discussions, as well as in practical aspects of implementation. Although rehabilitative services are a necessary part of the treatment and care plan for these children, and rehabilitation units are often where parents of children with new gastrostomy tubes and ventilator support learn to care for their children, the global perspective of care should be palliative even if death is not imminent. Supportive therapies. Occupational, physical, and/or speech therapy is indicated to maintain neurologic function for as long as possible and to insure comfort when deterioration begins. Gastrointestinal. A consult with a gastroenterologist regarding feeding or nutritional issues, or evidence of liver involvement may be appropriate. Surgical placement of a gastric feeding tube when appropriate can maintain nutritional status and/or prevent aspiration of oral feeding. Hepatic. Standard treatment for liver failure may include small frequent meals or continuous feeding to compensate for defective gluconeogenesis, reduction in dietary protein to a minimum, use of non-absorbable sugars to create an osmotic diarrhea, and use of conjugating agents to treat hyperammonemia. Because levocarnitine may have some benefit in the setting of liver failure and because of its low toxicity, some recommend its use from the time of diagnosis. Respiratory. Tracheostomy placement and artificial ventilation may be performed, as appropriate. Assessment of nocturnal ventilatory function can be performed for evidence of central and/or obstructive apnea using polysomnography with measurement of pCO2 and monitoring by pulse oximetry. Treatment with CPAP or BiPAP as indicated is appropriate. Seizures. Seizure control is a goal of treatment; however, refractory epilepsy, especially epilepsia partialis continua (EPC), may be impossible to control with any treatment. In individuals with EPC, the use of high-dose anticonvulsants may control the clinical seizures, but the associated obtundation with subsequent risk of aspiration and ventilatory failure may outweigh the benefit. Although anticonvulsant monotherapy is preferred, treatment with more than one medication often becomes necessary as the child’s seizures worsen and as multiple types of seizures occur. If high-dose anticonvulsant therapy is not effective in improving the quality of life by reducing the seizure burden, reducing the number and/or dose of medications may improve quality of life by reducing medication side-effects. There is no evidence that newer anticonvulsants such as felbamate, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, or levetiracetam offer a better therapeutic benefit over the older medications (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone); however, the newer medications tend to be less sedating, may require less processing by the liver, and have fewer drug-drug interactions. Intravenous magnesium, used most often to treat seizures in eclampsia, has shown efficacy in one report where affected individuals with status epilepicus were refractory to other typical anticonvulsants [Visser et al 2011]. One unpublished pathway for management of seizures is to begin with lamotrigine monotherapy, and when this is no longer effective for adequate control of seizures, add lacosamide. Adding clobazam may also help when these medications are no longer effective [RP Saneto, personal communication]. With the exception of valproate (see Note), other standard anticonvulsants are reasonable to use, although medications that are heavily metabolized by the liver, such as phenytoins or the barbiturates, should be reserved until other medications fail. Note: Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Because other anticonvulsants have also been implicated in accelerating liver deterioration, it is reasonable to monitor liver enzymes every two to four weeks after introducing any new anticonvulsant [Bicknese et al1992]. Movement disorder. In addition to electroencephalographic seizures, myoclonus and other non-epileptic movement disorders occur as part of AHS and can be as disabling as seizures. These movements should not be confused with seizures, and video EEG is often the only way to differentiate a seizure from a non-epileptic movement disorder. The use of benzodiazepines often reduces the severity of these abnormal movements and also assists in seizure management and reduction of spasticity. Chorea and athetosis [Hakonen et al 2005] may cause pain, and treatment with muscle relaxants and pain medications, including narcotics, would be advised. Some movement disorders can be treated with dopaminergic medication such as levodopa-carbidopa or tetrabenazine: a trial of either of these medications can be considered. In most cases, not all seizures and/or non-epileptic movements can be suppressed with medication, and a balance between the adverse effects of the medication(s) and the disability created by the seizures or movements must be accepted by both the family and physician. Often a modest reduction in seizure control is offset by an improved level of alertness, although the benefit may not be lasting.

Other Phenotypes

 Management is supportive and involves conventional approaches such as physiotherapy, speech therapy, and seizure management. Gastrostomy may be required to provide adequate nutrition. Surgery for ptosis may provide symptomatic relief for some.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 For individuals with any of the POLG-related phenotypes, dose reduction in medications metabolized by hepatic enzymes may be necessary to avoid toxicity. Reports suggest that CSF folate may be deficient in disorders that lead to mtDNA depletion [Hasselmann et al 2010]. Therefore, testing for CSF folate deficiency and offering treatment to those with deficiency is one option; the other option is empiric therapy with folinic acid (calcium leucovorin).

Surveillance

 Individuals with POLG-related disorders require frequent examination and interval evaluation by a team comprising the following: Primary care provider Neurologist Clinical geneticist Hepatologist or gastroenterologist Physiatrist Psychiatrist Ophthalmologist Pulmonologist Laboratory tests. No standard of care guidelines are available to suggest the frequency for which the following tests should be obtained. Testing should be guided by clinical features and the proposed schedule should be modified if the clinical course is stable. For those with the most severe phenotypes, the following could be considered: Every three months. CBC; electrolytes, liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT); CK, liver function tests including: preprandial serum glucose concentration; serum concentration of ammonia, albumin, bilirubin (free and conjugated), and cholesterol; and prothrombin time or INR as a measure of coagulation factors Annually. Urine analysis; serum concentration of lactic acid Biannually. Plasma amino acids; urine organic acids; plasma concentration of free and total carnitine (unless treated with levocarnitine, in which case measure annually) 
            Imaging and diagnostic procedures
           Liver ultrasound examination annually EEG and video EEG monitoring (e.g., for suspicion of subclinical status epilepticus; presence of epilepsia partialis continua; need to determine if events are seizures or non-epileptic movements) Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked responses as clinically indicated Barium swallow study as clinically indicated Polysomnogram with CPAP titration as part of an evaluation of subacute mental status changes or every two to three years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) should be avoided because of the risk of precipitating and/or accelerating liver disease [Bicknese et al 1992, Saneto et al 2010]. As with some other mitochondrial diseases, physical stressors such as infection, fever, dehydration, and anorexia can result in a sudden deterioration and should be avoided as much as possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Liver transplantation is not advised in children with AHS because transplanting the liver does not alter the rapid progression of the brain disease [Kelly 2000]. However, liver transplantation in adults who have an acceptable quality of life may be of benefit. In one report, one of two individuals undergoing liver transplantation survived [Tzoulis et al 2006]. In another report, a woman underwent liver transplantation at age 19 years, eight years after experiencing fulminant hepatic failure following onset of valproate therapy. Molecular genetic testing seven years after her liver transplantation confirmed the diagnosis of a POLG-related disorder; her phenotype fit best with SANDO [Wong et al 2008]. As of late 2012 (15 years after liver transplantation), she was alive and living semi-independently, albeit with progressive central nervous system dysfunction, specifically failing memory with increasing chorea and hemiballismus. The use of other treatments for refractory epilepsy, such as corticotropin or prednisone, ketogenic diet, and intravenous IgG, are unproven in the treatment of AHS. Vitamin and cofactor therapy with the intent to fortify mitochondrial function may be offered. There have not been formal studies of the use of these vitamins and cofactors in AHS or other POLG-related disorders [Parikh et al 2009]. The use of folinic acid should be strongly considered (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). The use of levo-arginine has been reported helpful in reducing the frequency and severity of the strokes associated with MELAS, and can be considered for use in persons with POLG-related disorders, especially if deficiency in the plasma or CSF arginine concentration is confirmed. Levocarnitine, creatine monohydrate, coenzyme Q10, B vitamins, and antioxidants such as alpha lipoic acid, vitamin E, and vitamin C have been used as mitochondrial supplements. Use of all in POLG-related disorders is reasonable based on limited published evidence and their general lack of toxicity [Gold & Cohen 2001, Rodriguez et al 2007, Horvath et al 2008].