http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alpha1-a

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), the following evaluations of lung, liver, skin, and vasculature are recommended: 
                Lungs Pulmonary function tests, including spirometry (with post-bronchodilator testing), lung volumes, diffusing capacity, and measures of oxygenation Chest CT, which is more sensitive for detecting emphysema than pulmonary function tests [Stolk et al 2001], as part of the initial evaluation by some clinicians Liver. Liver biopsy for light microscopy and histochemistry when definition of the precise nature and extent of liver disease is clinically indicated [Nelson et al 2012] Skin. A detailed history and physical examination to assess for panniculitis

Treatment of Manifestations



Lung Disease

 Patients with obstructive lung disease should receive standard therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which may include bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, pulmonary rehabilitation, supplemental oxygen, and vaccinations (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal). Specific therapy for AATD-related lung disease, called augmentation therapy, is the periodic intravenous infusion of pooled human serum alpha-1antitrypsin (AAT). Concordant observational studies show that AAT augmentation therapy can slow the rate of FEV1 decline among individuals with AATD-related emphysema [Seersholm et al 1997, AADRSG 1998, Wencker et al 1998, Tonelli et al 2009]. Two placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials [Dirksen et al 1999, Dirksen et al 2009] have shown trends toward preservation of lung density as determined by chest CT in treated individuals vs. controls. Results from a third placebo-controlled randomized, clinical trial are pending; however, preliminary findings are consistent with slowing of progression of emphysema [Chapman et al 2013]. Guidelines available from the American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society [2003] and from the Canadian Thoracic Society [Marciniuk et al 2012]: Recommend intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with established emphysema. Of note, the greatest benefit evident is observed in individuals with moderate degrees of airflow obstruction (e.g., FEV1 35%-60% predicted). Do not recommend prophylactic treatment with intravenous AAT augmentation therapy for individuals with severe AATD but no demonstrable emphysema. In addition, the Canadian Thoracic Society guidelines specify that AAT augmentation therapy should be offered to individuals with AATD and evidence of emphysema only when they have stopped smoking and have demonstrated accelerated loss of lung function despite optimal therapy for COPD. AATD-related lung disease can be modified in asymptomatic individuals by lifestyle changes, including avoidance of smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. It is suspected that regular exercise and good nutrition help maintain lung health. Approximately 8% of lung transplants in the US are performed in individuals with COPD related to AATD. Lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for individuals with end-stage lung disease (i.e., FEV1 <30%) and severe functional impairment despite optimal therapy [Seersholm et al 1994, Trulock 1998]. Some evidence suggests that among comparably affected individuals with AATD, those who receive a lung transplant survive longer (median survival of 11 years in transplant recipients compared to 5 years in those who do not receive a transplant) [Tanash et al 2011]. Note: Though effective in specific subsets of patients with AAT-replete COPD [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003], lung volume reduction surgery confers smaller and shorter-lived improvements in lung function in patients with AATD, and so is not generally recommended [Stoller et al 2007].

Liver Disease

 Vitamin E therapy improves liver function in infants with the PI*MZ genotype and in children with cholestasis [Sokol et al 1986, Pittschieler 1991], and could be predicted to help prevent oxidative damage to the lungs. Nonetheless, firm evidence that antioxidant therapy (like Vitamin E) is beneficial in AATD is lacking. Liver transplantation, the definitive surgical treatment for advanced liver disease, can restore serum AAT levels to normal because a liver from a donor with a PI*MM genotype produces qualitatively and quantitatively normal AAT [Francavilla et al 2000]. Serial lung function measurements following liver transplantation have been studied in a small number of patients to date (N = 17) with a highly variable course following liver transplant [Carey et al 2013]. Overall, 65% of patients experienced a decline in FEV1 post-liver transplant with the mean decline being modest over an average of 49.2 months post-liver transplant and not achieving statistical significance. The risk for childhood-onset liver disease in infants with the PI*ZZ genotype who are breast-fed during the first month of life was reported to be reduced; however, breast-feeding does not confer absolute protection against the development of severe liver disease [Sveger 1985].

Other

 Panniculitis. The often painful nodular lesions of panniculitis may resolve spontaneously or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy [Yesudian et al 2004]; however, when panniculitis is refractory to conventional treatment, it has been shown (anecdotally) to respond to intravenous AAT augmentation therapy in doses higher than the conventional dose of 60 mg/kg [Stoller & Piliang 2008]. Of note, it is presumed that the panniculitis improves because AAT augmentation therapy restores the proteolytic screen in the skin, thereby lessening inflammation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 To lessen the progression of lung disease, the following are recommended: Complete cessation of smoking Avoidance of dusty occupational exposures Yearly vaccination against influenza and pneumococcus To lessen the risk of liver disease, the following are recommended: Minimal consumption of alcohol [Kershaw & Guidot 2008] Vaccination against hepatitis A and B

Surveillance

 Patients with severe AATD should undergo pulmonary function tests (including spirometry with bronchodilators and diffusing capacity measurements) every six to 12 months [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003]. All individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype (including those who did not manifest liver disease in childhood) should undergo periodic evaluation of liver function [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003]. While current guidelines from the American Thoracic Society recommend regular follow up of liver function tests in adults with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003], those tests may not reliably detect liver disease in these individuals [Clark et al 2012]. For instance, various liver function tests were not significantly different in persons with AATD with or without liver disease, and the sensitivity of the alanine transaminase (ALT) for alpha-1 antitrypsin-associated liver disease was only 12% [Clark et al 2012] A combination of liver function tests, platelet count, and liver ultrasound examination may be an effective screening method to detect the presence of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis [Dawwas et al 2013]. All patients with established liver disease should have periodic (i.e., every 6-12 months) ultrasound examination of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and HCC [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003, Nelson et al 2012].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Smoking (both active and passive) is a risk factor for lung disease in individuals with AATD. Occupational exposure (including exposure to environmental pollutants used in agriculture, mineral dust, gas, and fumes) is an independent risk factor for lung function impairment in individuals with the PI*ZZ genotype.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The ATS/ERS guidelines recommend evaluation of older and younger sibs of an individual with severe AATD (Table 2) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. The ATS/ERS guidelines also recommend testing for parents and children of individuals with severe AATD. Extended pedigree analysis beyond first-degree relatives may be indicated in selected instances. For example, the presence of an AATD-associated condition (e.g., COPD, liver disease, panniculitis) in a more distant family member would justify extensive family testing (i.e., of family members beyond parents, sibs, and offspring). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Management of women with AATD during pregnancy should be guided by usual care principles, both for women without clinical disease and for those with liver disease. As noted, emphysema, especially in non-smokers, would not commonly be expected during the usual childbearing age range.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Inhaled administration of purified AAT can restore AAT levels in the bronchoalveolar fluid. Older studies demonstrated the feasibility of inhaling pooled human plasma-derived AAT –currently the subject of ongoing study [Hubbard & Crystal 1990, Sandhaus 2004, Abusriwil & Stockley 2006]. Synthetic inhibitors of human neutrophil elastase, administered intravenously and orally, could theoretically provide protection against proteolytic lung damage. No such drug has yet been approved. Antioxidant therapy. Vitamins A, C, and E and N-acetylcysteine have been suggested in the treatment of AATD-related emphysema. The efficacy of such treatment has not been evaluated [Sandhaus 2004]. Synthetic chaperones and polymerization could potentially prevent the intracellular polymerization of AAT implicated in causing intra-hepatocyte inclusions and liver disease. Modest improvement in liver retention and increase in plasma concentrations of AAT was suggested after administration of 4-phenyl-butyric acid (PBA) [Burrows et al 2000]. However, a human randomized trial failed to demonstrate efficacy of 4-PBA [Teckman 2004]. Biochemical data on a peptide that specifically binds to variant AAT encoded by the PI*Z allele and that inhibits polymerization are promising, but future cellular and animal studies are needed [Mahadeva et al 2002, Parfrey et al 2004]. Gene therapy is aimed at introducing a functional copy of SERPINA1 into cells to allow production of a normal AAT protein. An alternative approach is to introduce gene(s) to turn off production of the endogenous abnormal variant protein encoded by the pathogenic SERPINA1 allele. Murine studies transfecting muscle with an adeno-associated virus vector carrying a normal functional human SERPINA1 allele have been promising. Human gene therapy studies are currently under way, with evidence that this approach can sustainably increase serum AAT levels, albeit not yet to therapeutic levels (i.e., exceeding 57 mg/dL, the serum protective threshold value) [Flotte et al 2011]. Drugs to enhance autophagy (e.g., rapamycin and carbamazepine) have shown promise in enhancing serum AAT levels and diminishing liver damage. Human trials are under way; results are pending [Hidvegi et al 2010, Kaushal et al 2010, Perlmutter 2011]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) performed for persons with advanced non-AATD emphysema can (in appropriately selected individuals) improve lung function and enhance survival [National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group 2003]. However, in AATD-associated emphysema, the physiologic improvement following LVRS is more modest and less sustained than in non-AATD COPD [Gelb et al 1999, Stoller et al 2007]. In a study of 12 individuals with AATD-associated emphysema, postoperative lung function returned to baseline in six to 12 months but showed further deterioration in 24 months [Cassina et al 1998]. Results of the National Emphysema Treatment Trial were similarly unfavorable [Stoller et al 2007]; thus, LVRS is generally not recommended for individuals with AATD [American Thoracic Society & European Respiratory Society 2003]. Transgenic/recombinant production of human AAT protein could solve the potential problems of limited supply of AAT purified from human serum and the theoretic transmission of infectious agents. However, past clinical trials of transgenic/recombinant AAT produced in sheep and goats [Casolaro et al 1987, Wright et al 1991, Ziomek 1998] were discontinued because of serious immunologic reactions in the lungs of recipients. Results from more recent studies are not currently available.