http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alport

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) the following evaluations are recommended: 
                Evaluation of renal function Overt proteinuria (urine protein-creatinine ratio >0.2 or, in a child, 24-hour urine protein >4 mg/m2/hr) is an important indicator of renal disease progression in individuals with Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy. Urine protein excretion should be assessed at the time of diagnosis and at least annually thereafter. In Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy, decreased glomerular filtration and hypertension rarely appear before overt proteinuria. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels) and blood pressure should be monitored. Hearing evaluation. High-frequency sensorineural deafness typically becomes detectable by audiogram in late childhood (age 6-10 years) in boys with XLAS and in boys and girls with ARAS. Ophthalmologic evaluation Assessment of ocular status is often unnecessary if the diagnosis of Alport syndrome is established by other means. The maculopathy is asymptomatic, and anterior lenticonus is also frequently asymptomatic. Individuals who experience acute corneal erosion should be seen by an ophthalmologist. Cardiac evaluation. Baseline evaluation including echocardiogram for aortic dilation in males with XLAS is indicated. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013]. These recommendations encourage early detection of microalbuminuria and proteinuria through regular surveillance and early intervention aimed at suppressing proteinuria using angiotensin antagonists (click here for full text). Renal. Hypertensive individuals should receive appropriate management. Controlled clinical trials of therapy for Alport nephropathy have not been conducted. However, a retrospective analysis of a registry population suggested that early treatment with angiotensin blockade delays the onset of ESRD in human Alport syndrome [Gross et al 2012]. The angiotensin receptor blocker losartan has been shown to reduce proteinuria in children with Alport syndrome [Webb et al 2013]. Furthermore, angiotensin blockade has been shown to delay progression to ESRD in transgenic mice with ARAS [Gross et al 2003, Gross et al 2004]. Therefore, affected individuals are frequently treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers once proteinuria appears. This form of therapy is rarely associated with significant adverse effects. It is unknown whether the losartan therapy reduces the risk for aortic dilation in XLAS (as is being investigated for Marfan syndrome). Renal transplantation is typically successful in individuals with Alport syndrome [Kashtan et al 1995, Byrne et al 2002]. Anti-GBM nephritis involving the renal allograft is a dramatic, but rare, complication occurring in an estimated 3% of males with Alport syndrome who have undergone transplantation [Kashtan 1999, Byrne et al 2002]. Prior to renal transplantation, males with XLAS should have a cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation [Kashtan et al 2010]. Special considerations apply to the selection of potential living related kidney donors for individuals with XLAS. The following discussion considers potential donors on the basis of gender and the presence or absence of hematuria: Male relative without hematuria. The optimal living related donor is a male who has a normal urinalysis and is therefore unaffected. Male relative with hematuria. A related male with hematuria probably has Alport syndrome, and cannot be a kidney donor. Female relative without hematuria. Female relatives who have normal urinalyses are probably unaffected, although approximately 5%-10% of females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant are asymptomatic. It is rare for asymptomatic females whose children are also asymptomatic to be heterozygous. Asymptomatic females can probably donate a kidney safely, but should be informed of their risk of having affected male children to whom they will not be able to donate a kidney. Genetic status can be confirmed or excluded by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. Female relative with hematuria (i.e., heterozygous female). Females heterozygous for a COL4A5 pathogenic variant should only be considered as potential kidney donors if no asymptomatic living donors are available. The presence of proteinuria or sensorineural deafness is an absolute contraindication to kidney donation as these are risk factors for progression to ESRD. Heterozygous females younger than age 40 years should not be used as donors, even in the absence of proteinuria or deafness. Heterozygous females age 40 years or older who have normal renal function, blood pressure, and hearing and no proteinuria can be considered as donors because the risk of late progression to ESRD appears to be low in such individuals. However, the donor should be informed of the risk (albeit low) of late progression to ESRD. Cochlear. Hearing aids should be prescribed when appropriate. Ocular. The ocular manifestations of Alport syndrome rarely require specific ophthalmologic intervention. Some individuals develop cataracts that interfere with vision; these should be extracted when necessary. Diffuse leiomyomatosis. Symptomatic leiomyomas may require surgical intervention.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals who suffer recurrent corneal erosions may need to take measures (e.g., wearing goggles when riding a bicycle) to protect their corneas from minor trauma. Exposure to loud noise should be minimized.

Surveillance

 Clinical practice recommendations for the treatment and health surveillance of individuals with Alport syndrome have been published [Kashtan et al 2013]. Individuals with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy should be followed by a nephrologist in addition to a primary care physician. Once overt proteinuria has developed, renal function should be assessed periodically by serum creatinine concentration or other estimates of glomerular filtration rate (e.g., creatinine clearance or serum cystatin C levels), and blood pressure should be monitored. Although most females with XLAS exhibit only asymptomatic microhematuria, recent data indicate a significant risk for progression to ESRD [Jais et al 2003]. For this reason, all women with a diagnosis of Alport syndrome need to be monitored regularly for the development of proteinuria and hypertension. Children with Alport syndrome should have audiologic evaluation every one to two years beginning at age six to seven years (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview). Periodic cardiac evaluation for aortic dilation for males with XLAS is appropriate. Transplant recipients should be monitored for development of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate family members at risk for Alport syndrome or thin basement membrane nephropathy in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. 
                Urinalysis Males. A single urinalysis is sufficient in a male. Females. Several urinalyses should be performed in females before concluding that hematuria is absent. Molecular genetic testing. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members. Molecular genetic testing is necessary to exclude heterozygosity in an at-risk female who does not have hematuria. Relatives found to have proteinuria, hypertension, and/or a pathogenic variant should be referred to a nephrologist for further evaluation. In the absence of proteinuria or hypertension, relatives at risk should, at a minimum, have an annual urinalysis and measurement of blood pressure if molecular genetic testing is not available. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.