

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To determine the presence and extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete blood counts and flow cytometric immunophenotyping of lymphocytes, especially with regard to α/β-DNT cells, in combination with physical examination and imaging studies to assess lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly If significant lymphadenopathy is present, more extensive diagnostic procedures to detect lymphoma, especially if constitutional symptoms (e.g., fever, night sweats, weight loss) are present Measurement of autoantibodies to assess for autoimmunity Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 In the absence of curative treatment, current management is focused on the following: Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation, hypersplensim, and lymphomas Management of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases [Madkaikar et al 2011, Rao & Oliveira 2011, Teachey 2012] 
            Monitoring for and treatment of lymphoproliferation and hypersplenism
           Manifestations of lymphoproliferation require close clinical observation, as well as serial CT and PET scans every two to three years. Biopsy is indicated whenever there is a clinical suspicion of lymphoma. Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs do not decrease lymphadenopathy long term in individuals with ALPS, and are generally reserved for severe complications of lymphoproliferation (e.g., airway obstruction, significant hypersplenism associated with splenomegaly) and/or autoimmune manifestations. Experience with sirolimus suggests that it is the preferred agent in treating lymphoproliferation in a more sustained manner, including for maintenance of remission after intital treatment followed by a period of discontinued use [Teachey et al 2009, Bride et al 2016]. However, sirolimus is not without side effects. In severe cases, more potent (lympho-depleting) agents may be required to sufficiently control lymphoproliferative manifestations. Agents include cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin (ATG), and select monoclonal antibodies such as alemtuzumab (Campath®). Treatment of lymphoma is according to conventional protocols. The presence of defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not appear to hinder the response to chemotherapeutic agents or radiation. 
            Treatment of cytopenias and other autoimmune diseases
           Autoimmune cytopenias are typically treated by immune suppression with corticosteroids as well as corticosteroid-sparing agents, if prolonged treatment of autoimmune cytopenias is required and/or in cases of refractory cytopenias. Recent data from a multi-institutional study suggest that sirolimus should be considered as a first-line – corticosteroid-sparing – agent [Bride et al 2016]. Sirolimus requires monitoring for drug levels and toxic side effects. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can be used in cases when a less immunosuppressive drug (e.g., compared with sirolimus) seems sufficient, as steroids are tapered. In addition, if drug level and toxic side effects cannot be adequately monitored, MMF could be used as a first-line agent. Individuals with severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia may benefit from IVIG in combination with corticosteroids. Rituximab has been used successfully in the treatment of refractory cytopenias in ALPS. However, because of its immune toxicity, its use is generally avoided until other immunosuppression therapies have failed [Rao et al 2009, Rao & Oliveira 2011]. Splenectomy is reserved as an option of last resort in the treatment of life-threatening refractory cytopenias and/or severe hypersplenia because of the high risk of recurrence of cytopenias and sepsis post splenectomy in those with ALPS [Rao & Oliveira 2011, Price et al 2014]. Given the known risks associated with splenectomy, patients requiring this last-resort approach should be considered for curative bone marrow transplantation. Individuals with isolated chronic neutropenia may improve on low-dose G-CSF [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. In addition, use of a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist should be considered for isolated immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Bone marrow (hematopoietic stem cell) transplantation (BMT/HSCT) is currently the only curative treatment for ALPS. Because of the risks associated with BMT, it has so far been performed mostly in individuals with ALPS with severe clinical phenotypes, such as those with homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in FAS, those with severe and/or refractory autoimmune cytopenias, those with lymphoma, and those who have developed complications from (often long-term) immunosuppressive therapy. It is likely, however, that individuals with undiagnosed forms of ALPS, including ALPS-FAS, have been transplanted. Successful (reported) BMT in several individuals indicates that defective Fas-mediated apoptosis does not pose a barrier to this treatment option [Benkerrou et al 1997, Sleight et al 1998, Dowdell et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Vaccinations pre-splenectomy (with consideration of post-splenectomy boost vaccinations) and penicillin prophylaxis are strongly recommended for individuals who undergo splenectomy.

Surveillance

 Clinical assessment, imaging, and laboratory studies outlined in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis can be used in surveillance for manifestations of lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity. Specialized imaging studies such as combined PET and CT scanning in combination with clinical and laboratory surveillance may be helpful in detection of malignant transformation, keeping in mind that PET/CT scanning is often abnormal in ALPS, such that distinguishing between “typical” ALPS findings and a new malignancy (lymphoma) can be difficult [Rao & Oliveira 2011]. Because of this, careful consideration of imaging modalities that expose the patient to radiation is warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Splenectomy to control autoimmune cytopenias and/or massive splenomagaly is discouraged because it typically does not lead to permanent remission of autoimmunity and may be associated with an increased risk for infections. The two recent cohort studies reveal clear-cut consequences of splenectomy. In the French cohort, nine (30%) of 30 affected individuals who underwent splenectomy suffered 17 cases of severe invasive bacterial infection with four deaths after splenectomy; in the NIH cohort, 27 (41%) of 66 affected individuals suffered one or more episodes of sepsis with seven deaths. Of note: Anti-microbial prophylaxis and appropriate vaccinations did not prevent the majority of episodes of sepsis, although poor compliance was found to be a risk factor in the French cohort [Neven et al 2011, Price et al 2014]. The use of over-the-counter medications such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be discussed with a physician as some of these medications can interfere with platelet function.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on relatives at risk for ALPS-FAS, ALPS-FASLG, or ALPS-CASP10 if the pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband. Relatives who have the family-specific pathogenic variant should: Be advised of their increased risk for ALPS if the type and location of the ALPS-related pathogenic variant is predicted to have a high penetrance for clinical ALPS; Undergo ALPS-specific evaluations at initial diagnosis (e.g., enumeration of α/β-DNT cells, detection of autoantibodies, IL-10/soluble FasL measurement) (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis); Be advised that ALPS-specific evaluations or other assessments may need to be repeated at regular intervals, particularly if the family member is young and/or if new health-related issues consistent with ALPS or ALPS-related complications (e.g., lymphoma) become apparent (see Surveillance). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 In addition to the risks and benefits to a woman with ALPS associated with treatment with corticosteroids, mycophenylate mofitil, or sirolimus during pregnancy, the potential teratogenic risks of these exposures to the fetus must also be weighed. See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.