http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/als-ftd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with C9orf72-related amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD), the following evaluations are recommended: General medical history with emphasis on psychiatric illness [Devenney et al 2014] and problems potentially related to FTD such as alcohol or drug abuse Family history with attention to dementia, ALS, or psychiatric illness, which are present in many C9orf72 heterozygotes [Devenney et al 2014] Physical and clinical neurologic examination with attention to physical disability related to motor neuron disease Neuropsychological examination to evaluate the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance Electromyography in case of ALS and/or lower motor signs Assessment of need for ancillary equipment such as walker, wheelchair, and/or respiratory assistance Discussion of advanced care planning

Treatment of Manifestations

For ALS-related treatment options refer to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Overview. Psychosocial support and education are indicated to reduce caregiver stress and reduce the risk of caregiver burden. Non-pharmacologic treatment options in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) include psychosocial support and education as well as environmental, behavioral, and physical interventions designed to minimize the occurrence and consequences of undesired behaviors. Caregiver and patient support groups are valuable. Additional helpful interventions include physical, occupational and speech therapy, home safety evaluations, and the implementation of augmentative communication devices [Rabinovici & Miller 2010]. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy are very valuable in cases involving parkinsonism and/or lower/upper motor neuron signs. Pharmacologic treatment should be considered when non-pharmacologic treatment options have failed or when behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (as in FTLD) are dangerous or too stressful. Options include: SSRIs. Although the reported efficacy of SSRIs in treating FTLD is based on relatively small, often uncontrolled trials, the use of SSRIs is considered first line therapy in FTLD with behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms [Rabinovici & Miller 2010]. Venlafaxine. When apathy is prominent, venlafaxine may be tried for its activating properties. Bupropion is considered when parkinsonism is present because of its dopaminergic tone [Rabinovici & Miller 2010]. Atypical antipsychotics may be considered in patients with severe behavioral and psychological signs and symptoms (agitation, aggressiveness, psychosis) that are refractory to SSRIs. Often, atypical antipsychotics are necessary only as a temporizing measure, and can be tapered as patients become more apathetic (and thus less agitated and disinhibited) with disease progression [Rabinovici & Miller 2010].

Surveillance

Clinical, neurologic, and neuropsychological follow up is necessary.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder