http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/als-overview

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the following evaluations are recommended: Electrophysiologic investigations. EMG/NCV (3 extremities) Laboratory workup. CSF analysis, muscle biopsy, 24-hour urine collection for heavy metals, blood work (including: CBC, comprehensive chemistry panel, GGT, B12, folate, RPR-syphilis, ANA8/RF, thyroid function, CK, serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), immunofixation panel, quantitative immunoglobulin, qnti-GM1, serum Lyme AB, sed rate) Radiologic. Head, C-spine, thoracic spine, and lumbar spine MRI Neurologic. Physical examination, mental status, cranial nerves, motor examination, sensory examination, gait, reflexes Neuropsychologic testing (if applicable) to assess cognitive impairment Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is palliative and many individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team including: a neurologist, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and genetic counselor. Data suggest that individuals under the care of such a team may have a better prognosis [van den Berg et al 2004, Andersen et al 2005]. The factors influencing survival include: age, vital capacity, fatigue, body strength, spasticity, household income, and depression [Paillisse et al 2005], most of which can be managed by the appropriate specialist in the multidisciplinary team. Riluzole is the only currently FDA-approved drug for the treatment of ALS. Its mechanism of action is thought to be glutamate inhibition. Clinical trials have shown marginal slowing of disease progression in some but not all individuals, [Riviere et al 1998]. Riluzole is associated with elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase levels in 10% to 15% of treated individuals; in rare cases it may cause bone marrow depression [Bensimon & Doble 2004]. Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning. Pseudobulbar affect can be managed with antidepressants such as Nuedexta® (dextromethophan and quinidine). Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management, a prognostic factor for survival, has become a focus in the clinical setting. Medications such as baclofen and benzodiazepines can help relieve spasticity and muscle cramps; however, weakness and lethargy are common side effects. Individualized moderate-intensity endurance-type exercises for the trunk and limbs may help to reduce spasticity [Ashworth et al 2004]. Low-tech (e.g., alphabet board) and high-tech (i.e., computer-assisted) devices can aid speech and communication. The recent development of the eye movement-controlled on-screen keyboard may enable communication for individuals without any remaining limb function. Assistive devices, such as walkers or wheelchairs, can aid mobility; and others, such as bathroom installments, hospital bed, and Hoyer lift, can aid in activities of daily living at home. Ventilatory assistance may include use of bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP), which has played an increasing role in preserving and prolonging quality of life in persons with ALS. In 1999, the American Academy of Neurology published norms recommending the initiation of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) in individuals with a theoretic forced vital capacity (FVC) less than 50% of predicted [Miller et al 1999]. Studies show that mean survival significantly increases when NIV is initiated prior to the onset of bulbar symptoms [Farrero et al 2005]. Therefore, evaluation by a pulmonologist should be undertaken before reduction of the forced vital capacity below 50%. Although tracheostomy and ventilatory support can extend life span, affected individuals often decline these interventions [Albert et al 1999]. The tremendous psychological and social impact of ALS on both affected individuals and caregivers needs to be continually addressed [Goldstein et al 1998]. Hospice care, typically instituted once FVC is less than 30%, contributes to the individual’s comfort in the terminal stages.

Surveillance

 Specialized multidisciplinary ALS clinic evaluations are suggested every three months. Neurologic examination to establish the extent of weakness, atrophy, gait instability, involvement of fine motor and gross motor function and swallowing with attention to choking or coughing episodes and insensible aspiration manifesting as pneumonia Pulmonary function tests Nutritional status PT/OT evaluation Speech evaluation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Patients and caregivers should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modifications for the home and at work.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Xaliproden slowed the rate of deterioration in FVC by 43% in individuals with ALS during Phase II safety and efficacy trials performed in France but did not improve functional or manual muscle testing scores [Lacomblez et al 2004]. Further investigations are needed. Fornai et al [2008] reported a delay in disease progression in a small number of individuals with ALS taking a daily dose of lithium supplemental to riluzole. Additional research and clinical trials are needed to establish to neuroprotective effect of lithium. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Individuals with ALS commonly supplement their diets with vitamin E, vitamin C, B vitamins, selenium, zinc, coenzyme Q10, and herbal preparations such as ginseng, gingko biloba, and Maharishi Amrit Kalesh [Cameron & Rosenfeld 2002]. In a Cochrane Review, Orrell et al [2007] summarized and evaluated 21 clinical trials of antioxidant therapies in various combinations including: vitamin E, high-dose coenzyme Q10, vitamin C, selenium, beta-carotene, N-acetylcysteine, L-methionine, and selegiline. In the majority of these studies, the sample size was not adequate for statistical evaluation. Although the antioxidants were well tolerated in many of the trials, significant differences in longevity, muscle strength, or functional rating scales over time were not identified.