http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alstrom

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Alström syndrome, a complete history of disease should direct detailed physical examination and investigations. A multidisciplinary team should be established to formulate and coordinate monitoring, management, and therapeutic interventions. Cone-rod dystrophy. Ophthalmologic evaluation, including electroretinogram and visual field testing Obesity. Measurement of weight and height; calculation of body mass index (BMI) Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry with auditory brain stem response (ABR) and otoacoustic emissions (OAE) to detect sensorineural or conductive hearing loss; assessment of otitis media and conductive hearing loss Dilated cardiomyopathy. A detailed cardiac history and examination, including auscultation, echocardiography and ECGs. Echocardiography is required to demonstrate ventricular dilation, fibrosis, and decreased myocardial function. 
Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus Fasting plasma glucose, even in infancy A glucose tolerance test (GTT) as early as age six years Plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from infancy Hyperlipidemia. A fasting lipid profile, including triglycerides 
Endocrine abnormalities Assessment of thyroid function, including plasma TSH and free T4 concentration. If hyperthyroidism is suspected, free T3 concentration should be done. Measurement of pituitary hormones 
Urologic History to document urinary difficulties If the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal, renal ultrasound examination to detect pelvi-calyceal dilatation and bladder ultrasound examination to measure post-voiding residual volumes 
Renal disease Baseline blood pressure; 24-hour blood pressure monitoring Measurement of plasma BUN, creatinine, urea and electrolytes. If renal function testing is abnormal, ultrasound examination. If abnormalities, refer to a nephrologist. 
Hepatic disease Measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration Liver ultrasonography to evaluate for possible hepatomegaly and portal hypertension If clinically indicated, screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy for varices Pulmonary disease. Detailed assessment of pulmonary function by chest radiography, combined with pulmonary function tests Developmental assessment. Educational evaluation for intervention and IEP 
Other Gastrointestinal. If symptoms of reflux esophagitis remain severe, despite acid blockers, perform barium swallow or upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Skin. Note acanthosis nigricans (indication of insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus), alopecia, body hair, hirsutism on physical examination. Orthopedic abnormalities. Note flat feet, scoliosis, barrel chest, kyphoscoliosis on physical examination. Neurologic manifestations. Neurologic evaluation with EEG to examine for seizures. Note autistic-spectrum behavioral abnormalities, excessive startle, tactile defensiveness, unexplained joint or muscle pain, muscle dystonia, or hyporeflexia. 
Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No therapy exists to prevent the progressive organ involvement. However, monitoring for developing problems and early intervention is essential. 
Rod-cone dystrophy Early on when photodysphoria is significant, the use of red-orange tinted prescription lenses may reduce symptoms. Early educational planning should be based on the certainty of blindness. Instruction in the use of Braille, mobility training, adaptive living skills, and computing skills (including voice recognition and transcription software), and the use of large print reading materials while vision is still present are crucial. Obesity. A healthful, reduced calorie diet and regular exercise, such as walking, hiking, biking, and swimming with adaptations for the blind, are recommended to control weight gain. 
Progressive sensorineural hearing loss Myringotomy has been helpful in individuals with recurrent otitis media (‘glue ear’). Hearing can be maximized with bilateral digital hearing aids. Cochlear implantation has benefitted some patients [Florentzson et al 2010]. Cardiomyopathy. Angiotensinogen-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diuretics, digoxin, and possibly beta-blockers should be used in the treatment of cardiac failure. Cardiac transplantation has been successful in isolated cases [Goerler et al 2007]. Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes should be treated as in the general population unless heart failure and/or liver dysfunction are present. The diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin resistance, but some individuals respond to a low-sugar, low-fat diet; exercise; and metformin. Glitazones are added to further reduce insulin resistance but must be avoided in the presence of active or treated heart failure. These treatments should be discontinued when the serum creatinine concentration exceeds 200 µmol/L or if cardiomyopathy is evident. Incretin analogues given subcutaneously, as in nonsyndromic type 2 diabetes, are successful in two thirds of cases [Paisey et al 2008, Paisey 2009]. 
Hypertriglyceridemia Nicotinic acid derivatives can be helpful in long-term reduction of severe hypertriglyceridemia (>20 mmol/l) especially if pancreatitis has occurred and diabetes is absent or well controlled [Paisey et al 2004, Paisey 2009]. Statins are unlikely to be effective but can be considered for long-term prevention of atherosclerosis in adults with low HDL, high LDL, and diabetes. Pancreatitis should be treated as in the general population. 
Endocrine As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and pituitary hormones should be assessed to determine if hormonal adjustments are necessary. Male hypogonadism should be treated with testosterone according to local endocrine guidelines to preserve sexuality, muscle strength, and bone health. Thyroxine therapy should be initiated and monitored if the individual is hypothyroid. Urologic. Some individuals have required urinary diversion or self-catheterization to manage voiding difficulties [MacDermott 2001]. 
Renal disease The use of enzyme ACE inhibitors may be considered if proteinuria is detected. Successful renal transplantation has occurred in a growing number of individuals, but can be contraindicated in the presence of other complications including morbid obesity, uncontrolled diabetes, and cardiomyopathy. Hepatic disease. Portal hypertension may be treated with beta-blockade and sclerotherapy of the esophageal veins. Banding should be done in order to prevent upper-GI hemorrhage from varices. Patients who fail to respond to medication and banding are candidates for a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) to decrease risk of variceal bleeding caused by portal hypertension. Patients with significant portal hypertension should be evaluated early for liver transplantation. Pulmonary disease. General activity, including breathing exercises, can reduce chronic hypoxia and improve wellbeing. Coaching by an exercise expert may be necessary in order to achieve adequate spirometry results to determine the presence of obstructive airways disease. 
Other If skeletal abnormalities are present, referral to an orthopedist is appropriate. Reflux esophagitis, skin manifestations, orthopedic abnormalities, and neurologic manifestations should be treated as in the general population. Education intervention, as indicated by evaluation and IEP (individual education plan) with the expectation of total blindness and hearing loss.

Prevention of Primary Complications

The progression to diabetes mellitus and the severity of hyperglycemia can in some cases be mitigated by lifestyle changes and avoidance of severe obesity.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Routine pediatric immunizations should be given and administration of pneumococcal vaccination should be considered. Care must be taken during sedation or operative procedures. The combination of dilated cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary fibrosis can cause sudden severe hypoxia in an affected individual following surgery or even during a minor infection. Close monitoring of cardiac status and oxygenation are necessary until the individual is fully recovered.

Surveillance

Rod-cone dystrophy. Annual ophthalmologic follow-up is indicated as long as the affected individual has vision. Obesity. Weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) should be recorded annually and plotted on growth curves. Progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Audiometry should be performed yearly. 
Cardiomyopathy A detailed cardiac history and examination including echocardiography annually even in the absence of symptoms related to left ventricular dysfunction (signs of cardiac failure, such as sweating, fatigue, lethargy, asthma, decreased physical activity) ECGs in parallel with echocardiography and 24-hour ECG monitoring if indicated In individuals who have had infantile cardiomyopathy, annual monitoring by a pediatric cardiologist, even if the individual has recovered from cardiomyopathy and is asymptomatic 
Insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes Annual measurement of plasma insulin concentration, as hyperinsulinemia may be present from early infancy Measurement of fasting plasma glucose concentration every two to three months If fasting blood glucose is greater than 7 mmol/L, or postprandial blood glucose is greater than 11 mmol/L, measurement of HbA1c concentration and serum glucose concentration regularly (every 6 months, although glucose estimations may be performed more frequently as determined by the 'diabetic control' of the affected individual) Hyperlipidemia. Annual total lipid profile determination is appropriate unless hyperlipidemia is present, in which case more frequent monitoring may be indicated. When the affected individual is ill and/or dehydrated, pancreatitis precipitated by hyperlipidemia can be life threatening. 
Renal disease Urinalysis and measurement of plasma concentrations of electrolytes, uric acid, BUN, and creatinine twice yearly Renal and bladder ultrasound examinations every one to two years if the individual is symptomatic or if urinalysis is abnormal 
Hepatic disease Annual measurement of plasma ALT, AST, and GGT concentration Ultrasonography to evaluate for possible steatosis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and portal hypertension Pulmonary disease. Pulmonary function tests should be performed yearly to evaluate general lung function, even if symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis are not yet present. Hypothyroidism. Patients should be monitored annually for thyroid abnormalities.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any substance contraindicated in persons with renal or cardiac failure should be avoided. Therapy directed at one system may have adverse effects on other systems; for example, the use of glitazone therapy in diabetes mellitus is contraindicated in the presence of cardiac failure.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early evaluation and/or molecular genetic testing (if the two pathogenic allelic variants in a family are known) of at-risk sibs allows for early diagnosis and early treatment of manifestations. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no data to guide the management of a pregnancy should it occur in a female with Alström syndrome. Potential maternal complications during pregnancy could include development or worsening of cardiac, renal, or hepatic failure; severe dyslipidemia; and hyperglycemia. The fetus could be affected by placental dysfunction resulting from maternal diabetes and cardiorenal disease. Intensive multidisciplinary surveillance of any pregnancy would be mandatory.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.