http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/alzheimer-early

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (EOFAD), the following evaluations are recommended: History (especially first symptoms, duration, progression). In particular, onset before age 45 years may indicate more rapid progression. Examination (especially mental status) MRI, PET. Severe cortical atrophy on MRI or marked metabolic deficits on PET imaging suggest more advanced disease.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The mainstay of treatment is supportive and each symptom is managed on an individual basis [Clare 2002]. In general, affected individuals eventually require assisted living arrangements or nursing home care. Although the exact biochemical basis of Alzheimer disease is not well understood, it is known that deficiencies of the brain cholinergic system and of other neurotransmitters are present. Agents that increase cholinergic activity, such as tacrine cholinesterase inhibitors, are approved for treatment and show modest but variable benefit. Aricept® (donepezil), Exelon® (rivastigmine), and Reminyl® (galatamine) are such drugs [Rogers et al 1998, Farlow et al 2000, Raskind et al 2000, Feldman et al 2001, Mohs et al 2001, Seltzer et al 2004]. Memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, has also been approved for use in AD [Reisberg et al 2003]. Medical and behavioral management of depression, aggression, sleep disturbance, seizures, and hallucinations is required. Depression and seizures should be treated with appropriate medications. Physical and occupational therapy can be helpful to manage problems with gait and activities of daily living.

Surveillance

 Monthly surveillance to identify and manage secondary complications is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Sudden changes in environment and over-sedation should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), lipid-lowering agents, vitamin E, beta secretase inhibitors and β amyloid "vaccination" are being investigated as possible therapeutic agents for AD [Lahiri et al 2003]. None of these pharmacologic treatments has been systematically evaluated in individuals with EOFAD. An amyloid vaccination immunization trial of Aβ42 in late-onset AD was stopped because encephalitis developed in 6% of the subjects [Holmes et al 2008]. A treatment trial of an anti-Aβ monoclonal antibody showed no significant differences when primary efficacy was analyzed [Salloway et al 2009]. A treatment trial with a gamma secretase inhibitor (tarenflurbil) showed no efficacy [Green et al 2009]. Retrospective studies of NSAIDs have been mixed, showing possible protective effects [Vlad et al 2008] and no protective effects [Breitner et al 2009]. Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.