

Management



Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Amish lethal microcephaly (MCPHA), appropriate imaging studies should be performed. Refer to general references on microcephaly for guidance; no recommendations are specific to MCPHA.

Treatment of Manifestations

 This disorder is fatal within the first year of life in children of the Old Order Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. No intervention — including mitochondrial vitamin treatment — has shown promise for treatment or amelioration in this population. However, most experience with this disorder is based on the Old Order Amish; therefore, most clinical experience is based on a single allele. It is now known that this same allele can manifest in a more mild form [Siu et al 2010]. In this case, it was shown that a ketogenic diet improved the acidosis. Seizures have occurred in some affected infants; the few children who were treated responded well to phenobarbital. Physical therapy may be considered if the affected child develops contractures or other secondary neurologic manifestations. Early intervention to stimulate and comfort the infant may be considered. Support and respite for the family may be needed during the stressful terminal irritability phase of the disease, which can last for several weeks.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Routine childhood illnesses should be managed to minimize the acidosis associated with acute illnesses. Many affected infants in the Lancaster Amish population have died during metabolic exacerbations associated with an intercurrent infectious illness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Vitamin supplementation does not appear to be effective in most patients.