http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/amrf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with action myoclonus – renal failure (AMRF) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical evaluation including cognitive function and school performance, emotional features, eye movements, coordination, handwriting, walking Examination of myoclonus including evaluation at rest, with action, and in response to stimuli EEG evaluation including photosensitivity before therapy is initiated, as it is most characteristic before the use of anticonvulsant medication Renal function Audiogram and brain stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) to assess the possibility of clinical or subclinical sensorineural hearing loss [Rubboli et al 2011, Perandones et al 2012, Perandones et al 2014] Nerve conduction velocities (NCV) and needle electromyography (EMG) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Neurologic manifestations. Symptomatic pharmacologic and psychosocial support is the mainstay of care for the neurologic manifestations. Response to treatment is variable and may deteriorate over time, necessitating rehabilitative management. Valproic acid, the first drug of choice, diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures. Clonazepam may be used as add-on therapy for the treatment of myoclonic seizures. Levetiracetam appearss to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures, and is recommended in women of child bearing age. Note: Lamotrigine is not effective in controlling the myoclonus, and may aggravate myoclonus in some patients [Guerrini et al 1998]. Renal manifestations. Renal insufficiency requires dialysis but response to treatment is poor, and renal transplantation is often necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Standard measures for prevention of aspiration pneumonia and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) should be followed; offering psychosocial support may be helpful.

Surveillance

 Lifelong clinical follow up should include the following: Neurologic Monitoring of antiepileptic drug treatment (drug levels and clinical assessment of biological effects); Periodic assessment of hearing by audiograms and BAEPs and of the peripheral nerves by NCV and needle EMG. Renal function monitoring by measurement of: blood pressure; body weight; serum concentrations of creatinine, albumin, and cholesterol; 24-hour urinary protein; and creatinine clearance

Agents/Circumstances to avoid

 Diphenylhydantoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and possibly lamotrigine increase myoclonus and should be avoided in any individual with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME), including AMRF.

Evaluation of relatives at risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Some antiepileptic drugs can lead to an increased risk of malformations, growth retardation, or neurodevelopmental disabilities in exposed fetuses. However, when pregnant women experience prolonged seizures during pregnancy, the risk of adverse fetal outcomes is increased. Therefore, it is recommended that women with a known seizure disorder continue to take antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy. Standard measures for prevention of fetopathy should be followed. These include: Possible changes of medication prior to pregnancy; Spacing of the antiepileptic drugs into four doses a day or taking extended release medications, so that the drug levels do not have significant peaks or troughs; Monitoring the dosages and drug levels of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and after the delivery. In addition, folic acid should be prescribed at 1 mg/day for all women of childbearing age and increased to 5 mg/day when planning a pregnancy (ideally 3 months prior to conception) and during the pregnancy, in order to prevent possible neural tube defects and other congenital malformations that can be associated with fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A trial of enzyme replacement therapy (ERP) with imiglucerase (60 U/kg every two weeks) in two sibs with AMRF for a period of one year did not improve the clinical status. Substrate reduction therapy (SRT) with miglustat (600 mg daily) administered to one of the two sibs resulted in a significant reduction of myoclonus [Chaves et al 2011]. Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.