

Management



Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with aniridia, the following are recommended: Evaluation of visual acuity (not easily performed in infants), the degree of iris tissue deficiency, and the presence of foveal and optic nerve hypoplasia in order to predict future visual function Evaluation for the presence and degree of corneal involvement, cataract, and glaucoma, as they are potentially treatable causes of further visual reduction; however, they may not appear until later in life. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Aniridia. Simple measures are often the most important: Regular eye examinations and correction of refractive errors. Refractive errors range from high myopia through emmetropia to high hypermetropia. Spectacle correction of refractive errors is usually recommended as use of contact lenses can be difficult in the presence of keratopathy and reduced tear production. Tinted or photochromic lenses to reduce light sensitivity associated with the large pupillary aperture. Colored, tinted or artificial pupil contact lenses may reduce light sensitivity or restore a more normal appearance to the eye but, as above, may be difficult to wear because of a poor ocular surface and tear film. Occlusion therapy for anisometropic amblyopia or strabismic amblyopia in childhood Optical low-vision aids and other devices such as closed-circuit television systems to help adults and children of school age Advice and help with schooling Social support Note: Corrective surgery for strabismus can be undertaken but is usually only for cosmetic rather than visual purposes. Lens. Cataract extraction can significantly improve visual acuity in those with severe lens opacities. It should be remembered that in aniridia visual improvement after surgery is limited by foveal hypoplasia; thus, mild to moderate lens opacities may not require surgery: Children rarely require surgery (lens aspiration or lensectomy). In adults, phacoemulsification can be successful. Note: (1) A significant number of individuals with aniridia have poor zonular stability, which increases the risk for intraoperative complications and influences the choice of surgical technique and options for IOL implantation [Schneider et al 2003]. (2) The use of various types of black diaphragm aniridic IOLs may reduce glare or light sensitivity but may be associated with a higher rate of surgical complications [Reinhard et al 2000, Menezo et al 2005, Pozdeyeva et al 2005]. 
            Intraocular pressure Glaucoma is usually initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication. Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy: Trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites (e.g., 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin C) is often used but is associated with a higher risk of treatment failure than that seen in patients with primary glaucoma who undergo the same treatment. Drainage tube surgery (with or without antimetabolites) or cyclodiode laser treatment may be necessary in refractory cases, although this treatment is increasingly being undertaken as a primary procedure [Khaw 2002, Kirwan et al 2002, Arroyave et al 2003, Lee et al 2010]. Note: (1) Glaucoma presenting in infancy is more difficult to treat. Medical treatment is generally ineffective and surgery is required. Goniotomy and trabeculotomy have a low success rate, but trabeculectomy with or without antimetabolites is often successful [Nelson et al 1984, Okada et al 2000, Khaw 2002]. (2) While goniosurgery has been suggested as a preventive measure, glaucoma never develops in a significant proportion of those with aniridia [Swanner et al 2004]. 
            Cornea Ocular surface disease can be treated medically using lubricants, mucolytics, and punctal occlusion. Note: Drops without preservatives are often required to avoid preservative-related ocular surface toxicity. When corneal opacification causes significant visual reduction, penetrating keratoplasty (PK) may be considered; however, in the presence of the significant limbal stem cell deficiency observed in aniridia, PK alone has a poor prognosis [Tiller et al 2003]. Limbal stem cell transplantation alone, preceding or concurrent with keratoplasty may be undertaken, but requires an allograft as both eyes are usually affected. This may take the form of a cultured stem cell sheet or a limbal tissue transplant [Lee et al 2008, Pauklin et al 2010]. However, this therapy is associated with a high risk of failure and lifelong systemic immunosuppression may be required to prevent rejection. Whether the use of cultured oral mucous membrane cells may have a beneficial role is as yet uncertain. Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Surgical intervention is recommended at the first sign of aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005]. Wilms tumor. See Wilms Tumor Overview.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Detection of high refractive errors and amblyopia in children will allow therapy to protect or restore the vision Early detection of ocular hypertension and glaucoma will allow the instigation of therapy to prevent the further loss of visual function. Protection of the ocular surface with lubricants and lacrimal punctual obstruction may help slow the progression of sight-threatening corneal changes.

Surveillance

 Amblyopia and refractive error. Children younger than age eight years should be monitored every four to six months for refractive errors and detection and treatment of incipient or actual amblyopia (strabismic, refractive, or sensory). Glasses and other visual aids should be provided to be able to best access educational materials. Detection of later-onset eye pathology. Individuals with aniridia should have an annual ophthalmology review to detect problems such as corneal changes and cataracts. Glaucoma. Individuals with aniridia should undergo annual glaucoma screening throughout life including: Measurement of intraocular pressure; Optic disc examination; Visual field assessment, when possible. Note: Assessment of the optic disc and visual field may be difficult in the presence of media opacities and nystagmus. Aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Individuals with aniridia with a history of multiple ocular procedures (penetrating keratoplasty, IOLs, and drainage tube insertion) should be monitored for aniridic fibrosis syndrome [Tsai et al 2005]. Wilms tumor. Children with aniridia and a WT1 deletion require renal ultrasound examinations every three months and follow-up by a pediatric oncologist until they reach age eight years. See Wilms Tumor Overview. (Those without deletion of the WT1 locus are at very low risk for Wilms tumor and do not require such screening [Grønskov et al 2001, Muto et al 2002].) Renal function. Because of the increased risk for renal impairment in WAGR syndrome, it has been suggested that renal function be evaluated every few years across the lifetime in those with WAGR syndrome, especially those with bilateral Wilms tumor [Breslow et al 2005]. Hearing. Children with WAGR syndrome and isolated aniridia may have abnormal hearing despite a normal audiogram; thus, detailed audiologic evaluation is recommended [Bamiou et al 2007].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 It has been suggested that intraocular surgery may increase the likelihood of (or exacerbate existing) keratopathy [Edén et al 2010], and repeated intraocular surgery does predispose to the rare but severe aniridic fibrosis syndrome. Patients should therefore be counseled about these risks before undertaking such surgery.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is recommended that offspring and sibs of individuals with aniridia have an eye examination in infancy and be offered the option of genetic counseling and testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Ongoing research is investigating the role and success of limbal stem cell transplantation and ocular mucous membrane cell transplantation for keratopathies associated with limbal stem cell failure, including aniridia [Polisetti & Joyce 2013, Menzel-Severing et al 2013]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.