

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with ANO5-related muscle diseases, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation and manual muscle force measurement to establish a baseline for future assessment of disease progression and the possible need for assistive devices. Muscle imaging (CT or MRI) to identify the pattern of affected muscles in detail Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The need for orthoses or other assistive devices varies individually. Most patients remain ambulatory without assistance for decades. No definitive treatments for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies exist. Management is tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. Management to prolong survival and improve quality of life includes weight control to avoid obesity, physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures, and use of mechanical aids to help ambulation and mobility. Hyperextension of the knee can be treated by splinting [Hicks et al 2011].

Surveillance

 For persons with muscle weakness, evaluate muscle strength and functional status every six to 12 months. For asymptomatic persons, evaluate less frequently.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Heavy muscle force training of weak muscles should be avoided as very high levels of CK have been measured after strenuous exercise [Milone et al 2012, Penttilä et al 2012]. The use of statins, which can induce muscle pain and worsen muscle weakness, requires extra monitoring of clinical status especially at the beginning of treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.