http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/apoe-leu167del

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Baseline lipoprotein profile, including total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time)

Platelet count

Physical examination to screen for splenomegaly. If splenomegaly is suspected, an abdominal ultrasound examination could be performed to further characterize the extent of splenomegaly.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



There are no formal management guidelines for APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorders.

Given the limited number of reports of individuals with an APOE p.Leu167del-related lipid disorder and the clinical variability among affected individuals, it is unknown which individuals with the APOE p.Leu167del variant will develop hyperlipidemia, splenomegaly, and/or severe thrombocytopenia. However, the authors postulate that untreated hyperlipidemia may worsen the phenotype.

Hyperlipidemia. Discussion of the management of hyperlipidemia is beyond the scope of this article. For more in-depth discussion on management, see the 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults [Stone et al 2014] (full text). It should be noted that using risk prediction models in genetic dyslipidemia may markedly underestimate an individual’s risk of developing ASCVD.

Treatment for individuals with documented ASCVD or at high risk of developing ASCVD begins with lifestyle changes (adherence to a heart-healthy diet, exercise, tobacco avoidance, maintenance of a healthy weight). Medical therapy may include a statin (generally the mainstay of therapy to reduce ASCVD risk), a fibrate, high-dose fish oil, and/or niacin. If present, diabetes mellitus should be well controlled, as uncontrolled diabetes can worsen hypertriglyceridemia.

In patients with fasting triglyceride levels:

>500 mg/dL, the first goal of treatment should be to lower triglyceride levels to prevent pancreatitis.

>1000 mg/dL, elimination of fat from the diet is essential.

<500-1000 mg/dL, the focus may shift to the avoidance of high glycemic carbohydrates. Additionally, if identified, excessive intake of sucrose- or fructose-containing food and beverages should be limited.

Although caloric restriction with the goal of weight loss can also be helpful in lowering triglyceride levels, it should not be the primary focus in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Splenomegaly. Although no interventions are known to prevent disease progression, it has been suggested that treatment of dyslipidemia may prevent development of splenomegaly [Okorodudu et al 2013].

Splenectomy should be avoided as it may worsen hyperlipidemia. Patients who underwent splenectomy were reported to have markedly worsened hypertriglyceridemia after splenectomy [Nguyen et al 2000, Faivre et al 2005, Rahalkar et al 2008, Okorodudu et al 2013].

Liver function abnormalities and thrombocytopenia should be managed by specialists in gastroenterology and hematology, respectively.

Liver function abnormalities. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Persistent nausea

Vomiting

Abdominal pain

Yellow discoloration of the skin

Thrombocytopenia. Counsel patients to notify their healthcare provider regarding any of the following signs:

Bruising

Bleeding

Any new petechial rash

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Patients with splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.

Surveillance



There are no formal guidelines regarding surveillance. The authors suggest obtaining the following:

Lipoprotein profile one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). If abnormal, follow at regular intervals for treatment of hyperlipidemia.

Liver function panel, albumin, INR (prothrombin time) one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients regarding the signs of liver dysfunction.

Platelet count one year after diagnosis and every two to five years thereafter (if normal). Counsel patients to notify their provider immediately in the event of bleeding or petechial rash.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid the following:

Splenectomy as it worsens the hypertriglyceridemia

For those with splenomegaly: contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk of inheriting the APOE p.Leu167del variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures and surveillance.

Molecular genetic testing can be used to determine if a family member has inherited the APOE p.Leu167del variant.

If the APOE p.Leu167del variant is found, testing for the presence of an APOE e2 allele (see Diagnosis) is recommended.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



A woman with the APOE p.Leu167del variant should have triglyceride levels measured when pregnancy is identified and at least one to two times later in pregnancy as severe hypertriglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) in pregnancy increases the risk for pancreatitis and fetal and maternal death. Of note, hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy.

Treatment of hypertriglyceridemia in pregnant women is similar to that for nonpregnant individuals. The goal of therapy is to achieve fasting triglyceride levels below 500 mg/dL (see Treatment of Manifestations regarding dietary advice to lower triglycerides).

If acceptable triglyceride levels are not achieved in a pregnant woman with dietary changes alone, medical therapy may be required.

Medical management in pregnancy usually consists of fibrates (pregnancy category C). Prior to taking a medication during pregnancy, a pregnant woman should discuss with her physician the risks and benefits of the specific medication being prescribed.

Due to theoretic concerns regarding the role of cholesterol in embryonic development and the fact that hypercholesterolemia alone does not present a risk in pregnancy, statin therapy is contraindicated during pregnancy. Women who are taking a statin should discontinue the use of this medication prior to conception, if possible, or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. However, inadvertent exposure early in gestation is unlikely to lead to a significantly increased risk for adverse fetal outcomes [Pollack et al 2005].

Fish oil could be considered, but could alter prostaglandin metabolism in the fetus.

Severe hypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis can require apheresis and use of intravenous insulin and glucose. In these circumstances, consultation with a lipid specialist is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.