http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/arg1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arginase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Plasma ammonia concentration

Plasma arginine concentration

Developmental assessment

Complete neurologic evaluation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The management of individuals with arginase deficiency should closely mirror that described in the Urea Cycle Disorders Overview, with one caveat: individuals with arginase deficiency are less prone to episodes of hyperammonemia and when present, hyperammonemia is more likely to respond to conservative management such as intravenous fluid administration. However, the individual who is comatose and encephalopathic is at high risk for severe brain damage and should be treated accordingly. Arginine supplementation is obviously contraindicated.

Infants should be managed by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a specialized center. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following:

Rapidly reducing plasma ammonia concentration. The best way to reduce plasma ammonia concentration quickly is by dialysis; the faster the flow rate of dialysate, the faster the clearance of ammonia from the plasma. The method employed depends on the affected individual's circumstances and available resources. Fastest is use of pump-driven dialysis, in which an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) pump is used to drive a hemodialysis (HD) machine. Other methods are “routine” hemodialysis, hemofiltration (both arteriovenous and venovenous), peritoneal dialysis, and continuous-drainage peritoneal dialysis. Dialysis can usually be discontinued when plasma ammonia concentration falls below 200 µmol/L. Affected individuals often experience a "rebound" hyperammonemia that may require further dialysis, although rarely is this level of intervention required in arginase deficiency.

Pharmacologic management to allow alternative pathway excretion of excess nitrogen. Blocking of ammonia production and the need for ureagenesis is accomplished by diminishing catabolism with adequate non-protein calories and with a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. A loading dose of the drugs is followed by maintenance administration, initially intravenously and later orally when the individual is stable. Intravenous forms of these medications are now approved by the FDA and are generally available.

Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of calories supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, calories should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free oral formula, such as Mead Johnson 80056® or Ross Formula ProPhree®; however, complete restriction of protein should not exceed 24-48 hours, as depletion of essential amino acids may result in endogenous protein catabolism and nitrogen release. High parenteral glucose plus insulin can be used acutely to diminish endogenous protein catabolism. Individuals should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. In early treatment, feeding 1.0 to 1.5 g of protein/kg body weight with 50% as essential amino acids is advised, particularly for infants. Older children require and tolerate lower protein intake.

Reducing the risk of neurologic damage. Cautionary measures are physiologic stabilization with intravenous fluids (10% dextrose with one-quarter normal saline) and cardiac pressors as necessary while avoiding overhydration and resulting cerebral edema, the duration of which correlates with poor neurologic outcome.

Older individuals are at risk for episodes of hyperammonemia and should continue to be managed by a specialist in metabolic disorders.

Seizures are easily treated by phenobarbital or carbamazepine.

Acute intercurrent illnesses should be treated promptly with special dietary intervention or hospitalization to minimize the effect of catabolism.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



The goal should be maintenance of plasma arginine concentration as near normal as possible, consistent with the individual's tolerance for the following interventions:

Restriction of dietary protein through use of specialized formulas. In the best of circumstances, the affected individual should be on the minimal protein intake needed to maintain protein biosynthetic function, growth, and normal or near-normal plasma amino acid concentrations. Half or more of dietary protein should be an arginine-free essential amino acid mixture.

Administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate/glycerolphenylbutyrate at a dose of 350-600 mg/kg/day in patients weighing less than 20 kg, or 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day in larger patients. The medicines are to be taken in equally divided amounts with each meal or feeding (i.e., 3-6x/day) [De Deyn et al 1997, Iyer et al 1998, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium].

Liver transplantation eliminates the hyperargininemia and presumably the risk for hyperammonemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Most individuals with arginase deficiency have persistent hepatic synthetic function abnormalities; particularly, elevated prothrombin time.

In some circumstances hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis have developed and have either been fatal or required a liver transplant.

Arginine is the substrate for nitric oxide synthase; however, abnormalities in this pathway have not been described.

The spasticity may be reactive and instances of marked improvement with Botox® have been described.

Surveillance



Patients are seen at regular intervals determined by their age and degree of metabolic stability.

Infants should be seen monthly or more frequently, with monitoring of plasma concentration of ammonia and amino acids, growth, and neurologic function. If treatment fails to arrest the neurologic deterioration or if spasticity is symptomatic, appropriate orthopedic and physical therapy interventions are indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Valproic acid is to be avoided as it exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle defects and other inborn errors of metabolism [Scaglia & Lee 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Because the age of onset of arginase deficiency is delayed beyond the newborn period and the manifestations can vary, the genetic status of all sibs of a proband (especially the younger ones) should be clarified so that morbidity can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment in those who are affected. Testing methods can include any one of the following:

Plasma quantitative amino acid analysis

Molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific ARG1 pathogenic variants are known)

Analysis of enzymatic activity in red blood cells

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The authors are not aware of any instance in which pregnancy has been reported in a woman with arginase deficiency; therefore, no inference can be drawn about the safety of pregnancy for the mother or the fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Immunizations can be provided on the usual schedule.

Multivitamin and fluoride supplementation are indicated for all affected individuals.

Appropriate use of antipyretics is indicated. Ibuprofen is preferred over acetaminophen.