

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency the following evaluations are recommended: Complete neurocognitive evaluation Evaluation for evidence of hepatic involvement including hepatomegaly, hepatitis, and signs of liver failure Plotting of the systolic and diastolic blood pressure on the centile charts based on age and stature

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment involves rapid control of hyperammonemia during metabolic decompensations and long-term management to help prevent episodes of hyperammonemia and long-term complications. During acute hyperammonemic episodes severe enough to cause neurologic symptoms, treatment includes the following [Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001] (full text): Discontinuing oral protein intake Supplementing oral intake with intravenous lipids, glucose and intravenous insulin if needed (with close monitoring of blood glucose) to promote anabolism. Intravenous nitrogen scavenging therapy. A loading dose of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate in 25 to 35 mL/kg of 10% dextrose solution given intravenously over a 90-minute period is recommended. This is followed by a sustained intravenous infusion of 600 mg/kg L-arginine-HCL and 250 mg/kg each of sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate over a 24-hour period. When available, plasma concentrations of ammonia scavenging drugs should be monitored to avoid toxicity. In the absence of drug levels, a serum anion gap of greater than 15 mEq/L and an anion gap that has risen more than 6 mEq/L could indicate drug accumulation and increased risk for toxicity. Ammonia levels usually normalize with therapy; however failure to decrease ammonia levels with medical therapy mandates prompt institution of hemodialysis. Hemodialysis is the preferred method for rapid reduction of ammonia in patients who do not respond to nitrogen scavenging therapy. Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis (CAVHD) or continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) with flow rates greater than 40 to 60 mL/min is optimal. Some centers use extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with hemodialysis. Although this combination of techniques provides very high flow rates (170-200 mL/min) and rapidly reduces ammonia levels, morbidity is greater because of the need for surgical vascular access. Nitrogen scavenging therapy needs to be continued during hemodialysis. It is the authors’ policy to continue nitrogen scavenging therapy for 12-24 hours after the patient has been stabilized and is able to accept enteral feeds and medications [Author, personal observation].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Dietary restriction of protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays of long-term management. Diet. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for dietary protein is higher than the minimum needed for normal growth and, hence, most children with a urea cycle disorder (UCD) can receive less than the RDA of protein and still maintain adequate growth. To achieve this end [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]: Plasma concentrations of ammonia, branched chain amino acids, and arginine should be maintained within normal ranges. Serum plasma total protein and prealbumin levels should be maintained within the low normal ranges. Plasma glutamine concentration should be maintained at less than 1000 µmol/L if possible [normal range for individuals ages two to 18 years is 266-746 µmol/L]. Some of the correlations between compliance with the prescribed diet and outcome are contradictory. Although in some patients dietary therapy along with arginine supplementation have been shown to reverse the abnormalities of hair, to improve cognitive outcome, and to reverse abnormalities on EEG [Coryell et al 1964, Kvedar et al 1991, Ficicioglu et al 2009], in many dietary therapy has not been shown to influence the outcome of liver disease or cognitive impairment [Mori et al 2002, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. Arginine base supplementation. The doses of arginine base routinely recommended are 400-700 mg/kg/day in persons weighing less than 20 kg and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day in those weighing more than 20 kg. Supplementation with arginine base helps replenish this amino acid (which is deficient in persons with ASL deficiency) and promote excretion of nitrogen through the urea cycle as argininosuccinate. Arginine base is preferred for long-term chronic treatment as the chronic use of arginine hydrochloride may lead to hyperchloremic acidosis. Arginine base supplementation has been shown to reverse the hair changes; however, its efficacy in preventing the chronic complications is not known. While evidence suggests that arginine base supplementation may prevent metabolic decompensations in those with severe early-onset disease, long-term follow up of persons identified through newborn screening programs did not detect a difference in outcomes between those who were supplemented with arginine base and those who were not [Batshaw et al 2001, Ficicioglu et al 2009, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010]. As the renal clearance of argininosuccinic acid is high, increasing its production through arginine supplementation effectively increases waste nitrogen disposal, thereby decreasing the risk of hyperammonemia. However, because of the theoretic risk of argininosuccinic acid toxicity on hepatocytes, reducing the amount of supplemental arginine by initiating nitrogen scavenging therapy may have merits. Oral nitrogen scavenging therapy. Patients who have had frequent metabolic decompensations or episodes of elevated ammonia despite being on a protein-restricted diet and arginine base supplementation are candidates for oral nitrogen scavenging therapy, an alternative pathway therapy in which sodium benzoate and sodium phenyl butyrate stimulate the excretion of nitrogen in the form of hippuric acid and phenylacetylglutamine, respectively [Batshaw et al 2001]. The dose of sodium phenyl butyrate is 400-600 mg/kg/day for persons weighing up to 20 kg and 9-13 g/m2/day for those weighing more than 20 kg; the dose of sodium benzoate is 250-500 mg/kg/day. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Long-term correction of ASL deficiency in the liver can be accomplished by OLT [Lee & Goss 2001] which has resulted in “biochemical cure” [Robberecht et al 2006, Marble et al 2008, Newnham et al 2008]. However, OLT does not correct the arginine deficiency or elevation of argininosuccinic acid at the tissue level, two abnormalities thought to account for the long-term complications of ASL deficiency. Thus, the authors have recommended OLT only in patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations that are resistant to conventional medical therapy, or in patients who develop cirrhosis with associated metabolic decompensations [Author, personal observations].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Salt restriction and use of antihypertensives are indicated in those with elevated blood pressure. Antihypertensives may be tried although their efficacy has not been established. Electrolyte (potassium) supplementation is appropriate when indicated.

Surveillance

 Regular monitoring of the concentration of plasma amino acids to identify deficiency of essential amino acids as well as impending hyperammonemia is indicated. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical scenario, but need to be more frequent in neonates and in those with frequent metabolic decompensations. The authors prefer to evaluate neonates every one to two weeks, infants between age two months and one year every one to three months, and children older than age two years every three to four months. Early signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes in older individuals include mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, ankle clonus, and elevated plasma concentrations of glutamine, alanine, and glycine. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration in such individuals. Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic dietician and clinical biochemical geneticist is preferred when possible. Annual measurement of blood pressure using the appropriate-sized cuff and plotting the centile values for age and stature is indicated. Periodic evaluation of liver function tests may be necessary; the appropriate frequency is unknown. Periodic evaluation of serum electrolytes is appropriate; the frequency unknown.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Excess protein intake Large boluses of protein or amino acids Less than recommended intake of protein Prolonged fasting or starvation Obvious exposure to communicable diseases Valproic acid Intravenous steroids Hepatotoxic drugs in those with hepatic involvement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Evaluation of at-risk sibs (either by molecular genetic testing if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known or by biochemical testing) shortly after birth can reduce morbidity by permitting early diagnosis and treatment of those who are affected. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.