http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/arterial-t

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS), the following evaluations are recommended: Echocardiography. Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size [Roman et al 1989]. MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to evaluate arterial tortuosity and identify arterial aneurysms and/or stenoses throughout the arterial tree Lung function test and imaging (radiographs, CT-scan) when emphysema is suspected Skeletal radiographs depending on the clinical findings (e.g., scoliosis). Consideration of bone densitometry based on patient history (fractures), sex, habits (smoking, alcohol consumption, sedentary life style) and age Evaluation of the palate to identify patients with a highly arched palate, bifid uvula, or cleft palate who may be at risk for orthodontic complications including dental crowding (see Surveillance). Patients with bifid uvula and cleft palate may be at risk for feeding difficulties. Eye examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders that includes: refraction and correction of refractive errors, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia; specific assessment for keratoconus, keratoglobus, and corneal thinning Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Individuals with ATS benefit from a coordinated approach of multidisciplinary specialists including a clinical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. If feasible, individuals with ATS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition. Cardiovascular. In managing the cardiovascular features of ATS the following should be kept in mind: Clinical history studies are limited. Vascular disease is widespread and requires repeated imaging of the complete arterial tree from head to pelvis by MRA or CTA. It is currently not known whether arterial dissections or thrombosis is the main cause of ischemic events. As is common practice in the treatment of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, hemodynamic stress on the arterial wall can be reduced through use of beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and angiotensin II receptor 1 (ATIIR1) antagonists such as losartan, when titrated to effect. While ATIIR1 antagonists may have an additional beneficial effect by attenuating TGFβ signaling in the arterial wall, the role of TGFβ signaling in ATS is unclear (see Molecular Genetic Pathogenesis). Importantly, the efficacy of these treatments has not been established in ATS and caution is warranted when using blood pressure-lowering medications in the presence of arterial stenosis (anatomic or functional due to severe tortuosity) – especially renal artery stenosis, as these medications may confer a risk for renal failure. Aneurysms and focal stenoses are amenable to surgical intervention. For aortic root aneurysms, a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation can be used. No data are available on the aortic diameter at which intervention is appropriate; thus, decision making should also include assessment of the family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit. For focal stenoses of the aorta and aortic branches, surgery, catheterization, or a hybrid of the two (transcatheter-surgical procedure) may be used [Santoro et al 2008, Vicchio et al 2008]. Pulmonary artery stenosis resulting in pulmonary hypertension may be treated by catheterization and/or surgery. Skeletal. Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist. Surgical stabilization of the spine may be required. At the patient’s discretion, orthotics may be used for severe pes planus. Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated. Eye. The ocular manifestations of ATS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is essential, and evaluation of keratoconus is necessary. 
            Other Hernias may recur after surgical repair. A supporting mesh can be used in the surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk. Careful postoperative evaluation of (surgical) wounds is necessary as wound healing may be delayed. Note that stitches should avoid traction and should remain in place for approximately ten days. Emphysema is treated symptomatically. Of note, positive pressure ventilation may cause emphysematous changes to progress. Individuals with ATS can and should remain active with aerobic activities (e.g., swimming) performed in moderation.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Regular cardiovascular follow up with echocardiography, and MRI- angiography or CT scan with 3D reconstructions from head to pelvis starting at birth or at the time of diagnosis, and repeated at regular intervals depending on the initial findings and the disease course. Under stable conditions (in the absence of aneurysms, stenosis, or dilatation of the aortic root), echocardiography could be performed on a yearly basis and MRI angiography or CT scan at least every three years in older children and adults. Pulmonary hypertension may develop secondary to pulmonary artery stenosis, requiring regular echocardiographic follow-up. Pulmonary follow up. Increased vigilance for emphysema is appropriate Routine follow-up for refractive errors and keratoconus, when possible with an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders Evaluation for orthopedic complications especially during periods of rapid growth (first two years of life and during puberty), e.g., serial radiographs to evaluate for progression of scoliosis Orthodontic follow-up, especially during eruption of permanent dentition because of the increased risk of dental crowding secondary to palatal abnormalities

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise Scuba diving because of pressure differences and the need for positive pressure ventilation Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants Use of tobacco, which increases cardiovascular risk and the likelihood of premature skin aging Sun tanning, which increases the likelihood of premature skin aging

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband with ATS in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of surveillance and preventive measures. If the SLC2A10 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, at-risk sibs should be evaluated for signs of the disorder (clinically and with echocardiography or more elaborative vascular imaging, as clinical symptoms may be very subtle) to clarify their genetic status. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Data on the management of women with arterial tortuosity syndrome during pregnancy and delivery are limited with only three pregnancies reported (in 2 women) to date. All pregnancies had a good outcome; however, one woman experienced pelvic organ prolapse following the vaginal delivery of her first child [Castori et al 2012]. The other woman, who delivered without complications at 34 weeks’ gestation by elective cesarean section, was started on acetylsalicylic acid to prevent thromboembolic events eight days post partum [Allen et al 2009]. Preconception counseling should include possible pregnancy-associated risks to the mother and medication-associated risks to the fetus. The risks to the mother are mainly those of aortic root dilatation and dissection. As is common practice in management in Marfan syndrome, elective aortic repair using a valve-sparing procedure (if possible) could be performed prior to conception when the aortic root diameter reaches 45 mm. Currently, no data are available on a possible risk for pregnancy-associated uterine rupture (as is seen in Loeys-Dietz syndrome and EDS, vascular type). Prenatal and postnatal physiotherapy can minimize the risk for pelvic organ prolapse. Peripartum intensive monitoring is advised. Pregnancies should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician and a cardiologist familiar with this or related conditions. Increased surveillance of the aortic root and previously detected aneurysms during pregnancy and following delivery is recommended because of the increased risk for progressive dilatation. Echocardiography is suggested every two to three months from conception until six months post partum. Delivery should be planned in a center with experience with this or related conditions. It is currently unclear whether caesarean section or vaginal delivery is preferable. Medication-associated risks to the fetus. The effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) on the fetus in the first trimester of pregnancy are incompletely understood; however, use in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can lead to fetal death and damage. Angiotensin II receptor 1 antagonists (ATIIR1) such as losartan are thought to lead to similar fetal effects as ACE-I, including fetal damage, oligohydramnios, and fetal death, if taken during the second and/or third trimesters of pregnancy. Ideally, women with ATS who are planning a pregnancy should transition to a different antihypertensive medication (e.g., a beta-blocker) prior to conception. Women with ATS who become pregnant while taking an ACE-I or an ATIIR1 should be transitioned to a different antihypertensive medication as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. Women undergoing a non-valve sparing aortic root replacement before pregnancy should be advised of the risk associated with anticoagulant therapy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.