

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Arts syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation for manifestations of hypotonia, ataxia, presence/absence of tendon reflexes Audiometry for evidence of hearing loss Eye examination for evidence of optic atrophy Assessment of intellectual abilities Analysis of the family pedigree for other possible affected individuals and carrier females

Treatment of Manifestations

 Intellectual disability. An individualized educational support program tailored to the patient’s needs and based on assessment of cognitive abilities should be provided. Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management. Cochlear implantation in the two affected Australian males was associated with improved communication skills. Optic atrophy. No treatment is available. Ataxia. See Hereditary Ataxias, Management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Because of immune system compromise in males with Arts syndrome, the following are recommended: An annual influenza immunization Routine immunizations against other common childhood infections (e.g. measles, mumps)

Surveillance

 Cognitive impairment appears to be non-progressive, but repeat neuropsychologic assessments are recommended to help guide educational support programs. Although the sensorineural deafness appears to be static (albeit very severe), regular audiologic assessment is recommended so that educational support can be optimized. Visual impairment appears to be progressive; thus, regular evaluation by an ophthalmologist is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Females at risk of being carriers should be evaluated for the family-specific PRPS1 pathogenic variant because clinical manifestations observed in carriers may only become apparent at a later age. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation could theoretically alleviate some of the symptoms of Arts syndrome by providing an oral source purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. An adult with HPRT deficiency has been reported to benefit neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006]. An open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome is continuing [J Christodoulou et al, unpublished data; approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia]. Oral SAM supplementation is presently set at 30 mg/kg/day. The brothers appear to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however, slight deterioration in their vision has been noted. Mildly affected carrier females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.