http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/arvd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the following evaluations are recommended if not performed at the time of diagnosis: ECG Echocardiogram and/or MRI, depending on the expertise of the imaging center Noninvasive monitoring. Cardiac rhythm can be monitored noninvasively through Holter or event monitoring, and this is an effective means of detecting ventricular ectopy including nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Implantable loop recorders can also be used in individuals with ARVC for whom arrhythmia risks are not clear. Signal-averaged ECGs may also be useful [Philips & Cheng 2016]. Electrophysiology study to assess the risk for ventricular arrhythmias and the appropriateness of device insertion (e.g., an implantable cardioverter defibrillator). A cardiac catheter ablation of tissue causing abnormal rhythms can be performed during the electrophysiology study; however, ablation may not be effective long term in individuals with ARVC because of the multiple sites of primary ventricular tachycardias.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Affected individuals should be monitored by a cardiologist who is knowledgeable about ARVC. Management of individuals with ARVC is complicated by its variable course and the limited specificity of clinical findings to predict arrhythmia risk. Management should be individualized and based on the specific results of detailed clinical and genetic investigation. Management is focused on prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). Beta blockers are considered first line therapy. Although their efficacy has not been shown in a randomized, prospective clinical trial, beta blockers are recommended [Yancy et al 2013, Corrado et al 2015]. Amiodarone may also be effective [Corrado et al 2015]. The mainstay of arrhythmia prevention relies on device insertion and management. Risk-benefit analysis for device insertion and management should be balanced against clinical risk stratification for arrhythmias. Education regarding sudden death risk to affected adults and parents of affected children is an important aspect of management. Physical exercise ‒ specifically regular, intense exercise ‒ is thought to promote ARVC and its associated arrhythmias. Therefore, those with fully diagnosed ARVC are usually recommended to reduce or eliminate prolonged exercise and participation in competitive sports [James et al 2013]. Supporting this idea that intense exercise hastens the onset of ARVC, Ruwald et al [2015] reported that a history of participation in competitive sports was associated with an earlier age of onset. These findings support the notion that intense exercise can induce ARVC even in the absence of an identifiable genetic predisposition. Heart transplantation is considered when ARVC has progressed to right or left ventricular heart failure. Severe diffuse biventricular involvement simulating dilated cardiomyopathy and requiring heart transplantation appears to be rare.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Prospective randomized trials have not been conducted in ARVC for the prevention of arrhythmias. Management relies on personalized recommendations based on clinical assessment. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). Observational studies support that ICD placement is effective in reducing the risk for sudden cardiac death in ARVC. ICD placement should be considered in anyone with a clinical diagnosis of ARVC. Corrado et al [2010] reported results of ICD implantation in 106 individuals with ARVC who met task force criteria. Device placement was based on the presence of arrhythmia risk factor defined as syncope, family history of sudden death, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and whether ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation was inducible in an electrophysiology done at the time of device implant. Over the follow-up interval of 58 months, 24% of subjects had an appropriate ICD discharge. Syncope was found to predict appropriate ICD discharge. The advisability of placing an ICD for primary prevention remains a question of debate [Zorzi et al 2016]. The ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association) and European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, which are based on experience and previously published reports recommend as a Class I indication (i.e., procedure/treatment should be performed) ICD implantation for prevention of sudden cardiac death in individuals with documented sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation who have a reasonable expectation of survival with good functional status for more than one year. Class II indications (i.e., it is reasonable to perform procedure/treatment) for ICD implantation include extensive disease (e.g., left ventricular involvement), family members with sudden death, or undiagnosed syncope when ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia cannot be excluded as the cause of syncope while the individual was on optimal medical therapy [Tracy et al 2013, Priori et al 2015].

Surveillance

 Screening for degree of cardiac involvement in persons diagnosed with ARVC is essential to ascertain severity and disease progression over time. Screening recommendations: ECG, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms Echocardiogram, annually or more frequently depending on symptoms Holter monitoring, event monitoring, implantable loop recorder Exercise stress testing Cardiac MRI, with frequency depending on symptoms and findings

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with ARVC are discouraged from participating in vigorous athletic activity including competitive athletics because of the strain caused on the right heart [Corrado et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to relatives at risk for ARVC (even those age <18 years) if the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Predictive testing should be offered in the context of formal genetic counseling. Note: The initial molecular testing in the proband should encompass ARVC-related genes as a gene panel because of the high rate of digenic heterozygosity (a heterozygous pathogenic variant in two different genes) and to increase the yield of genetic testing [Barahona-Dussault et al 2010, Bauce et al 2010, Christensen et al 2010, Xu et al 2010, Nakajima et al 2012]. Once one (or more) family-specific variant(s) have been identified, targeted variant testing is performed in relatives. Guidelines exist for screening for cardiac involvement in asymptomatic first-degree relatives at risk for ARVC [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]: If the family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified in the asymptomatic at-risk relative, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended yearly between ages ten and 50 years. If genetic testing has not been performed or did not identify a pathogenic variant in an affected family member, screening for cardiac involvement is recommended for asymptomatic at-risk first-degree relatives every three to five years after age ten years. Screening for cardiac involvement comprises the following [Hershberger et al 2009, Charron et al 2010]: Medical history with attention to heart failure symptoms, arrhythmia, presyncope, and syncope ECG, with consideration of signal-averaged electrocardiogram Echocardiogram Holter monitoring Cardiac MRI At-risk first-degree relatives with any abnormal clinical screening tests for cardiac involvement should be considered for repeat clinical screening in one year [Hershberger et al 2009]. Children younger than age ten are not usually screened, as ARVC features are not usually seen in children before this age. See Hamilton & Fidler [2009] for a review of screening for ARVC in the young. A recent MRI study of ARVC in the young suggested that MRI increases sensitivity but that it was still unusual, even with this more sensitive modality, to see ARVC in children before age ten years [Etoom et al 2015]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Case reports describe successful outcomes in women with ARVC who are pregnant and give birth [Agir et al 2014, Cozzolino et al 2014]. Specific guidelines for managing ARVC in pregnancy have not been developed, but affected individuals need to be monitored by a multidisciplinary team.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.