http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ataxia-telangiectas

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic consultation with attention to ataxia, including assessment of extraocular movement Assessment of speech re communication and swallowing re risk of aspiration Nutrition and feeding assessment Immune status of specific parameters that were previously aberrant (e.g., immunoglobulin levels, B/T cell levels, T cell function) Chest x-ray and pulmonary function for baseline CBC with differential Diabetes screen (urinalysis, fasting blood glucose concentration, Hgb A1C) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Neurologic. Supportive therapy can minimize drooling, choreoathetosis, myoclonus/tremor, and ataxia. However, individual responses to specific medications (e.g., amantadine and 4-aminopyridine) and to treatments used for myoclonus vary [Perlman et al 2012, Nissenkorn et al 2013, Shaikh et al 2013, van Egmond et al 2015]. Thus, it is recommended that treatment options be discussed with an experienced neurologist. Early and continued physical therapy can minimize the risk for contractures (which appear in almost all individuals with time and often lead to other problems such as pressure sores and pain) and scoliosis (which can, for example, be the consequence of prolonged sitting in a wheelchair – particularly the tendency to lean on the same elbow). Although steroids are reported to temporarily improve the neurologic symptoms of A-T in children, the symptoms reappear within days of their discontinuation [Gatti 1985, Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. (See also Therapies Under Investigation.) Immunodeficiency. IVIG replacement therapy should be considered for individuals with frequent and severe infections and very low IgG levels [Nowak-Wegrzyn et al 2004]. Pulmonary. The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which can contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in persons with A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text). Cancer. Because cells from individuals with A-T are 30% more sensitive to ionizing radiation than cells from controls, conventional doses of ionizing radiation are potentially lethal in individuals with A-T. Thus, the use of radiotherapy and some radiomimetic chemotherapeutic agents should be administered carefully and monitored closely [Schütte et al 2016]. Doses of some chemotherapeutic agents are often reduced by 25%-50% and longer recovery periods between treatments are considered to allow for the slower DNA repair that occurs in A-T [Schütte et al 2016].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Pulmonary and nutritional complications of dysphagia are common. Often, gastrostomy tube feedings are recommended to manage these comorbidities. Children with disorders with predictable progression (like A-T) and impaired swallowing may benefit from early rather than late placement of a feeding tube [Lefton-Greif et al 2000]. Anesthesia carries unique potential risks in persons with A-T because of impaired coordination of swallowing, increased risk of aspiration, reduced respiratory capacity, and propensity to infections [McGrath-Morrow et al 2008]. In a recent review, 24% of patients required supplemental oxygen (maximum duration 24 hours) post anesthesia; mild postoperative hypothermia was also relatively common [Lockman et al 2012].

Surveillance

 The European Respiratory Society (ERS) has prepared extensive guidelines for the multidisciplinary respiratory management of A-T, emphasizing the need for monitoring of immune function, recurrent infection, pulmonary function, swallowing, nutrition, and scoliosis, all of which could contribute to increased respiratory morbidity and mortality in A-T [Bhatt et al 2015] (full text). Parents should be counseled to monitor for – and report to a physician – the early warning signs of malignancy (which can occur at any age) including weight loss, bruising, and localized pain or swelling. Periodic CBCs are warranted. Immune status needs to be monitored if severe recurrent infections occur or immunomodulatory therapy is in progress.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Research suggests the following: Antioxidants (e.g., vitamin E or alpha-lipoic acid) are recommended, although no formal testing for efficacy has been conducted in individuals with A-T. Alpha-lipoic acid has the theoretic advantage of crossing the blood-brain barrier and improving mitochondrial function in A-T cells [Ambrose et al 2007]. In culture, certain aminoglycoside antibiotics can induce small amounts of full-length ATM protein and return ATM functions to A-T cells with primary nonsense pathogenic variants [Lai et al 2004, Gatti 2012]. Non-aminoglycoside read-through chemicals, identified by a high-throughput screen of 70,000 compounds, induce ATM protein in A-T cells [Du & Gatti 2009]; and chemical derivatives of those compounds – such as RTC13, RTC14, RTC216, RTC202, RTC204, and RTC219 – have produced encouraging results in other diseases besides A-T (e.g., a mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy [Kayali et al 2012], epidermolysis bullosa keratinocytes, xeroderma pigmentosum [Kuschal et al 2013], and retinal cells from amaurotic congenital blindness [Pillers et al 2015]. Thus, it is anticipated that in future patients will be candidates for mutation-targeted therapeutic trials, which will be based on the class of pathogenic variants present and not on the specific gene itself. These drugs will be grouped according to the class of pathogenic variants for which they can address/correct the underlying molecular pathogenicity. – rendering them potentially useful for treating a molecular spectrum of genetic diseases based on the class of pathogenic variant rather than the disease itself [Du et al 2007, Hu & Gatti 2008, Du & Gatti 2009, Jung et al 2011, Gatti 2012, Du et al 2013, Lavin 2013]. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (AMOs) induce substantial corrections of ATM protein in cell lines with certain types of ATM splicing variants [Du et al 2007, Du et al 2009]. AMOs remain active in A-T cells for more than 14 days. In animal studies, they are well tolerated when a cell-penetrating protein moiety is added to the AMO. Groundbreaking clinical trials using AMO to treat spinal muscular atrophy – and a particular splicing variant that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy – are in progress. Amlexanox (Aphthasol®) is another non-aminoglycoside (similar to ataluren [PTC124]) read-through compound for nonsense pathogenic variants that is being tested. To date, it is approved as an ointment for mouth ulcers and is prescribed primarily by dentists [Loudon 2013]. Dexamethasone and betamethasone, but not methylprednisolone, have been reported to decrease neurologic manifestations in A-T [Buoni et al 2006, Broccoletti et al 2008, Gatti & Perlman 2009]. However, the neurologic improvement, which is also accompanied by signs of steroid toxicity, disappears within days of discontinuation of the steroids. Additional studies are in progress. Delivery of the steroids by loading them into erythrocytes affords much better dose control and delivery at 0.001% of previous steroid doses [Leuzzi et al 2015]. In a formal clinical trial in progress, betamethasone is being delivered within autologous red cells that have been infused with doses 100-1000 times lower than what was previously manageable, thereby mitigating most side effects of chronic steroid therapy. Use of insulin-like growth factor 1(IGF-1) treatment for A-T has been suggested [Fernandez et al 2005]. More recently, Voss et al [2014] showed that the GH/IGF-1 axis was perturbed in 58.3% of individuals with A-T (age range 2 to 9 years). A clinical trial is presently underway. Manganese-containing superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimics have a radioprotective effect on A-T cells [Pollard et al 2009]. A recent report provides compelling evidence that treatment of a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with a copper-chaperone for SOD extends by 500 days the life expectancy of mice that normally die within three months [Williams et al 2016]. This potential advance in treating motor degeneration may be applicable to A-T as well. Mutation-targeted therapy for other rare genetic diseases has been encouraging [Wilschanski et al 2003, Welch et al 2007, Du et al 2009]. The number of potential disease targets for read-through therapy exceeds 8000 [Keeling & Bedwell 2011]. It is also estimated that 10%-15% of human pathogenic variants are nonsense variants [Mort et al 2008], predicting investigation of many millions of potential drug candidates. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Any child younger than age five years with malignancy should be evaluated for A-T before starting chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy since conventional doses of either can be fatal in A-T.