http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/b-thal

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 The initial step following diagnosis of β-thalassemia in an individual is to distinguish between those who have thalassemia intermedia (requiring intermittent transfusions on an as-needed basis) from those with thalassemia major (who need a regular transfusion program). See Establishing the Diagnosis. The following should be included in the investigations when deciding whom to transfuse: Confirmed diagnosis of thalassemia Hemoglobin level <7 g/dl on 2 occasions, > 2 weeks apart (excluding all other contributory causes such as infections) OR, presence of the following features, regardless of hemoglobin level: Facial changes Poor growth Bony fractures Clinically significant extramedullary hematopoiesis.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Comprehensive reviews of the management of thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia have been published by Thalassemia International Federation [Taher et al 2013, Cappellini et al 2014] and are available at the TIF web site. Thalassemia major. Regular transfusions correct the anemia, suppress erythropoiesis, and inhibit increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron. Before starting the transfusions, it is absolutely necessary to carry out hepatitis B vaccination and perform extensive red blood cell antigen typing, including Rh, Kell, Kidd, and Duffy and serum immunoglobulin determination — the latter of which detects individuals with IgA deficiency who need special (repeatedly washed) blood unit preparation before each transfusion. The transfusion regimen is designed to obtain a pre-transfusion Hb concentration of 95-100 g/L. Transfusions are usually given every two to three weeks. Thalassemia intermedia. Treatment of individuals with thalassemia intermedia is symptomatic and based on splenectomy and folic acid supplementation. Treatment of extramedullary erythropoietic masses is based on radiotherapy, transfusions, or, in selected cases, hydroxyurea (with a protocol similar to that used for sickle cell disease). Hydroxyurea also increases globin gamma chains and may have other undefined affects. Individuals with thalassemia intermedia may develop iron overload from increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron or from occasional transfusions; chelation therapy with deferasirox has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in persons age ten years or older with a liver iron concentration ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight or serum ferritin ≥800 ng/mL (thresholds after which the risk of serious iron-related morbidity is increased) [Taher et al 2012]. 
            Bone marrow transplantation Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) from an HLA-identical sib represents an alternative to traditional transfusion and chelation therapy. If BMT is successful, iron overload may be reduced by repeated phlebotomy, thus eliminating the need for iron chelation. The outcome of BMT is related to the pretransplantation clinical conditions, specifically the presence of hepatomegaly, extent of liver fibrosis, and magnitude of iron accumulation. In children who lack the above risk factors, disease-free survival is over 90%. Adults with beta-thalassemia are at a higher risk for transplant-related toxicity due to an advanced phase of the disease and have a cure rate of 65% with current treatment protocol [Isgrò et al 2010]. Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) of variable severity may occur in 5%-8% of individuals. BMT from unrelated donors has been carried out on a limited number of individuals with β-thalassemia. Provided that selection of the donor is based on stringent criteria of HLA compatibility and that individuals have limited iron overload, results are comparable to those obtained when the donor is a compatible sib [La Nasa et al 2005, Gaziev et al 2013]. Affected individuals without matched donors could also benefit from haploidentical mother-to-child transplantation, the results of which appear encouraging [Sodani et al 2011]. Cord blood transplantation. Cord blood transplantation from a related donor offers a good probability of a successful cure and is associated with a low risk for graft versus host disease (GVHD) [Pinto & Roberts 2008]. For couples who have already had a child with thalassemia and who undertake prenatal diagnosis in a subsequent pregnancy, prenatal identification of HLA compatibility between the affected child and an unaffected fetus allows collection of placental blood at delivery and the option of cord blood transplantation to cure the affected child [Orofino et al 2003]. Alternatively, in case of an affected fetus and a previous unaffected child, the couple may decide to continue the pregnancy and pursue BMT later, using the unaffected child as the donor. Unrelated cord blood transplantation has been explored as an alternative option for affected individuals without a suitable HLA matched unrelated adult donor. However, this strategy may be limited by less than adequate cell dose and higher rates of primary graft failure. One potential strategy may be the use of two cord blood units in order to achieve the desired cell dose, as has been done in individuals with malignancy. However, this approach may be associated with a higher rate of acute GVHD, which may add to the burden of morbidity and mortality for this population. For these reasons, unrelated cord blood transplantation appears to be a suboptimal strategy for individuals with thalassemia [Ruggeri et al 2011]. However, others have found the outcome of this approach to be more favorable. Jaing et al [2012] reported an overall survival of 88% and a thalassemia-free survival of 74% in 35 individuals with β-thalassemia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of the disease, allows early appropriate treatment and monitoring.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Transfusional Iron Overload

 The most common secondary complications are those related to transfusional iron overload, which can be prevented by adequate iron chelation. 
              Assessment of iron overload Serum ferritin concentration. In clinical practice, the effectiveness of chelators is monitored by routine determination of serum ferritin concentration. However, serum ferritin concentration is not always reliable for evaluating iron burden because it is influenced by other factors, the most important being the extent of liver damage. Liver biopsy. Determination of liver iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen shows a high correlation with total body iron accumulation and is the gold standard for evaluation of liver iron overload. However, (1) liver biopsy is an invasive technique involving the possibility (though low) of complications; (2) liver iron content can be affected by hepatic fibrosis, which commonly occurs in individuals with iron overload and HCV infection; and (3) irregular iron distribution in the liver can lead to possible false-negative results [Clark et al 2003]. Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a reliable measurement of hepatic iron concentration, is another option [Fischer et al 2003]; however, magnetic susceptometry is presently available only in a limited number of centers worldwide. MRI techniques for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart are commonly used [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. T2 and T2* parameters have been validated for liver iron concentration. Cardiac T2* is reproducible, is applicable between different scanners, correlates with cardiac function, and relates to tissue iron concentration [Pennell 2005, Wood 2008]. Clinical utility of T2* in monitoring individuals with siderotic cardiomyopathy has been demonstrated. In one study, twelve human hearts from transfusion-dependent affected individuals after either death or transplantation for end-stage heart failure underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* (the reciprocal of T2*) measurement. Tissue iron concentration was measured in multiple samples of each heart with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, providing calibration in humans for cardiovascular magnetic resonance R2* against myocardial iron concentration and detailing the iron distribution throughout the heart in iron overload [Carpenter et al 2011]. 
              Chelation therapy Desferrioxamine B (DFO). The first chelator introduced clinically was desferrioxamine B (DFO) administered five to seven days a week by 12-hour continuous subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. Recommended dosage depends on the individual's age and the serum ferritin concentration. Young children start with 20-30 mg/kg/day, increasing up to 40 mg/kg/day after age five to six years. The maximum dose is 50 mg/kg/day after growth is completed. The dose may be reduced if serum ferritin concentration is low. By maintaining the total body iron stores below critical values (i.e., hepatic iron concentration <7.0 mg per gram of dry weight liver tissue), desferrioxamine B therapy prevents the secondary effects of iron overload, resulting in a consistent decrease in morbidity and mortality [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2004]. Ascorbate repletion (daily dose not to exceed 100-150 mg) increases the amount of iron removed after DFO administration. Side effects of DFO chelation therapy are more common in the presence of relatively low iron burden and include ocular and auditory toxicity, growth retardation, and, rarely, renal impairment and interstitial pneumonitis. DFO administration also increases susceptibility to Yersinia infections. The major drawback of DFO chelation therapy is low compliance resulting from complications of administration. Deferiprone (L-1), a bidentated oral chelator, is administered in a dose of 75-100 mg/kg/day. The main side effects of deferiprone therapy include, arthropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms and, above all, neutropenia and agranulocytosis [Galanello & Campus 2009] that demand close monitoring. The effect of deferiprone on liver iron concentration may vary among the individuals treated. However, results from independent studies suggest that deferiprone is more cardioprotective than desferrioxamine; compared to those being treated with DFO, individuals being treated with deferiprone have better myocardial MRI pattern and less probability of developing (or worsening pre-existing) cardiac disease [Anderson et al 2002, Piga et al 2003]. These retrospective observations have been confirmed in a prospective study [Pennell et al 2006]. Deferasirox was developed as a once-daily oral monotherapy for the treatment of transfusional iron overload. It is effective in adults and children and has a defined safety profile that is clinically manageable with appropriate monitoring. The most common treatment-related adverse events are gastrointestinal disorders, skin rash, and a mild, non-progressive increase in serum creatinine concentration [Cappellini 2008]. Cases of renal failure, hepatic failure, cytopenias and gastrointestinal hemorrhage have been reported in the post-marketing phase. Provided adequate doses are given, there is a good response to deferasirox across the full range of baseline liver iron concentration values. Prospective data demonstrate the efficacy of deferasirox in improving myocardial T2* and in maintaining a normal left ventricle ejection fraction [Pennell et al 2012, Pennell et al 2014]. Deferasirox has not been evaluated in formal trials for affected individuals with symptomatic heart failure or low left-ventricle ejection fraction. Strategies of chelation using a combination of desferrioxamine and deferiprone have been effective in individuals with severe iron overload. Retrospective, prospective, and randomized clinical studies have shown that combined iron chelation with deferiprone and desferrioxamine rapidly reduces myocardial siderosis, improves cardiac and endocrine function, reduces liver iron and serum ferritin concentration, reduces cardiac mortality, and improves survival; toxicity is manageable [Tanner et al 2007, Galanello et al 2010].

Cardiac Disease

 Particular attention has been directed to the early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac disease because of its critical role in determining the prognosis of individuals with β-thalassemia. Assessment of myocardial siderosis and monitoring of cardiac function combined with intensification of iron chelation can result in excellent long-term prognoses [Wood 2008, Kirk et al 2009, Chouliaras et al 2011].

Osteoporosis

 Osteoporosis is a common complication in adults with thalassemia major or thalassemia intermedia [Voskaridou & Terpos 2008]. Its origin is multifactorial, making it difficult to manage. Treatment involves appropriate hormonal replacement, an effective regimen of transfusion and iron chelation, calcium and vitamin D administration, and regular physical activity. Sufficient evidence exists to support the use of bisphosphonates in the management of thalassemia-associated osteoporosis (to prevent bone loss and improve the bone mineral density). Further research is warranted to establish their anti-fracture efficacy and long-term safety [Giusti 2014]. However, since the origin of bone disease in thalassemia major is multifactorial and some of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are still unclear, further research in this field is needed to allow for the design of optimal therapeutic measures [Skordis & Toumba 2011].

Surveillance

 A general timetable for clinical and laboratory evaluation in thalassemia major has been provided by Thalassemia International Federation [Cappellini et al 2014] and is available at the TIF web site. For individuals with thalassemia major, follow up to monitor the effectiveness of transfusion therapy and chelation therapy and their side effects includes the following: Monthly physical examination by a physician familiar with the affected individual and the disease Every three months: assessment of liver function tests (serum concentration of ALT), determination of serum ferritin concentration, and assessment of growth and development (during childhood) Annual Ophthalmologic and audiologic examinations Complete cardiac evaluation, and evaluation of thyroid, endocrine pancreas, parathyroid, adrenal, and pituitary function Liver ultrasound evaluation and determination of serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration in adults with hepatitis C and iron overload for early detection of hepatocarcinoma Bone densitometry to assess for osteoporosis in the adult Regular gallbladder echography for early detection of cholelithiasis [Origa et al 2009], particularly in individuals with the Gilbert syndrome genotype (i.e., presence of the (TA)7/(TA)7 motif in the UGT1Apromoter)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Alcohol consumption, which in individuals with liver disease has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage Iron-containing preparations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate older and younger sibs of a proband as early as possible. Early detection of anemia, the primary manifestation of β-thalassemia, allows prompt, appropriate treatment and monitoring. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, hematologic testing can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Provided that a multidisciplinary team is available, pregnancy is possible and safe, and usually has a favorable outcome in women with β-thalassemia. An increasing number of women with thalassemia major and thalassemia intermedia may, therefore, have children. Although hypogonadotropic hypogonadism remains a common condition in thalassemia major, gonadal function is usually intact and fertility is usually retrievable. Pregnancy also appears to be safe in most women with thalassemia intermedia, although larger and more detailed studies are needed. Indeed, an increased risk for certain complications cannot yet be excluded. For example, women with thalassemia intermedia who had never previously received a blood transfusion or who had received a minimal quantity of blood are reported to be at risk for severe alloimmune anemia if blood transfusions are required during pregnancy [Origa et al 2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

 New chelation strategies are under investigation. A metabolic iron balance study in six affected individuals wherein the relative effectiveness of deferasirox (30 mg/kg/day) and deferoxamine (40 mg/kg/day) was compared, alone and in combination, demonstrated a negative iron balance in 5/6 using the combination of drugs just three days a week [Grady et al 2013]. This finding has been confirmed in some clinical studies [Arandi et al 2015]. Moreover, preliminary studies using in combination the two oral chelators deferasirox and deferiprone appear to be encouraging [Berdoukas et al 2010, Farmaki et al 2011, Voskaridou et al 2011, Elalfy et al 2015]. A study in a mouse model of hemochromatosis demonstrated that the use of minihepcidins (small drug-like hepcidin agonists) in a hepcidin-deficient mouse could be beneficial in iron overload disorders when used either alone for prevention or possibly as adjunctive therapy with phlebotomy or chelation [Ramos et al 2012]. Induction of fetal hemoglobin synthesis can reduce the severity of β-thalassemia by improving the imbalance between alpha and non-alpha globin chains. Several pharmacologic compounds including 5-azacytidine, decytabine, and butyrate derivatives have had encouraging results in clinical trials [Pace & Zein 2006]. These agents induce Hb F by different mechanisms that are not yet well defined. Their potential in the management of β-thalassemia syndromes is under investigation [Perrine 2008, Boosalis et al 2011]. The efficacy of hydroxyurea treatment in individuals with thalassemia is still unclear. Hydroxyurea is used in persons with thalassemia intermedia to reduce extramedullary masses, to increase hemoglobin levels, and, in some cases, to improve leg ulcers [Levin & Koren 2011]. Hydroxyurea prevents hemolysis and hypercoagulability by modifying the defective hemoglobin synthesis and reducing thrombocytosis. A retrospective study found no pulmonary hypertension in 50 individuals with thalassemia intermedia treated with hydroxyurea for seven years [Karimi et al 2009, Taher et al 2010]. A good response, correlated with particular polymorphisms in the beta-globin cluster (i.e., C>T at -158 G gamma), has been reported in individuals with transfusion dependence [Bradai et al 2003, Yavarian et al 2004]. However, controlled and randomized studies are warranted to establish the role of hydroxyurea in the management of thalassemia syndromes. Modulators of erythropoiesis, such as TGF-β-like molecules or inhibitors of JAK2, could soon revolutionize the treatment of β-thalassemia and related disorders. Activins, members of the TGF-β family signaling, are key regulators of human hematopoiesis, modulating various cellular responses such as proliferation, differentiation, migration and apoptosis. A modified activin type IIB receptor inhibiting signaling induced by some members of the TGF-β superfamily promotes maturation of terminally differentiating erythroblasts. In thalassemic mice (Hbbth1/th1), it ameliorates hematologic parameters as well as co-morbidities that develop as a consequence of the erythroid hyperplasia [Suragani et al 2014]. The discovery that JAK2 plays an important role in the progression and exacerbation of ineffective erythropoiesis suggests that drugs inhibiting JAK2 activity could mitigate ineffective erythropoiesis and reverse splenomegaly. In fact, in preclinical studies it has been shown that a JAK2 inhibitor dramatically decreased the spleen size and modulated the ineffective erythropoiesis [Breda & Rivella 2014]. The possibility of correction of the molecular defect in hematopoietic stem cells by transfer of a normal gene via a suitable vector or by homologous recombination is being actively investigated. The most promising results in the mouse model have been obtained with lentiviral vectors [Persons 2009]. A clinical trial for β-thalassemia has begun in France, and one individual with transfusion-dependent HbE/beta-thalassemia has demonstrated a therapeutic effect after transplantation with autologous CD 34(+) cells, genetically modified with a beta-globin lentiviral vector [Kaiser 2009]. The levels of genetically modified cells increased from 2% in the first few months to 11% at 33 months post transplant. The affected individual was last transfused on June 6, 2008, and four years after transplantation (despite being slightly anemic and undergoing repeated phlebotomies for the decrease of iron overload) does not require blood transfusions. Although most of the therapeutic benefit results from a dominant, myeloid-biased cell clone, in which the integrated vector causes transcriptional activation of HMGA2 (a potential oncogene in various types of cancer) in erythroid cells, this integration seems hitherto benign [Cavazzana-Calvo et al 2010]. Very encouraging preliminary data on individuals with HbE/β-thalassemia and homozygous β-thalassemia transplantated with autologous CD34+ cells transduced with a replication-defective, self-inactivating lentiviral vector containing an engineered β-globin gene (βA-T87Q) were recently reported by the same group [Cavazzana et al 2014, Thompson et al 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Attempts at in utero transplantation using the father as a haploidentical donor have consistently failed.