http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bap1-tpds

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome (BAP1-TPDS), the following evaluations are recommended [Rai et al 2016]: Atypical Spitz (ATS) tumors, cutaneous melanoma (CM), and/or basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Full-body skin examination by a dermatologist with excision of any lesions suggestive of an atypical Spitz tumor Uveal melanoma (UM). Dilated eye examination and imaging by an ocular oncologist Malignant mesothelioma (MMe). No screening modalities exist; however, if an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Abdominal ultrasound examination, urinalysis, and abdominal MRI (consider also requesting assessment of the pleura and peritoneum) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The treatments for BAP1-TPDS tumors are those used in standard practice. Uveal melanoma. Because of the increased aggressiveness of BAP1-related uveal melanoma, all uveal melanomas should be managed as the more aggressive tumors (ie., those determined to be class 2 by expression profiling and those with monosomy 3) [Njauw et al 2012]. Malignant mesothelioma. MMe is highly refractory to conventional therapies including aggressive surgical intervention and multimodality strategies; thus, a cure is unlikely. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is treated in the usual manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Uveal melanoma. Arc welding has been associated with risk of uveal melanoma and this should be avoided if possible. Sunglasses with high UVA and UVB protection can reduce risk of cancer on the eyelids, but data regarding the benefit of sunglasses for uveal melanoma are lacking. Malignant mesothelioma. As with all individuals, asbestos exposure and smoking should also be avoided. Cutaneous melanoma. Primary prevention is limited to those measures typically used to reduce the risk for cutaneous melanoma, including limiting of sun exposure, regular use of sunscreen and protective clothing, and regular dermatologic examinations.

Surveillance

Consensus management recommendations have not been established; however, several groups have proposed variations of the following [Carbone et al 2012, Battaglia 2014, Rai et al 2016]: Uveal melanoma. Yearly dilated eye examinations and imaging by an ocular oncologist beginning around age 11 years Malignant mesothelioma. No reliable early disease symptoms or screening modalities Annual evaluation is recommended for late manifestations of mesothelioma, which can include chest pain, cough, fever, shortness of breath, dysphagia, hoarseness, weight loss, fever, upper body and face edema (chest mesothelioma) and abdominal pain, ascites, nausea, vomiting, and/or constipation (peritoneal mesothelioma). Annual physical examination is recommended to look for signs of pleurisy (pleural inflammation), peritonitis, ascites and/or pleural effusion. If an abdominal MRI is to be performed as recommended for ccRCC, consider evaluation of the peritoneum and pleura as well. Although some physicians recommend spiral chest CT for asymptomatic persons with a history of exposure to asbestos, others do not, given the possible increased risk of cancer from radiation exposure. Cutaneous melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and atypical Spitz tumors. Annual full body dermatologic examinations beginning around age 20 years Clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Protocol similar to von Hippel Lindau disease with annual abdominal ultrasound examination; consideration of annual urinalysis and abdominal MRI every two years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Arc welding Asbestos Smoking Unnecessary and prolonged sun exposure

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the BAP1 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of screening and preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Currently no open treatment trials specifically target patients with BAP1-TPDS. One NCI-sponsored trial using vorinostat in the treatment of metastatic uveal melanoma is assessing BAP1 mutation status as a secondary outcome measure. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.