

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial (BWCFF) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopy Hearing assessment Brain MRI EEG (if brain MRI is abnormal) Neurology (adult or child) consultation in case of brain MRI anomaly and/or seizures Neurocognitive evaluation Echocardiogram for evidence of congenital heart defects Abdominal ultrasound examination for evidence of malformation of the kidneys and/or ureters Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 There is no specific treatment of BWCFF syndrome. Symptomatic management involves the following. Ptosis may require surgical treatment. Coloboma and/or microphthalmia may lead to poor vision and require routine care for these findings. Hearing loss may require routine care including hearing aids. Epilepsy is treated using standard protocols. Developmental delay requires specific support (speech therapy, physical therapy) adapted to the severity of the disability. Malformations of the heart, urinary tract, and oral clefts are treated using standard procedures.

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes the following: Neurodevelopmental follow up by a multidisciplinary team involved in cognitive impairment and appropriate support Coloboma or microphthalmia: ophthalmologic follow-up (at least yearly) with systematic screening for intraocular hypertension and glaucoma. Although glaucoma has not been reported to date, it is a known complication of colobomatous microphthalmia. Early detection allows specific treatment of intraocular hypertension. Routine follow up of deafness for any evidence of progression Cardiac defect: cardiology follow up (adapted to the type of congenital heart disease identified) Renal tract anomaly: nephrology follow up adapted to the anomaly and the risk of renal insufficiency Screening for malignancies. The risk of malignancies is not established for BWCFF syndrome; screening for hematologic malignancies must be considered in case of physical deterioration or unexplained chronic fever.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.