http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bbs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmologic assessment to determine visual acuity, field deficits, or refractive errors. Fundoscopic photographs should be filed for later comparison. Examination of the genitalia in both sexes. It is important to image the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina in all affected females. Pelvic ultrasound examination is preferred. Calculation of body mass index (BMI) (weight in kg divided by the height in meters squared) can aid in identifying medically significant obesity. Dietary evaluation if obesity is present (BMI >30) Renal function studies and renal ultrasound examination for assessment of possible structural renal anomalies. If significant abnormalities are identified, referral to a nephrologist is desirable. Baseline blood pressure assessment As nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a commonly overlooked feature of BBS, questioning the individual or parents with regard to the individual’s fluid intake and output can be a simple but helpful diagnostic aid. In some instances, tests of renal concentrating ability by initial urinalysis may be helpful. Cardiac evaluation including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography Developmental assessment and/or educational evaluation for the purpose of intervention and planning Endocrinologic testing as needed including glucose tolerance testing (GTT) for diabetes mellitus, lipid levels, and assessment of thyroid and liver functions. More formal tests of pituitary function may be warranted particularly in assessing fertility and development of secondary sex characteristics. Infertility should not be assumed in all males or females. Hearing evaluation. Otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and audiometry may reveal subclinical sensorineural hearing loss in adults. Conductive hearing loss is common in children as a result of recurrent otitis media. Dental evaluation to assess for hygiene, dental crowding, and hypodontia Neurologic examination to assess for ataxic gait, poor coordination, dysdiadochokinesia, inability to perform tandem gait walking, poor two-point discrimination, and diminished fine motor skills Consider referral to a clinical geneticist.

Treatment of Manifestations

No therapy exists for the progressive visual loss, but early evaluation by a low-vision specialist facilitates introduction of low vision aids and mobility training. Educational planning should take the prospect of future blindness into consideration. To manage obesity, multiple strategies are advocated, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies. Education and dietary measures to control weight gain must be initiated at an early age. No formal trials of drug therapy (appetite suppressants or lipase inhibitors) have been reported; however, such therapy may be attempted providing the individual does not have contraindications to specific drug use (i.e., renal or hepatic dysfunction). Complications of obesity, such as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes mellitus, should be treated as in the general population. Cognitive disability should be addressed through early intervention and special education, as indicated by evaluation. It is advisable to assess individual needs with respect to education, as many adults are capable of attaining independent living skills. Speech therapy should be offered at the first sign of speech delay and/or impairment. Renal transplantation has been successful, although the immunosuppressants used following transplantation can compound the weight problem. Surgical correction of hydrocolpos, vaginal atresia, or hypospadias may be warranted. As children approach puberty, gonadotropin and sex hormone levels should be monitored to determine if hormone replacement therapy is indicated. It is important to offer contraceptive advice to all affected females rather than assume likely infertility. The earliest and most common intervention for polydactyly is removal of the accessory digit. Indicators are functional interference and poorly fitting footwear. Most children have their accessory digits removed within the first two years. Treatment of cardiac abnormalities is the same as for the general population. Dental extractions are appropriate as required for dental crowding. Prompt treatment for acute and chronic otitis media should be considered. Insertion of grommets is commonplace.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.

Surveillance

A multidisciplinary approach is required to effectively manage this pleiotropic condition. Suggested surveillance is summarized here: Annual ophthalmologic evaluations with annual electroretinogram in those older than age five years Routine (at least annual) measurement of blood pressure A baseline renal ultrasound scan and annual renal function tests for all individuals with BBS. If a structural renal malformation is detected, review by a nephrologist and follow-up sonography is indicated. Monitor BUN and serum concentration of creatinine if a progressive obstructive urinary tract anomaly is detected or if bilateral renal malformations are observed and satisfactory renal growth is not observed on follow-up ultrasonography. In individuals with renal impairment (elevated serum creatinine) as a result of an underlying structural malformation, six-month to annual monitoring by a nephrologist for complications of chronic kidney disease is indicated. Annual endocrinology review Regular testing for diabetes mellitus by measurement of fasting glucose concentration or glucose tolerance testing Annual thyroid function tests, liver function tests and lipid profile

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Any substances contraindicated in persons with renal impairment should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Sibs or relatives who have clinical features similar to those of the individual with BBS warrant genetic consultation. If the relative is deemed affected, molecular genetic testing, consultation with an ophthalmologist, and a renal sonogram to evaluate for structural renal malformations are recommended. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Expectant mothers affected with BBS require close monitoring for any deterioration in renal function or pregnancy-related complications due to structural abnormalities of the reproductive tract.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.