http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bgd-biotin

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with biotin-thiamine responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation by a pediatric neurologist Assessments by specialists in rehabilitation medicine, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy Psychology evaluation for assessment of IQ Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Appropriate treatment includes the following: ICU care during acute encephalopathic episode, including treatment of seizures and increased intracranial pressure Biotin and thiamine therapy. Biotin is given as 5-10 mg /kg and thiamine as 300-900 mg orally. (Note: In one report 20mg/kg/day in a neonate was used.)
Symptoms typically resolve within days. (Note: SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transport and some patients respond only to thiamine.) Biotin and thiamine need to be given lifelong. During acute decompensation thiamine may be increased to double the regular dose and given intravenously. In the acute stage empiric treatment with antimicrobial/antiviral agents. Recommended until infectious causes of the acute/subacute encephalopathy are ruled out. Fever control. Paramount as fever downregulates SLC19A3 and may exacerbate the disease. Antiepileptic drugs for effective control of seizures Symptomatic treatment of dystonia, including administration of L-dopa Rehabilitation, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy Educational programs adapted to individual needs Education of the family regarding the importance of lifelong compliance with medical therapy

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Appropriate measures include the following: Prompt administration of biotin and thiamine early in the disease course (see Treatment of Manifestations) Avoidance of triggers/stressors including trauma and surgery

Surveillance

Evaluation every six months by the treating subspecialists (pediatric neurologist, metabolic genetic specialist, physiotherapist, and psychologists) is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Stress and trauma should be avoided as they can precipitate acute attacks.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, perform molecular genetic testing on at-risk relatives (e.g., sibs of the proband) in order to begin biotin and thiamine therapy as soon as possible in all individuals with biallelic SLC19A3 pathogenic variants, even those who are asymptomatic. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Affected women should continue biotin and thiamine therapy during pregnancy. No information regarding risk to the fetus of an affected mother is available.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Routine administration of immunizations is recommended (without any specific precautions).