

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS), the following evaluations are recommended: Detailed dermatologic examination and punch biopsy of suspected cutaneous lesion High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) or CT of the chest highly recommended for visualization of pulmonary cysts. Individuals who have symptoms/signs of pneumothorax should immediately undergo chest x-ray and CT of the chest and appropriate treatment. Baseline abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast or MRI to screen for renal tumor. Renal ultrasound examination may distinguish cystic from solid renal lesions. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 In general, fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas are benign lesions for which no treatment is required; however, affected individuals may seek treatment for such lesions for cosmetic purposes, particularly when multiple cutaneous lesions are located on the face. Treatment of fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas is difficult, as they tend to be numerous and recurring. Erbium-YAG or fractional CO2 laser ablation may result in substantial improvement, but relapse can occur [Gambichler et al 2000, Jacob & Dover 2001, Kahle et al 2001]. Shaving or other ablative methods have been used with variable results. Treatment of pneumothorax is the same as in the general population. Nephron-sparing surgery is the treatment of choice for renal tumors whenever possible, depending on the size and location of the tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Because of the bilateral, multifocal nature of BHDS-associated kidney cancer, a management approach involving observation of small tumors until they reach 3 cm in size is often recommended [Pavlovich et al 2005]. Therefore, renal tumors greater than 3.0 cm and/or rapidly growing tumors usually require partial nephrectomy. When surgical intervention is recommended, an attempt is made to remove all or most of the visible tumors. Although surgical management is not considered “curative” for BHDS-associated renal cell carcinoma (RCC), BHDS-associated renal tumors often are slow growing, and only infrequently are multiple surgical procedures required during a an affected individual’s lifetime to control the tumor burden and prevent the development of metastasis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 No preventive or curative treatment is available for BHDS. However, development of renal cell carcinoma has the strongest positive association with cigarette smoking [Moore et al 2005].

Surveillance

 There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the recommendations given are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted. Individuals with known BHDS, individuals known to have a pathogenic variant in FLCN without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone genetic testing should have regular monitoring by physicians familiar with the spectrum of BHDS. 
            Renal tumor screening
           Renal imaging is appropriate for individuals age 18 years or older when the clinical diagnosis of BHDS is established or if a pathogenic variant in FLCN is confirmed. However, earlier testing and surveillance for renal tumors should be personalized based on family history of renal tumor development, when available. Yearly MRI of the kidneys is the optimal screening modality to assess for kidney lesions. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast is an alternative when MRI is not an option. However, the long-term effects of cumulative radiation exposure in individuals with BHDS is unknown and has not been studied. As a result of the low aggressiveness of kidney tumors and the 3.0-cm rule used by surgeons in treating renal tumors [Pavlovich et al 2005], affected individuals without a family history of kidney tumors who have had two to three consecutive annual MRI examinations without the detection of kidney lesions may be screened every two years until a suspicious lesion is identified. Note: The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in further characterization of kidney lesions but should not be used as a primary screening modality. If any suspicious lesion (<1.0 cm in diameter, indeterminate lesion, or complex cysts) is noted on screening examination, annual MRI should be instituted. Abdominal/pelvic CT scan with contrast may be used as an alternative in those for whom MRI is not an option. Renal tumors less than 3.0 cm in diameter are monitor by periodic imaging. When the largest renal tumor reaches 3 cm in maximal diameter evaluation by a urologic surgeon is appropriate with consideration of nephron-sparing surgery [Stamatakis et al 2013]. Rapidly growing lesions and/or symptoms including pain, blood in the urine, or atypical presentations require a more individualized approach. PET-CT scan is an option for evaluation of these lesions. Melanoma. Because of a concern for a possible increased risk of melanoma in those with BHDS, full body skin examination at routine intervals to evaluate for suspicious pigmented lesions should be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Cigarette smoking High ambient pressures, which may precipitate spontaneous pneumothorax Radiation exposure

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 When the family-specific pathogenic variant is known, use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members improves diagnostic certainty and reduces costly screening procedures in at-risk members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant. Early recognition of clinical manifestations may allow timely intervention and improve outcome. Therefore, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early detection is appropriate. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.