http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/biotin

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in a symptomatic individual diagnosed with biotinidase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: History of seizures, balance problems, feeding problems, breathing problems, loss of hair, fungal infections, skin rash, conjunctivitis Physical examination for hypotonia, ataxia, eye findings such as optic atrophy, eczematous skin rash, alopecia, conjunctivitis, breathing abnormalities such as stridor, thrush, and/or candidiasis Evaluation for psychomotor deficits Evaluation for sensorineural hearing loss Ophthalmologic examination Identification of cellular immunologic abnormalities because of the increased risk of recurrent viral or fungal infections caused by immunologic dysfunction Consultation with a metabolic specialist or clinical geneticist To establish the extent of disease and needs in infants or children diagnosed with biotinidase deficiency following newborn screening, the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination for neurologic findings (e.g., hypotonia, ataxia), eye findings (e.g., conjunctivitis), skin findings (eczematous rash, alopecia), breathing abnormalities (e.g., stridor) and fungal infections caused by immunologic dysfunction (thrush and/or candidiasis). Evaluation for psychomotor deficits Evaluation for sensorineural hearing loss Ophthalmologic examination (for finding such as optic atrophy) Consultation with a metabolic specialist or clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

Although newborn screening for biotinidase deficiency has resulted in almost complete ascertainment of children with biotinidase deficiency in the United States and in many other countries, occasionally a child who has not been screened or has been mistakenly thought to have normal biotinidase activity on newborn screening will present with clinical symptoms. These children may become metabolically compromised and require hydration, occasionally bicarbonate for acidosis, and procedures to ameliorate hyperammonemia. Once it is recognized that the child has a multiple carboxylase deficiency, administration of biotin – or a multivitamin “cocktail” containing biotin – can rapidly resolve the metabolic derangement and improve many of the clinical symptoms within hours to days. Compliance with biotin therapy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) improves symptoms in symptomatic individuals. Some features such as optic atrophy, hearing loss, or developmental delay may not be reversible; they should be addressed with ophthalmologic evaluations and intervention, hearing aids or cochlear implants, and appropriate interventions for developmental deficits.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

All individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency (<10% mean normal enzyme activity), even those who have some residual biotinidase enzyme activity, should be treated with biotin independent of their genotype [Wolf 2003]. Note: Although Möslinger et al [2003] stated that children with greater than 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may not need treatment, a child with 1% to 10% biotinidase activity may be just as likely to develop symptoms as one with total loss of enzyme activity [Wolf 2002]. It is therefore strongly recommended that all children with profound biotinidase deficiency, regardless of the residual biotinidase enzyme activity, be treated with biotin. Note: Because genotype/phenotype correlations in biotinidase deficiency are not well established, decisions regarding treatment should be based on the results of enzyme activity rather than molecular genetic testing. Biotinidase deficiency is treated by supplementation with oral biotin in free form as opposed to the bound form. Children with biotinidase deficiency identified by newborn screening will remain asymptomatic with compliance to biotin therapy. All symptomatic children with biotinidase deficiency have improved after treatment with 5-10 mg oral biotin per day. Biotin is usually dispensed as a tablet or a capsule (most of which is filler: the quantity of biotin is minute relative to the quantity of filler). To administer biotin to an infant or young child, the tablet can be crushed or the contents of the capsule can be mixed with breast milk or formula in a spoon, medicine dispenser, or syringe. Note that the contents of the tablet or capsule should not be put into a bottle because the mixture will stick to the bottle and/or fail to pass through the nipple, thus delivering inconsistent doses. Although biotin occasionally is dispensed as a solution or syrup, these liquid preparations are not recommended because the mixture – which is a suspension – tends to settle (especially upon refrigeration) and to grow bacteria upon storage. The liquid preparations usually do not provide a consistent dose and should not be added to milk in a bottle. The biochemical abnormalities and seizures rapidly resolve after biotin treatment, followed by improvement of the cutaneous abnormalities. Hair growth returns over a period of weeks to months in children who have alopecia. Optic atrophy and hearing loss may be resistant to therapy, especially if a long period has elapsed between their onset and the initiation of treatment. Some treated children have rapidly achieved developmental milestones, whereas others have continued to show delays. Only a few anecdotal reports exist regarding symptoms in children with partial biotinidase deficiency who were not treated with biotin. Because there is no known toxicity for biotin, children with partial deficiency are usually treated with 1-10 mg oral biotin per day. Biotin therapy is lifelong. There are no known adverse side effects from pharmacologic doses of biotin. In fact, the major problem is the lack of treatment or non-compliance with prescribed treatment. More data are required to determine the dosage of biotin that is necessary for older children with either profound or partial biotinidase deficiency, but essentially all children have tolerated 10 mg/day of oral biotin with no side effects. Anecdotally, two girls with profound biotinidase deficiency developed hair loss during adolescence that resolved following increase of their biotin dosages from 10 mg per day to 15 or 20 mg per day. A protein-restricted diet is not necessary.

Surveillance

For all children with biotinidase deficiency: Yearly ophthalmologic examination and auditory testing for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency Regularly scheduled appointments with primary care physicians or as needed Yearly evaluation by a clinical geneticist or metabolic specialist for individuals with profound deficiency and every two years for those with partial deficiency Symptomatic children with residual clinical problems should be seen as directed by the appropriate sub-specialists: Evaluation of urinary organic acids if return of symptoms with biotin therapy (most commonly the result of non-compliance)Note: Measurement of biotin concentrations in blood or urine is not useful except to determine compliance with therapy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Raw eggs should be avoided because they contain avidin, an egg-white protein that binds biotin, thus decreasing its bioavailability. (Thoroughly cooked eggs present no problem because heating inactivates avidin, rendering it incapable of binding biotin.)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

A newborn with an older sib with biotinidase deficiency should be treated at birth with biotin pending results of the definitive biotinidase enzyme activity assay and/or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known). The genetic status of older sibs (even if asymptomatic) of a child with biotinidase deficiency should be clarified by assay of biotinidase enzyme activity or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known) so that biotin therapy can be instituted in a timely manner. The genetic status of any relative with symptoms consistent with biotinidase deficiency should be clarified by assay of biotinidase enzyme activity or molecular genetic testing (if the BTD pathogenic variants in the family are known) so that biotin therapy can be instituted in a timely manner. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The only special pregnancy management considerations for a woman who is carrying a baby with biotinidase deficiency or is at risk of having a baby with biotinidase deficiency is consideration of biotin supplementation of the mother. An optimal prenatal dose has not been determined.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.