

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To evaluate an individual newly diagnosed with Bloom’s syndrome (BSyn) the following are recommended in addition to the routine medical history, family history, and physical examination: Evaluation for gastroesophageal reflux and micro-aspirations into the lung of gastric contents Fasting blood glucose determination at the time of diagnosis and annually thereafter Determination of plasma immunoglobulin concentrations Observation of urination for evidence of urethral obstruction If diagnosis occurs in adulthood, colonoscopy and stool guaiac at the time of diagnosis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Psychosocial. Family and teachers are encouraged to relate to persons with BSyn appropriately for their chronologic age rather than the younger age suggested by their unusually small size. Growth. Growth hormone administration to children with BSyn has not increased growth rate or adult height in most persons, but some have experienced improved linear growth. Use of growth hormone has been approached cautiously in this population, because of the theoretic increase in their risk to develop tumors as a result of their treatment. Supplemental feeding results in increased fat deposition but not in improved linear growth. Diabetes mellitus. Treatment of diabetes mellitus in BSyn is the same as in other persons. Cancer. The hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to both DNA-damaging chemicals and ionizing radiation ordinarily necessitates modification of standard cancer treatment regimens, which usually includes a reduction of both dosages and durations. Absence of information as to the ideal dosages makes such treatment particularly challenging to the physician; nevertheless, the fact that the cancers themselves often appear unusually responsive to the treatment justifies the special effort. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Too few persons with BSyn have had BMT to permit conclusions as to its value (which in theory could be great). The required ablative therapy prior to BMT often may require modification of standard protocols because of the hypersensitivity of persons with BSyn to DNA-damaging agents.

Surveillance

 Families benefit from counseling regarding the risk of cancer in persons with BSyn. The wide variety of types and sites of cancer in Bsyn – plus the unusually early onset of solid tumors such as carcinomas and sarcomas – makes surveillance for cancer a life-long undertaking, requiring planning and cooperation among the affected person, the family, and the physician in charge. In persons younger than age 20 years, leukemia is the main type of cancer. Until evidence becomes available that treatment at the earliest stages of leukemia is more effective than treatment after full-blown symptoms appear, hematologic surveillance other than that used in general pediatrics appears unnecessary, if not contraindicated. Close contact between individuals age 20 years and older and their physicians is advisable, and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated promptly as potential early indicators of cancer. Screening for colon cancer, the most common solid tumor in individuals with BSyn (see Table 2), should begin decades earlier than in others, and should be carried out more frequently. In adults, colon cancer screening may include colonoscopy every one to two years, and stool guaiac testing for blood every three to six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Sun exposure to the face, particularly in infancy and early childhood, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from avoidance of sun exposure to the face and early surveillance for cancer (see Surveillance). Molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate sibs if the BLM pathogenic variants in the family are known. An unusually low birth weight followed by short stature throughout childhood is typically present in affected sibs; sibs of normal stature are likely unaffected and may not need further testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to the testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.