http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bofs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS), the following studies are recommended: CT imaging of the temporal bone to anticipate optimal hearing correction [Raveh et al 2000, Tekin et al 2009, Stoetzel et al 2009] Echocardiogram if there is a murmur or cardiac symptoms Renal ultrasonography The following consultations are recommended: Examination of the skin defects by a pediatric plastic surgeon to delineate the extent of the lesion(s), to determine if there is a sinus and, most importantly, to determine if a thymic remnant could be present Formal evaluation of cleft lip/palate and other possible facial abnormalities by a cleft lip/palate team, which often includes a clinical geneticist, pediatric plastic surgeon, otorhinolaryngologist, speech and language therapist, dental and orthodontic specialist, and ophthalmologist Complete eye examination by a pediatric ophthalmologist to assess for visual limitations, strabismus, and nasolacrimal duct obstruction Referral of those with anophthalmia and/or severe microphthalmia to support services for the visually impaired Referral to a nephrologist if renal abnormalities are identified Referral to an audiologist For those with a cleft, assessment by a speech therapist Development assessment particularly for children with visual and/or hearing problems Monitoring for depression, attention dysregulation Note: Motor delays are not part of BOFS, and thus, physical and occupational therapy is not anticipated.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Milunsky et al [2011] provided management guidelines. In general, children with BOFS and multiple anomalies should be followed in a setting in which multispecialty care can be provided by a team including, for example, craniofacial specialists, plastic surgeons, otolaryngologists, and speech therapists [adapted from Milunsky et al 2011] (full text; see Table III). Ideally, multispecialty evaluations and surgery should be performed within a craniofacial clinic. Surgical treatment should be done only by a pediatric plastic surgeon experienced in treating cleft lip. Lesser forms of cleft lip (formerly known as “pseudocleft”) may need surgical correction [Lin et al 2009]. In addition to the nasal tip flattening or asymmetry that may be associated with cleft lip, a characteristic full, flat nasal tip may need a corrective procedure. In addition affected individuals may need reconstruction of malformed protruding pinnae. If diagnosed in early infancy, auricular molding may be indicated. When branchial or supra-auricular skin defects are small, linear, or superficial, they may heal spontaneously. The larger skin defects should be treated like a moist “wound” by a plastic surgeon, but generally do not need surgical intervention. They should not be cauterized. Most larger skin defects require surgical excision. Importantly, a sinus tract must be dissected by an experienced pediatric plastic surgeon. Exploration for a thymic remnant may be necessary, which should be sent for histopathologic examination. Obstruction from nasolacrimal duct stenosis or atresia must be relieved and monitored for restenosis. Severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia may be managed by inserting a conformer into the eye socket to encourage its growth. Hearing loss is treated routinely (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). The teeth should be monitored for size and number, caries, and malocclusion. Sensory, psychologic, and developmental challenges should be treated with supportive therapies. Currently, data are insufficient to make recommendations that more severely affected individuals require more psychologic support.

Surveillance

 Monitor for changes related to the major findings over time. Monitor older children as they enter adolescence for signs of low self-esteem and other psychologic issues.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.