http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bor

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a branchiootorenal spectrum disorder (BOR/BOS), the following evaluations are recommended: Second branchial arch anomalies. Cervical examination for fistulae; computed tomography of the neck if a mass is palpable under the sternocleidomastoid muscle above the level of the hyoid bone 
                Otologic findings A complete assessment of auditory acuity using ABR, emission testing, and pure tone audiometry (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) Computed tomography of the temporal bones, especially if the hearing impairment fluctuates or is progressive Renal anomalies. Renal ultrasound examination and/or excretory urography (intravenous pyelography); tests of renal function: BUN and creatinine; urinanalysis Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Recommended treatment: Second branchial arch anomalies. Excise branchial cleft cysts/fistulae. 
                Otologic anomalies Fit with appropriate aural habilitation as indicated. Enroll in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired. Consider canaloplasty to correct an atretic canal; however, in individuals with BOR/BOS, associated middle ear anomalies (e.g., a facial nerve overriding the oval window) can preclude a successful result. Evaluate the status of the middle ear preoperatively by obtaining thin-cut CT images of the temporal bones in both the axial and coronal planes. 
                Renal anomalies Treat urologic and renal abnormalities in the standard manner. If renal anomalies (e.g., vesicoureteral reflux) are present, medical and surgical treatment may prevent progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). If ESRD develops, consider renal transplantation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Otologic manifestations of disease can often be surgically corrected with correction of the cupped-ear malformation and occasionally improvement in the conductive component of the hearing loss. Branchial arch anomalies can be surgically corrected.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Renal anomalies such as vesicoureteral reflux can lead to progressive renal failure, a secondary complication that can be avoided by surgical correction of retrograde flow of urine from the bladder into the ureter.

Surveillance

 Surveillance for otologic and renal anomalies should be offered as described below. Otologic anomalies. Serial audiometry to survey for progression of hearing loss: Annual examination by a physician who is familiar with hereditary hearing impairment Semiannual examination for hearing impairment and annual audiometry to assess stability of hearing loss (more frequent if fluctuation or progression is described by the affected individual) 
            Renal anomalies Regular assessment of renal function to prevent progression to ESRD Semiannual/annual examination by a nephrologist and/or urologist if indicated, based on level of renal function and type of renal and/or collecting system malformation

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with renal abnormalities should use appropriate caution when taking medications (i.e., antibiotics and analgesics) that can impair renal function or require normal renal physiology for clearance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives at risk for BOR/BOS to determine if a treatable and/or possibly progressive otologic and/or renal abnormality is present. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; Comprehensive physical examination (to include hearing evaluation and renal imaging and function studies) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.