http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bpan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete neurologic examination and developmental assessment including evaluation of motor function, speech/language, swallowing, and sleep EEG monitoring, including sleep EEG, for any child with features (by history or observation) to suggest overt or occult seizures. Early referral to a neurology epilepsy sub-specialist is recommended if hypsarrhythmia or another aggressive electrographic pattern is found on EEG. Assessments by specialists in physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy Ophthalmologic examination Assessment of nutrition by a nutritionist or dietician Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Seizures. As seizure severity and complexity varies widely, management should be tailored to the individual. Some children with BPAN may have no evidence of seizures or experience only rare febrile events and require no ongoing pharmacologic intervention. Others have severe, refractory epilepsy with multiple seizure types warranting the involvement of specialists in pediatric epilepsy and consideration of multiple therapeutic modalities, including antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), ketogenic diet, and/or vagus nerve stimulation. Short-term treatment with ACTH, prednisolone, or vigabatrin should be considered early in the care of a child with epileptic spasms, based on the guidelines in the US consensus report from the International League Against Epilepsy [Pellock et al 2010]. Education of parents regarding common seizure presentations is appropriate. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Global Developmental Disability/Intellectual Disability

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states. For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP). For ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an individualized education program (IEP) should be developed by the local public school district based on each individuals’ level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21. For all ages. In the United States, individuals are protected under IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) and should receive free and appropriate public education in the least restricted environment. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Developmental pediatricians can also provide assistance with transition to adulthood. Consideration of private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs is recommended. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation. In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

Gross motor dysfunction. Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation). Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers) For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox® anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures. Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., writing, feeding, grooming, and dressing). Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the indvidual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control. Parkinsonism. Involvement of a neurologist specializing in movement disorders may be helpful once parkinsonism emerges in adolescents/adults. In the treatment of parkinsonism, dystonia, and spasticity the usual pharmacologic agents can be considered with the caveat that these therapies could exacerbate the cognitive deficits that also occur in this age group. Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism with dopaminergic medications usually has an initial striking benefit in males and females with improved motor function, affect, appetite, and interest in activities, followed by equally consistent disabling motor fluctuations (“on-off” phenomena) and dyskinesias [Hayflick et al 2013, Hogarth 2015]. As cognitive deficits progress in those with advanced disease, carbidopa/levodopa formulations may carry a lower risk of adverse neuropsychiatric effects than dopamine agonists. Amantadine may be helpful for dyskinesias, but also carries a risk (especially in higher doses) of adverse psychiatric effects such as hallucinations and agitation. Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity can include (if indicated) clonazepam or other benzodiazepines, oral baclofen, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen. Trihexyphenydyl may also be useful for dystonia but may worsen cognitive dysfunction in advanced stages of the disease.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary. Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Other Features

Disordered sleep. Pharmacologic treatment of sleep abnormalities with melatonin, chloral hydrate, or benzodiazepines may be indicated. Ophthalmologic findings. Eye findings are treated in a routine manner. 
Other Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed A gastric feeding tube to help maintain adequate weight (which becomes more difficult with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia, if indicated Monitoring for complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease with institution of pharmacologic management if indicated. There are no data on the efficacy of fundoplication in BPAN. Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications Regular pulmonary hygiene to manage risk for pulmonary complications; tracheostomy as indicated when secretions are difficult to manage

Surveillance

Routine follow up by a neurologist for medication management and interval assessment of ambulation, seizure activity, speech, and swallowing. Often done every three to six months, follow up may be annual for those who are more stable. For those receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism), monitoring for adverse neuropsychiatric effects and disabling motor fluctuations and dyskinesias Follow-up ophthalmologic examination every one to two years

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because women with mild manifestations of BPAN could potentially reproduce, the potential for teratogenic effects of medication taken during pregnancy needs to be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation

Because BPAN falls in the category of NBIA and because individuals with BPAN have high brain iron, the possibility of chelation therapy is sometimes raised. The chelator deferiprone is currently under investigation for treatment of another NBIA disorder, PKAN. However, to date there is no evidence that iron chelation initiated early in the disease course prevents or delays the parkinsonian degeneration in adulthood or otherwise alters the course of PKAN. Nonetheless, results of these studies may inform its use in BPAN and/or lead to additional clinical trials. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.