http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bpes

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), the following evaluations are recommended: Examination by a (pediatric) ophthalmologist for visual acuity, refractive error, extraocular movement, strabismus, size of palpebral apertures, and eyelid elevation. Those with amblyopia or strabismus should be referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist for management [Beckingsale et al 2003]. Genetic evaluation and genetic counseling by a clinical geneticist to discuss recurrence risk and assess risk for premature ovarian insufficiency (POI). In girls with BPES, the family history can indicate the type of BPES in affected females (with type I inferred by the association with subfertility or infertility). In uninformative families or simplex cases (i.e., single occurrence in a family), molecular genetic testing may be helpful in some cases in assessing the risk for POI. Referral of females with BPES to a pediatric or adult endocrinologist during late puberty or early adulthood to assess onset and course of POI

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management requires the input of specialists including a clinical geneticist, pediatric ophthalmologist, oculoplastic surgeon, (pediatric or adult) endocrinologist, reproductive endocrinologist, and gynecologist. Eyelid surgery. Timing of eyelid surgery is controversial; it involves weighing the balance of early surgery to prevent deprivation amblyopia and late surgery to allow for more reliable ptosis measurements, the latter of which provides a better surgical outcome. Furthermore, ptosis surgery is hampered by the dysplastic structure of the eyelids [Beckingsale et al 2003]. The surgical management is traditionally performed in two stages and involves a medial canthoplasty for correction of the blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus at ages three to five years, followed about a year later by ptosis correction, which usually requires a brow suspension procedure. Many surgical techniques have been described for medial canthoplasty and none of the existing methods is free from criticism. If the epicanthal folds are small, a Y-V canthoplasty is traditionally used; if the epicanthal folds are severe, a double Z-plasty is used. An alternate technique for medial canthoplasty has been described recently using the skin redraping method, which has a simple flap design, less scarring, and the effective repair of epicanthus inversus and telecanthus [Sa et al 2012]. To correct telecanthus, the medial canthal tendon is usually shortened or fused with a transnasal wire. Ptosis correction is particularly important as it can address the disfigurement as well as functional concerns. Frontal muscle flap suspension is mostly used for severe ptosis in adults; however, it remains controversial. A major concern is that the frontal muscle development may be restrained by surgery. Decock et al [2011b] reported that super-maximal resection and frontalis suspension is the preferred method as it leads to a good cosmetic outcome as well as to an improved muscle function. Alternatively, a one-stage procedure in which medial canthoplasty and ptosis correction are performed simultaneously has been described [Wu et al 2008]. Two recent retrospective, interventional studies including 21 patients demonstrated that one-stage correction using a standard combination of surgical techniques is safe and efficient [Sebastiá et al 2011, Liu et al 2014]. Recent insights into the causes of the abnormal lower eyelid positioning allow a more targeted surgical reconstruction that produces a more natural appearance [Decock et al 2011a]. Ten individuals with molecularly proven BPES were noted to have a laterally displaced inferior punctum (i.e., in the lower eyelid) due to temporal displacement of the entire lower eyelid. Addition of a simple surgical step corrected the position of the lower eyelid and its abnormal downward concavity (the temporal ectropion), and the lateral displacement of the inferior punctum. This approach eliminates the epicanthus inversus fold without the need for double Z-plasty [Decock et al 2011b]. Ovarian insufficiency. Management of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) needs to address the two following major medical issues that are applicable to primary ovarian insufficiency in general and not specific for BPES (no data specific to BPES are available): Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the International Menopause Society recommend estrogen replacement therapy for women with primary ovarian insufficiency (amenorrhea and a menopausal serum FSH concentration). Although no data from randomized trials guide the use of hormonal therapy in women with BPES and POI, a reasonable regimen would be 100 μg of transdermal estradiol and 10 mg of oral medroxyprogesterone acetate daily for the first 12 days of each month. Women should keep a menstrual calendar and have a pregnancy test promptly in the case of late menses [Nelson 2009].A pelvic ultrasound examination and measurement of bone mineral density are indicated at the time of diagnosis of ovarian insufficiency. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency should be encouraged to maintain a lifestyle that optimizes bone and cardiovascular health, including engaging in regular weight-bearing exercise, maintaining an adequate intake of calcium (1200 mg daily) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU daily), eating a healthy diet to avoid obesity, and undergoing screening for cardiovascular risk factors, with treatment of any identified risk factors. Infertility. No therapies have been shown to restore ovarian function and fertility. Some couples are averse to adoption and to reproductive technologies and are content not to become parents.For couples who decide to pursue parenthood actively, the options are adoption, foster parenthood, embryo donation, and egg donation. The rates of pregnancy with egg donation appear to be similar among older and younger women. Women with primary ovarian insufficiency who become pregnant as a result of oocyte donation may have an increased risk of delivering infants who are small for gestational age and of having pregnancy-induced hypertension and postpartum hemorrhage, but these findings are controversial [Nelson 2009].The issue of POI is emotionally charged and should be discussed with the patient with this in mind.

Surveillance

 The frequency of ophthalmic follow-up should be individualized depending on age, procedures performed in the past, and results of visual acuity testing. Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are advised in females in whom the BPES type is unknown or in whom BPES type I is suspected based on a positive family history or FOXL2 pathogenic variant. Frequency of endocrinologic follow-up to monitor ovarian status is individualized and can involve pelvic ultrasound examination, measurement of serum FSH concentrations, and assessment of menstrual pattern (ages of menarche and onset of oligomenorrhea and secondary amenorrhea).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Ovarian transplantation has been performed in rare instances in which the affected woman has an identical twin sister with normal ovarian function [Nelson 2009]. Note: (1) Cryopreservation has not yet been reported in BPES. (2) Children who are at risk for POI are most likely to benefit from cryopreservation as their ovaries contain more primordial follicles than those of adult women; it is expected that by the time these children are mature and need their ovarian tissue, the modalities for its optimal use would become available. (3) At the time that they might wish to consider an IVF procedure, adult women with BPES usually do not have sufficient appropriate primordial follicles for embryo cryopreservation. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.