http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/brca1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Individuals who have a germline pathogenic variant in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are counseled at the time of disclosure of molecular genetic test results about their options for Surveillance and Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Treatment of Manifestations

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines suggest that women with a BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant could consider bilateral mastectomy as a primary surgical treatment of breast cancer because of their elevated rate of ipsilateral and contralateral breast cancer. See NCCN guidelines for the treatment of breast cancer and the treatment of other BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated malignancies (registration required).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations


Breast cancer Consider prophylactic bilateral mastectomy Given the conflicting data on the degree of risk reduction of breast cancer associated with prophylactic oophorectomy, consider discussing the risks and benefits of this approach with a genetics specialist. Chemoprevention. In a retrospective study tamoxifen reduced the risk for breast cancer by 62% among healthy women with a BRCA2 germline variant [King et al 2001]. The sample size, however, was extremely small. In a nested case-control study, tamoxifen use was associated with a 41%-50% reduction in the risk of developing contralateral breast cancer [Narod et al 2000, Metcalfe et al 2005]. There have been no prospective randomized trials of tamoxifen as a chemoprevention agent in women with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants. Breast feeding for a cumulative total of more than one year reduced the risk for breast cancer [Jernström et al 2004]. 
Ovarian cancer/fallopian tube cancer Consider prophylactic oophorectomy, recognizing that completion of childbearing may factor into this decision. Several studies have documented a significant (80%-96%) risk reduction in ovarian cancer following risk-reducing oophorectomy [Kauff et al 2002, Rebbeck et al 2002, Rutter et al 2003]. Salpingectomy. Recent advances in understanding the molecular events preceding ovarian cancer have established the fallopian tube as the origin of the majority of high-grade serous ovarian cancers, leading to the consideration of salpingectomy with ovarian retention until the age of natural menopause as the first step in primary prevention. This approach is likely to reduce the health hazards of premature menopause, but its adoption will require prospective data to establish its safety and efficacy [Daly et al 2015]. Tubal ligation. A meta-analysis of 13 studies showed a reduction in risk for ovarian cancer of 34% in the general population after tubal ligation [Cibula et al 2011]. A meta-analysis of modifiers of risk of cancer in individuals with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 found a reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer in females with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, although study design issues limit the impact of these findings [Friebel et al 2014]. Oral contraceptive use has been associated with a reduction in ovarian cancer risk of 14% among women who had ever used oral contraceptives and 38% among long-term users [Whittemore et al 2004a]. Note: There is no evidence that use of current (after 1975) oral contraceptive formulations increases the risk for early-onset breast cancer for women with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Significant adverse consequences of tamoxifen treatment included higher rates of endometrial cancer and thromboembolic episodes (including pulmonary embolism) in those individuals who took the medication than in those who did not. Women with a history of thromboembolic disease or with a coagulation disorder should avoid taking tamoxifen. Women on tamoxifen should be counseled to report any abnormal vaginal bleeding immediately to their gynecologist.

Surveillance


Women Monthly breast self-examination Clinical breast examination every 6-12 months beginning at age 25 Annual breast MRI beginning at age 25, or individualized based on family history if a breast cancer diagnosis before age 30 is present Annual mammogram beginning at age 30 Annual transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125 concentration beginning at age 35 years (or individualized based on the earliest age of onset in the family) may be considered for those women who have not elected to undergo prophylactic oophorectomy. Note: Annual pelvic ultrasound and/or CA-125 concentration has not been effective in detecting early-stage ovarian cancer, either in high-risk or average-risk women. 
Men Breast self-examination training and regular monthly breast self-examination beginning at age 35 Annual clinical breast examination beginning at age 35 Annual prostate cancer screening beginning at age 45 
Women and men Screening for melanoma should be individualized based on the family history. Screening of asymptomatic individuals for pancreatic cancer is not generally recommended, but is possible in research settings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No data specific to individuals with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants are available.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a cancer-predisposing BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline variant has been identified in a family, testing of at-risk relatives can identify those family members who also have the familial variant and thus need increased surveillance and early intervention when a cancer is identified. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several studies currently underway are looking at novel approaches to the treatment of BRCA-associated breast and ovarian cancer. The majority of the studies involve PARP inhibitors, and have led to FDA approval for one of these agents in treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer. Newer studies are exploring the use of PARP inhibitors in other BRCA-associated cancers (e.g., pancreatic cancer). Given the experimental data showing increased sensitivity of BRCA cell lines to platinum-based agents, there is interest in platinum-based regimens for breast cancer in the neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and metastatic setting. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). General population studies suggest that long-term estrogen replacement therapy in postmenopausal women may increase breast cancer risk, but that short-term use to treat menopausal symptoms does not. However, even relatively short-term combined estrogen plus progestin use was shown to increase the incidence of breast cancers in a randomized, placebo control trial of HRT [Chlebowski et al 2003]. Three observational studies on the impact of HRT on breast cancer risk in BRCA 1/2 heterozygotes have been published. Rebbeck et al [2005] evaluated breast cancer risk associated with HRT after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy in a cohort of 462 women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant and found that HRT of any type after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy did not significantly alter the reduction in breast cancer risk associated with the surgery. The postoperative follow up was 3.6 years. It was concluded that short-term HRT does not substantially increase the risk for breast cancer in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant. A subsequent study of expanded data from this cohort included 1299 women with a mean follow-up of 5.4 years. There was no increase in breast cancer risk, and a significant decrease in breast cancer risk was found among BRCA1 heterozygotes [Domchek et al 2011]. In another matched case-control study of 472 postmenopausal women with a BRCA1 pathogenic variant, the use of HRT was associated with a reduction in breast cancer risk [Eisen et al 2008]. Finally, a case-control study of 432 matched pairs with a mean follow up of 4.3 years also found a decrease in the risk for breast cancer in BRCA1 heterozygotes [Kotsopoulos et al 2016]. Taken together, these studies support the short-term use of HRT among BRCA1/2 heterozygotes who have undergone surgical menopause.