http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/brugada

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Brugada syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Electrocardiogram Induction with sodium blockers (ajmaline, procainamide, pilsicainide, flecainide) in persons with a type 2 ECG or type 3 ECG and suspicion of the disease Electrophysiologic study to assess risk of sudden cardiac death. Although the data are controversial, no other risk stratification parameter is presently available for asymptomatic individuals [Nunn et al 2010]. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Brugada syndrome is characterized by the presence of ST-segment elevation in leads V1 to V3. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are the only therapy currently known to be effective in persons with Brugada syndrome with syncope or cardiac arrest [Brugada et al 1999, Wilde et al 2002]. See Figure 3 for risk stratification and recommendations of ICD in individuals with Brugada syndrome. Electrical storms respond well to infusion of isoproterenol (1-3 µg/min), the first line of therapy before other antiarrhythmics [Maury et al 2004]. It is important to: Eliminate/treat agents/circumstances such as fever, cocaine use, electrolyte disturbances, and use of class I antiarrhythmic medications and other non-cardiac medications that can induce acute arrhythmias; AND Hospitalize the patient at least until the ECG pattern has normalized. Controversy exists regarding the treatment of asymptomatic individuals. Recommendations vary [Benito et al 2009, Escárcega et al 2009, Nunn et al 2010] and include the following: Observation until the first symptom develops (the first symptom can also be sudden cardiac death) Placement of an ICD if the family history is positive for sudden cardiac death Use of electrophysiologic study (EPS) to identify those most likely to experience arrhythmias and thus to benefit the most from placement of an ICD

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Quinidine (1-2 g daily) has been shown to restore ST segment elevation and decrease the incidence of arrhythmias [Belhassen et al 2004, Hermida et al 2004, Probst et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

During surgery and in the post-surgical recovery period persons with Brugada syndrome should be monitored by ECG.

Surveillance

At-risk individuals with a family history of Brugada syndrome or a known pathogenic variant should undergo ECG monitoring every one to two years beginning at birth [Oe et al 2005]. The presence of type I ECG changes should be further investigated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following can unmask the Brugada syndrome ECG [Antzelevitch et al 2002]: Febrile state Vagotonic agents α-adrenergic agonists [Miyazaki et al 1996] β-adrenergic antagonists Tricyclic antidepressants First-generation antihistamines (dimenhydrinate) Cocaine toxicity The following should be avoided [Antzelevitch et al 2003]: Class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs including flecainide and propafenone Class 1A agents including procainamide and disopyramide

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives is appropriate because: ECG changes have low sensitivity in establishing the diagnosis [Priori et al 2003]; Identification of individuals at risk allows preventive measures such as avoidance of medications that can induce ventricular arrhythmias; Surveillance can then be limited to family members who have the identified pathogenic variant [Benito et al 2009, Escárcega et al 2009, Nunn et al 2010]. If the pathogenic variant has not been identified in the family, relatives should be screened with an ECG. If a type I ECG is identified, further investigation is warranted. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Hormonal changes during pregnancy can precipitate arrhythmic events in women with Brugada syndrome. Recurrent ventricular tachyarrhythmia can be inhibited and the electrocardiographic pattern can normalize following IV infusion of low-dose isoproterenol followed by oral quinidine [Sharif-Kazemi et al 2011]. Quinidine is not known to be teratogenic to the developing fetus and is a preferred drug to treat arrhythmia in pregnancy. For more information about medication use during pregnancy, visit www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.