http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/burn-mckeown

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Burn-McKeown syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: In newborns, airway assessment for evidence of upper-airway obstruction with choanal stenosis/atresia Ophthalmology assessment for lower-eyelid coloboma for possible corneal involvement Audiology assessment (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) Examination for midline cleft palate or unilateral cleft lip/palate; referral to multidisciplinary cleft palate team as required Cardiology and/or echocardiographic assessment for structural heart defects Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation or surgical correction of choanal stenosis/atresia. Defects of the lower eyelids that can result in corneal exposure require care by an ophthalmologist to reduce the risk of corneal scarring. Treatment of hearing loss is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aids. Treatment of craniofacial manifestations (e.g., cleft lip and/or palate, preauricular tags, prominent ears) is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, and speech/language therapy. Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner.

Surveillance

 Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in craniofacial disorders. Clinical follow up should include body measurements, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.