http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bvd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To determine the stage of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, ophthalmologic examination should be performed. Medical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Low vision aids provide benefit for those individuals with significant deterioration in visual acuity. Stage 4c fundus lesions or choroidal neovascularization and hemorrhage can be managed by direct laser photocoagulation. Marano et al [2000] suggested a conservative approach in the treatment of choroidal neovascularization based on two individuals with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy whose visual acuity improved. No clinical trials comparing the efficacy of laser photocoagulation to conservative treatment have been conducted. Anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents are the standard treatment for individuals with subfoveal choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Leu et al [2007] injected intravitreal bevacizumab in a 13 year-old with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy and CNV, hastening visual recovery and regression of the CNV. Intravitreal ranibizumab has also been used with success [Querques et al 2009]. There are no reports on the use of aflibercept. Long-term follow up of these affected individuals is unknown. There are currently no clinical trials to demonstrate the effectiveness of anti-VEGF agents on CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. Andrade et al [2003] performed photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin for CNV on one person with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. The CNV regressed and the subretinal hemorrhage resolved. The authors suggested that PDT may be an option for treatment of CNV in Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. Genetic counseling and occupational counseling should be offered.

Surveillance

 Ophthalmologic examination should be performed annually to monitor the progression of the fundus lesions; in childhood, annual examinations are important in preventing the development of amblyopia. Affected individuals should be advised to see their ophthalmologist in the event of decreased vision or metamorphopsia, which could be signs of CNV.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Cessation of smoking helps prevent neovascularization of the retina [Clemons et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.