http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cadasil

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CADASIL, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation Psychometrics with particular attention to executive function Standard brain MRI (FLAIR sequence) Clinical genetics consultation Psychiatric consultation should be considered

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no treatment of proven efficacy for CADASIL. Antiplatelet treatment is frequently used, but not proven effective in CADASIL. Migraine should be treated symptomatically and prophylactically, depending on the frequency of manifestations. There is no evidence that triptans and ergot derivatives should be avoided, although some argue that vasoconstrictive medication should be used with prudence. Co-occurrence of hypertension, diabetes, or hypercholesterolemia should be treated. Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families. Further discussion of medical management options for individuals with CADASIL was published by del Río-Espínola et al [2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

There are no preventive measures for stroke or vascular dementia. Migraine attacks can be treated symptomatically and prophylactically according to migraine care standards.

Surveillance

There are no standard international surveillance guidelines for CADASIL. Several countries have developed CADASIL guidelines which can be referred to, such as the medical guideline for CADASIL published (in French) by the French Health Authority (HAS). Yearly follow up by a neurologist with expertise in CADASIL is recommended from the time of diagnosis. A consultation with a neuropsychiatrist is recommended when there are symptoms of depression or other psychiatric manifestations. Consultation of other medical specialists (e.g., rehabilitation physician, physical therapist, and psychologist) is as required. The interval at which individuals with CADASIL should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the patients and their care givers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Angiography and anticoagulants are contraindicated in CADASIL as they may provoke cerebrovascular accidents [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001]. Smoking increases the risk of stroke in individuals with CADASIL and should be avoided [Singhal et al 2004]. Thrombolytic therapy (intravenous thrombolysis) is contraindicated because of the presumed increased risk for cerebral hemorrhage in view of the fact that patients with CADASIL have microbleeds on MRI [Lesnik Oberstein et al 2001, Dichgans et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although no formal studies have been performed, no evidence from clinical practice suggests that fetuses affected with CADASIL are at an increased risk for intrauterine complications or complications during/after delivery. Women with a NOTCH3 pathogenic variant have been described as at increased risk for neurologic events in pregnancy during and shortly after delivery (puerperium) [Roine et al 2005]. However, it should be noted that this study was performed retrospectively. In the authors’ experience, most women with CADASIL have an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery, but transient neurologic events are sometimes reported (mostly consistent with migraine aura) [Lesnik Oberstein, unpublished observation based on clinical practice].

Therapies Under Investigation

Small-scale observational studies have suggested a beneficial effect of acetazolamide on migraine [Donnini et al 2012]. Acetazolamide has also been shown to have a beneficial effect on cerebral blood flow in one case report [Park et al 2011]. Acetazolamide is not given to patients with CADASIL on a routine basis. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies suggest that disease progression is faster in individuals with CADASIL who have increased blood pressure [Peters et al 2004, Holtmannspötter et al 2005, Peters et al 2006]. However, no controlled data are available regarding the effect of antihypertensive treatment on disease progression. Based on experience with stroke in general, many neurologists prescribe salicylates. Whether these are of any efficacy in preventing stroke in individuals with CADASIL has not been studied.