http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cah

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-OHD CAH), the following evaluations are recommended: 
To assess for salt wasting Plasma renin activity (PRA) Serum electrolytes 
To distinguish classic from non-classic forms of 21-OHD CAH Baseline 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, cortisol, and aldosterone ACTH stimulation test to compare stimulated concentration of 17-OHP to the baseline level 
To assess the degree of prenatal virilization in females Careful physical examination of the external genitalia and its orifices Vaginogram to assess the anatomy of urethra and vagina 
To assess the degree of postnatal virilization in both males and females Bone maturation assessment by bone age Serum concentration of adrenal androgens (unconjugated dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA], Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended for those individuals with a new diagnosis of 21-OHD CAH.

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency have been published [Speiser et al 2010] (full text). It is imperative to make the diagnosis of 21-OHD CAH as quickly as possible in order to initiate therapy and arrest the effects of cortisol deficiency and mineralocorticoid deficiency, if present. A multidisciplinary team of specialists in pediatric endocrinology, pediatric urology/surgery, clinical genetics, and psychology is essential for the diagnosis and management of the individual with ambiguous genitalia [Hughes et al 2006]. A pioneer project of CAH comprehensive care centers was implemented [Auchus et al 2010]. Two CAH comprehensive care centers which can provide multidisciplinary care from diagnosis through all stages of growth and development have been designated in the United States.

Classic 21-OHD CAH

Glucocorticoid replacement therapy. The goal of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is to replace deficient steroids, minimize adrenal sex hormone and glucocorticoid excess, prevent virilization, optimize growth, and promote fertility [Clayton et al 2002]. Hydrocortisone in tablet form is the treatment of choice in growing children. The use of oral hydrocortisone suspension is discouraged. Treatment for CAH principally involves glucocorticoid replacement therapy, usually in the form of hydrocortisone (10-15 mg/m2/24 hours) given orally in two or three daily divided doses [New et al 2013]. Glucocorticoid therapy for children involves balancing suppression of adrenal androgen secretion against iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in order to maintain a normal linear growth rate and normal bone maturation. Note: Overtreatment with glucocorticosteroids can result in cushingoid features and should be avoided. It often occurs when serum concentration of 17-OHP is reduced to the physiologic range for age. An acceptable range for serum concentration of 17-OHP in the treated individual is higher (100-1,000 ng/dL) than normal, provided androgens are maintained in an appropriate range for gender and pubertal status. During periods of stress (e.g., surgery, febrile illness, shock, major trauma), all individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require increased amounts of glucocorticoids. Typically, two to three times the normal dose is administered orally or by intramuscular injection when oral intake is not tolerated. Affected individuals should carry medical information regarding emergency steroid dosing. Individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH require lifelong administration of glucocorticoids. After linear growth is complete, more potent glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone and dexamethasone) that tend to suppress growth in childhood can be used. Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy. Treatment with 9α-fludrohydrocortisone (Florinef®) (0.05-0.2 mg/day orally) and sodium chloride (1-2 g/day added to formula or foods) is necessary in individuals with the salt-wasting form of 21-OHD CAH. All individuals with the classic form should be treated with both 9α-fludrohydrocortisone and sodium chloride supplement in the newborn period and early infancy [Speiser et al 2010]. Sodium chloride supplementation may not be necessary after infancy; the amount of mineralocorticoid required daily may likewise decrease with age. Feminizing genitoplasty. Per the 2006 joint LWPES/ESPE (Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society/European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology) consensus statement [Lee et al 2006] (full text): “Surgery should only be considered in cases of severe virilization (Prader III-V) and be performed in conjunction, when appropriate, with repair of the common urogenital sinus. Because orgasmic function and erectile sensation may be disturbed by clitoral surgery, the surgical procedure should be anatomically based to preserve erectile function and the innervation of the clitoris. Emphasis is on functional outcome rather than a strictly cosmetic appearance. It is generally felt that surgery that is performed for cosmetic reasons in the first year of life relieves parental distress and improves attachment between the child and the parents; the systematic evidence for this belief is lacking.” The Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines [Speiser et al 2010] (full text) state: “[C]litoral and perineal reconstruction [should] be considered in infancy and performed by an experienced surgeon in a center with similarly experienced pediatric endocrinologists, mental health professionals, and social work services.” Although there are no randomized controlled studies of either the best age or the best methods for feminizing surgery, the recommended procedures are neurovascular-sparing clitoroplasty and vaginoplasty using total or partial urogenital mobilization. When necessary, vaginoplasty is usually performed in late adolescence because routine vaginal dilation is required to maintain a patent vagina. Precocious puberty. The true precocious puberty that may occur in 21-OHD CAH can be treated with analogs of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH). Testicular adrenal rest tumors. Response of testicular adrenal rest tumors to intensified glucocorticoid treatment may decrease the tumor size and improve testicular function [Bachelot et al 2008]. Testis-sparing surgery is considered in males who fail medical treatment, but the outcome has not been favorable, perhaps because of long-standing obstruction of the tubules [Claahsen-van der Grinten et al 2008]. Assistive reproductive technologies (ART) may also be considered to achieve fertility [Sugino et al 2006]. Transition from adolescence to adulthood. Improved care for individuals with 21-OHD CAH has resulted in a good prognosis and normal life expectancy. However, a prospective cross-sectional study of adults with 21-OHD CAH in the UK showed the following [Arlt et al 2010]: Affected individuals were significantly shorter and had a higher body mass index. Women with classic CAH had increased diastolic blood pressure. Metabolic abnormalities were common among studied individuals, and included obesity (41%), hypercholesterolemia (46%), insulin resistance (29%), osteopenia (40%), and osteoporosis (7%). Subjective health status was significantly impaired and fertility compromised. Transition of pediatric individuals to medical care in the adult setting is an important step to ensure optimal lifelong treatment, aiming to achieve good health with a normal life expectancy and quality of life [Reisch et al 2011]. Care for adults with CAH requires a multidisciplinary approach, including psychological support by specialists [Ogilvie et al 2006a]. Adrenalectomy. Bilateral adrenalectomy has been reported as a treatment of individuals with severe 21-OHD CAH who are homozygous for a null variant and who have a history of poor control with hormone replacement therapy [Van Wyk et al 1996, Meyers & Grua 2000]. It is thought that these individuals may be more successfully treated as individuals with Addison disease; however, compliance with the medication regimen postoperatively is exceedingly important. Thus, bilateral adrenalectomy can be considered only in selected individuals who have failed medical therapy; the risk for non-compliance must be considered before surgery [Speiser et al 2010]. Only small series of adults undergoing adrenalectomy have been reported (see review in Bachelot et al [2008]), the largest of which included five persons [Ogilvie et al 2006b]. The three main indications for adrenalectomy were: infertility, virilization, and obesity. Improvements in all three areas were noted in all reported individuals. More long-term data are needed to determine the outcome of those undergoing adrenalectomy, since the potential increase in ACTH postoperatively can worsen adrenal rest tissues.

Non-Classic 21-OHD CAH

Individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH do not always require treatment. Many are asymptomatic throughout their lives, or symptoms may develop during puberty, after puberty, or post partum. The hyperandrogenic symptoms that require treatment include advanced bone age, early pubic hair, precocious puberty, tall stature, and early arrest of growth in children; infertility, cystic acne, and short stature in both adult males and females; hirsutism, frontal balding, polycystic ovaries, and irregular menstrual periods in females; and testicular adrenal rest tissue in males [New 2006]. In previously treated individuals, an option of discontinuing therapy when symptoms resolve should be offered [Speiser et al 2010]. Traditionally, individuals with non-classic 21-OHD CAH have been treated with lower amounts of glucocorticoid than those required for individuals with classic 21-OHD CAH.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Salt-wasting crisis. Newborn screening programs aim to identify infants with classic 21-OHD CAH in order to initiate glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid treatment prior to a potentially life-threatening salt-wasting crisis. See Treatment of Manifestations, Glucocorticoid replacement therapy and Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Short stature. Short stature may result from glucocorticoid-induced growth suppression caused by over-treatment with glucocorticoids or from advanced skeletal maturation caused by inadequate glucocorticoid treatment. Evidence derived from observational studies suggests that the final height of individuals with CAH treated with glucocorticoids is lower than the population norm and lower than expected given parental height [Muthusamy et al 2010]. See Therapies Under Investigation for a discussion of treatment of short stature in individuals with CAH.

Surveillance

The following evaluations should be performed every three to four months when children are actively growing. Evaluation may be less often thereafter. The frequency of evaluation should vary depending on individual needs [Speiser et al 2010]. Efficacy of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following: Early-morning serum concentrations of 17-OHP, Δ4-androstenedione, and testosterone approximately every three months during infancy and every three to six months thereafter. (In some instances, measurement of urinary pregnantriols and 17 ketosteroids in a 24-hour urine sample may help assess hormonal control. However, the process of urine collection makes it less practical than a simple blood draw.) Linear growth, weight gain, pubertal development, and clinical signs of cortisol and androgen excess Bone age to assess osseous maturation (at 6- to 12-month intervals) Efficacy of mineralocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by measurement of the following: Blood pressure Early morning plasma renin activity or direct renin assay in a controlled position (usually upright) Monitoring for testicular abnormalities in males. Periodic imaging of the testes either by ultrasonography or MRI should begin after puberty and be repeated every three to five years. Monitoring fertility and metabolic risks in adults. In affected adults, periodic measurements and/or monitoring of the following should be performed: Fecundity and fertility Weight Lipid profile Blood pressure Bone mineral density Imaging studies. No routine adrenal imaging or bone mineral density is recommended [Speiser et al 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Physical stress such as febrile illness, gastroenteritis with dehydration, surgery accompanied by general anesthesia, and major trauma can precipitate an adrenal crisis in individuals with classic CAH. Increased doses of glucocorticoids are recommended in these situations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If prenatal testing for 21-OHD CAH has not been performed, it is appropriate to evaluate newborn sibs of a proband in order to facilitate early diagnosis and treatment. Serum 17-OHP concentration should be measured in addition to newborn screening. Molecular genetic testing is indicated if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnant females with classic 21-OHD CAH. Pregnant females who have classic salt-wasting 21-OHD CAH need to be monitored closely by an endocrinologist during pregnancy. Maintenance doses of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid usually need to be increased because adrenal androgens tend to increase during pregnancy. Despite excess production of maternal adrenal androgens, the genitalia of their female fetuses are not virilized [Lo et al 1999].

Therapies Under Investigation

Affected female fetus with genital ambiguity. Through molecular genetic testing of fetal DNA, defects in 21-OHD CAH synthesis can be diagnosed in utero. Genital ambiguity in female fetuses may be reduced or eliminated by suppressing fetal androgen production through administration of dexamethasone to the mother beginning early in gestation and continuing until delivery. Prenatal treatment should continue to be considered experimental and should only be used within the context of a formal IRB-approved clinical trial. Noninvasive prenatal diagnostic methods for earlier diagnosis of affected female fetuses have been developed and may eliminate the unnecessary prenatal treatment of males and unaffected females [New et al 2014, Tardy-Guidollet et al 2014]. Treatment of short stature. Injections of human growth hormone alone or in combination with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) may be used to improve height prognosis in individuals with 21-OHD CAH who have significant growth failure [Lin-Su et al 2011]. Aromatase inhibitors to slow bone age advancement have been used. However, these approaches are considered experimental treatment and should not be used outside of formally approved clinical trials [Speiser et al 2010]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.