http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cantu

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Cantú syndrome and related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended: Cardiology evaluation with echocardiogram and electrocardiogram Skeletal survey to assess for the associated bone abnormalities Evaluation for scoliosis Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Consider referral to a dermatologist for discussion of treatment options for hypertrichosis. Possible treatments may include shaving and, in teenagers and adults, use of depilatories or laser hair removal. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) often requires surgical closure in infancy or early childhood. Of note, the PDA in Cantú syndrome is frequently described as being very large. Pericardial effusion sometimes requires pericardiocentesis and ultimately pericardial stripping to prevent reaccumulation of the effusion. Scoliosis may require bracing or surgical correction. Standard management for peripheral edema, including compression stockings, is indicated.

Surveillance

If cardiac abnormalities are present, follow-up intervals should be determined by the cardiologist according to the specific clinical manifestations. Otherwise, yearly echocardiogram and electrocardiogram are recommended to monitor cardiac size and function, as well as for evidence of pericardial effusion. These studies should be started in infancy, or as soon as the diagnosis is made, and continued throughout life. Spine radiographs to assess for scoliosis should be performed if there is concern based on physical examination. If scoliosis is present, continued monitoring by an orthopedist is recommended. Consider brain MRI with magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) to evaluate persistent headaches or other neurological symptoms, given the increased risk for cerebral vascular abnormalities. Affected individuals should be monitored for edema –which often develops in adolescence or early adulthood- by reviewing the medical history regarding swelling of the limbs, and by physical examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic ABCC9 or KCNJ8 variant in an affected family member is known, relatives at risk who are suspected of having Cantú syndrome can be offered molecular genetic testing to clarify their genetic status. Family members who are affected should be evaluated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy of a fetus with Cantú syndrome warrants monitoring for: Polyhydramnios. The cause of polyhydramnios is unknown. In some instances, severe polyhydramnios has required serial amniotic fluid reductions and has led to premature labor and delivery. Macrosomia. It is unknown if fetal size warrants special consideration at the time of delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.