

Management 



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CARASIL, the following evaluations are recommended: T2* gradient echo imaging to check cerebral microbleeds Spine MRI to check the degenerative change in lumbar or cervical spine  Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Supportive care in the form of practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families.  Gait disturbance from spasticity and pyramidal signs in the lower extremities may require walking aids or medication such as baclofen or tizanidine. Personality change may require antipsychotic medication. If spinal spondylosis is severe and patients show some neurologic deficit due to spinal compression, orthopedic treatment may be helpful to relieve symptoms. A wig or hairpiece may be helpful for alopecia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Anti-platelet therapy and anti-hypertension therapy may be recommended; however, there is no evidence for their effectiveness.

Surveillance

 The interval at which a person with CARASIL are followed depends on the severity and type of symptoms and the needs of the affected individual and care givers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Smoking and a high-salt diet, which may hasten the progression of arteriosclerosis, should be avoided. 

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It has been speculated that hypertension or smoking may influence the age of onset and frequency of stroke episodes in individuals with CARASIL; smoking may result in earlier disease onset [Singhal et al 2004] and smoking or hypertension may increase the frequency of stroke episodes in individuals with CADASIL [Samii et al 2010]. Therefore, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures such as oral administration of anti-hypertensive drugs and abstinence from smoking.  If the HTRA1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, brain MRI can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. Pregnancy Management
 No special management is necessary in pregnancy for individual with CARASIL.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There is no clinical trial for this disorder. 