http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/carney

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Carney complex (CNC), the following evaluations are recommended: Imaging or biochemical screening for endocrine tumors for diagnostic purposes only Thyroid ultrasonography, recommended as a satisfactory, cost-effective method for determining thyroid involvement in pediatric and young adults with CNC. Its value, however, is questionable in older individuals. In males, testicular ultrasonography at the initial evaluation In females, transabdominal ultrasonography during the first evaluation. Unless an abnormality is detected initially, the test need not be repeated because of the low risk for ovarian malignancy. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following interventions are routine: Cardiac myxoma. Open-heart surgery Cutaneous and mammary myxoma. Surgical excision Cushing syndrome. Bilateral adrenalectomy Pituitary adenoma. Transsphenoidal surgery Thyroid adenomas. Surgery if cancerous LCCSCT. Orchiectomy usually required for boys with aggressively growing LCCSCT and gynecomastia to avoid premature epiphyseal fusion and induction of central precocious puberty. Tumors with lack of growth and mild gynecomastia can be treated medically with aromatase inhibitors. PMS. Surgery to remove primary and/or metastatic lesions

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The only preventive measure in an asymptomatic individual is surgical removal of a heart tumor (cardiac myxoma) prior to the development of heart dysfunction, stroke, or other embolism.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Development of metabolic abnormalities from Cushing syndrome or arthropathy and other complications from acromegaly may be prevented by medical or surgical treatment of the respective endocrine manifestations.

Surveillance

 Recommended clinical surveillance for individuals with CNC include the following: 
            Pre-pubertal pediatric individuals Echocardiogram (annually; biannually for those with a history of excised myxoma) Testicular ultrasound for boys; close monitoring of growth rate and pubertal staging (annually) 
            Post-pubertal pediatric and adult individuals Echocardiogram (annually or biannually for adolescent individuals with a history of excised myxoma) Testicular ultrasound (annually) Thyroid ultrasound (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed) Transabdominal ultrasound of the ovaries (baseline examination; may be repeated as needed) Urinary free cortisol levels (annually) Serum IGF-1 levels (annually) 
            Further evaluation of affected individuals of all age groups, as needed For primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, in addition to urinary free cortisol levels: Diurnal cortisol levels (11:30 pm, 12:00 am and 7:30 am, 8:00 am sampling) Dexamethasone-stimulation test (modified Liddle’s test, as per Stratakis et al [1999]) Adrenal computed tomography For gigantism/acromegaly, in addition to serum IGF-1 levels: Pituitary MRI Three-hour oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT) 90-minute thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) testing For psammomatous melanotic schwannoma: MRI (brain, spine, chest, abdomen, retroperitoneum, pelvis)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance). If the PRKAR1A pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.