http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/catsper-mi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CATSPER-related male infertility, the following evaluations are recommended (if not performed previously as part of the diagnostic evaluation): In males, pubertal age or older, semen analysis to assess sperm number, motility, and morphology In males and females with DIS, hearing evaluation including otologic examination and audiologic assessment (including measurement of bone conduction) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Infertility. No available treatment can reverse the morphologic and/or motility defects observed in CATSPER-related asthenospermia or asthenoteratospermia (low motility with increased number of abnormal forms). For infertile males, one option is to bypass these morphologic and motility abnormalities using assisted reproductive technologies such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) [Smith et al 2013]. This approach has been used successfully in males with DIS [Zhang et al 2007]. Deafness. For males and females with DIS, treatment of hearing loss is best achieved by fitting hearing aids for amplification. For school-age children or adolescents, special educational assistance may also be warranted and, where possible, should be offered. (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview and Related Genetic Counseling Issues for other issues pertinent to the care of deaf and hard-of-hearing persons.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae. Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies. In contrast, early auditory intervention, whether through amplification, otologic surgery, or cochlear implantation, is effective [Smith et al 2005] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Although decreased cognitive skills and performance in mathematics and reading are associated with deafness, examination of persons with hereditary hearing loss has shown that these deficiencies are not intrinsically linked to the cause of the deafness. Thus, early identification and timely intervention are essential for optimal cognitive development in children with prelingual deafness.

Surveillance

 Annual monitoring of hearing loss is not required in individuals with DIS because hearing loss is non-progressive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with DIS should avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace or during recreation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband with DIS in infancy or early childhood in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early support and management of hearing loss. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing for the causative contiguous gene deletion; Otologic examination and audiologic assessment. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.