http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cbl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism, the following evaluations are recommended. In an unstable patient: Serial metabolic evaluations of blood gases, electrolytes, glucose, ammonia, liver function, total and direct bilirubin, renal function, lactate dehydrogenase, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma methylmalonic acid (MMA), and total plasma homocysteine (tHcy) to guide acute management until the patient stabilizes Complete blood count (CBC) with differential to evaluate for megaloblastic anemia, cytopenias Peripheral blood smear to evaluate for the presence of schistocytes, in the presence of other manifestations of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) Molecular genetic testing to identify pathogenic variants, if not previously performed, to aid in genetic counseling and prediction of disease severity Once the patient becomes stable: Clinical assessment of growth parameters, head circumference, ability to feed, developmental status, and neurologic status Laboratory assessment of nutritional status (electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels [including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D], and trace minerals) and renal function; complete blood count to monitor for cytopenias Echocardiogram EEG and brain MRI in symptomatic individuals Ophthalmologic examination

Treatment of Manifestations

 Prognosis is poor in patients with early-onset cblC who are undiagnosed and untreated [Rosenblatt et al 1997]. Institution of therapy during acute illness results in rapid improvement of clinical, biochemical, and hematologic manifestations in patients with early- and late-onset cblC [Bartholomew et al 1988, Rosenblatt et al 1997, Bodamer et al 2001, Tomaske et al 2001, Kind et al 2002, Van Hove et al 2002, Fowler et al 2008]. Parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) is the mainstay of therapy and should be instituted as soon as a disorder of intracellular cobalamin metabolism is suspected. Infants are started with daily 1.0 mg intramuscular or subcutaneous injections. Patients with cblC are often highly responsive to this therapy. Patients with elevated tHcy should also receive betaine (250 mg/kg/day) and folate or folinic acid. Acute metabolic decompensation. Although less common in the disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism than in methylmalonic acidemia, severe acidotic/ketotic crises due to profound methylmalonic acidemia do occur. Such critically ill individuals should be managed in consultation with a metabolic specialist. MedicAlert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals. Treatment includes volume replacement with isotonic solutions containing high (10%-12.5%) glucose to reverse catabolism, correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate, and prompt reintroduction of feedings — preferably enterally, but parenterally if enteral route cannot be established. Thromboembolic complications a cause of mortality in cblC are likely associated with increasing plasma concentrations of tHcy [Carrillo-Carrasco & Venditti 2012]. The proper management of thromboembolic complications, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic microangiopathy, should include initiation of OHCbl and betaine or an increase in their doses [Van Hove et al 2002, Sharma et al 2007]. Long-term management. The goals of long-term management include improving the metabolic derangement by lowering plasma tHcy and MMA concentrations and maintaining plasma methionine concentrations within the normal range. These are accomplished by: Parenteral OHCbl. The most experience derives from the treatment of patients with cblC. Infants are usually started at a daily dose of 1.0 mg (~0.3 mg/kg/d) of OHCbl given IM or SQ. Parenteral OHCbl (not the cyanocobalamin form or oral form) is the only effective preparation. Placement of a SQ catheter that minimizes cutaneous punctures [Freehauf et al 2011] and pre-filled injections may increase compliance. Weight-appropriate adjustment of the OHCbl dose is recommended and can be attained by the ability to concentrate OHCbl up to 30 mg/mL. Further titration of the dose may be empirically adjusted as needed for worsening clinical manifestations [Van Hove et al 2002] or for metabolic control of plasma tHcy, MMA, or methionine concentrations [Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2009]. Betaine. Oral betaine (starting at ~250 mg/kg/day) is recommended in patients with defective MeCbl production (cblC, cblD, cblE, cblF, cblG, and cblJ). Betaine augments the non-methionine synthase-dependent conversion of homocysteine to methionine (however, this is not uniformly accepted). Optimal dosing and monitoring have not been adequately established. Folate and folinic acid. Folic acid and folinic acid can potentially augment remethylation and may help improve plasma tHcy and methionine concentrations. Folinic acid may be preferred as it crosses the blood brain barrier more efficiently than folic acid. The adult dose of folate is 1.0 mg by mouth per day, titratable down to 0.5 mg for maintenance. Doses for children and infants are available in the Harriet Lane Handbook [Tschudy & Arcara 2012] and other common reference texts. Dietary management. Patients may be able to tolerate a normal diet: the use of a low-protein diet is under debate and needs further clinical studies to clarify the benefits of its use. Most importantly, methionine restriction should be avoided, as hypomethioninemia can be detrimental [Ribes et al 1990, Rossi et al 2001, De Bie et al 2009]. Gastrostomy tube placement may be required in the present of feeding difficulties and failure to thrive. Other therapeutic considerations that have not been fully validated: Methionine supplementation. Hypomethioninemia is usually responsive to appropriate treatment with OHCbl and betaine. The need for exogenous methionine supplementation may be minimized by these strategies, as the efficacy of this therapy is uncertain [Smith et al 2006]. Pyridoxine. Vitamin B6 is a cofactor for cystathionine beta synthase and, therefore has been proposed as a means of maximizing the removal of homocysteine. Persons with disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism generally do not respond to pyridoxine unless they have a dietary deficiency. Levocarnitine. Indicated for low plasma carnitine levels Treatment of infantile spasms, seizures, congenital heart defects, and hydrocephalus is done in a routine manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Early institution of therapy may reduce but not completely prevent primary manifestations. To prevent metabolic decompensations, patients should be advised to avoid situations that result in catabolism, such as prolonged fasting and dehydration. Of note, during an intercurrent illness patients may be treated with glucose-containing IV fluid. Flu prevention (i.e., immunization) should be a routine part of health maintenance.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Antiplatelet doses of aspirin may be given to patients with isolated homocystinuria to decrease the risk for thrombosis [Brunel-Guitton et al 2010].

Surveillance

 The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on age and disease severity. During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated once or twice a month by a metabolic specialist. Clinical evaluation should include assessment of: Growth including weight, linear growth, and head circumference; Nutritional status; Feeding ability; Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate. Laboratory evaluation should include: Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, plasma MMA concentration, plasma amino acids (methionine), plasma tHcy concentration; Complete blood count (CBC) to monitor for cytopenias; Nutritional studies, if indicated: electrolytes, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels (including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D), and trace minerals. Routine evaluations should include: Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal and optic nerve changes in patients with cblC and cblG and if visual symptoms are present; Neurologic evaluations for early signs of psychomotor retardation, behavioral disturbances, seizures, and myelopathy; Brain MRI and/or EEG as clinically indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Potentially exacerbating circumstances: Prolonged fasting (longer than overnight without dextrose-containing intravenous fluids) Dietary protein intake below the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for age or more than that prescribed by a metabolic specialist Methionine restriction. Methionine-free formulas given to infants with methylmalonic acidemia should be avoided as the decreased methionine intake may worsen hypomethioninemia in patients with decreased methionine production. Nitrous oxide, an anesthetic that is potentially toxic as it depletes the body stores of vitamin B12 and inhibits methionine synthase activity [Abels et al 1990, Drummond & Matthews 1994]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, at-risk sibs may be tested prenatally to allow initiation of treatment as soon as possible after birth. If the newborn sibling of an affected individual has not undergone prenatal testing, the infant can be tested in the first week of life by urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, measurement of total plasma homocysteine, and acylcarnitine profile analysis for the purpose of early diagnosis and treatment. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to confirm the diagnosis. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 A good pregnancy outcome was reported in a woman with cblC treated with OHCbl 1.0 mg IM, folic acid 5.0 mg per day, aspirin 80 mg per day, levocarnitine, and low-protein diet [Brunel-Guitton et al 2010]. Prenatal therapy of an affected fetus by administration of intramuscular OHCbl to the mother may decrease developmental abnormalities and improve neurocognitive outcome [Huemer et al 2005, Trefz et al 2012] but does not appear to affect the ophthalmologic outcome [Patton et al 2000]. The dose and frequency of administration of IM OHCbl has not been established. Favorable outcomes of prenatal treatment have been reported by using dosages between 1 to 10 mg per day, 2-3 times a week, starting as early as 15 weeks’ gestational age [Huemer et al 2005, Trefz et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.