

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial cerebral cavernous malformation (FCCM), the following evaluations are recommended: MRI imaging of the brain and/or spinal cord if not already performed Cerebral angiography may be considered to better define a complex lesion with arterial or venous components identified on brain MRI; however, caution should be used as cerebral angiography carries a small but appreciable risk of stroke. In those with epilepsy: Electoencephalogram (EEG) and/or video-EEG Wada testing (to determine which hemisphere is language dominant) Magnetoencephalography to confirm the localization of the epilepsy and to exclude other epileptogenic lesions Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect. Surgical removal of lesions associated with intractable seizures or focal deficits from recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect has traditionally been recommended [Heros & Heros 2000, Selman et al 2000, Folkersma & Mooij 2001]; however, a recent large prospective study in Scotland reported that surgical excision increased the overall risk of short-term neurologic disability, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, and new focal neurosurgical deficits [Moultrie et al 2014], calling this practice into question. Neuropsychological testing may be considered prior to any neurosurgical procedure. Microsurgical techniques rely on intraoperative examination for precise localization. Even when a large number of lesions are present, a surgical approach may be justified. Gamma knife surgery or radiosurgery, while effective, appears to increase the risk of recurrent hemorrhage and remains unproven [Wang et al 2010, Steiner et al 2010]. Very large single lesions can be difficult to ablate, especially in the brain stem. In these instances, radiosurgery may be an option [Monaco et al 2010]. In a group of individuals with symptomatic cavernous malformations studied in Japan, radiosurgery using varying doses of radiation for deep lesions was compared with conservative (nonsurgical) management. Doses less than 15 Gray (Gy) were associated with the lowest level of complications. Complications were also lower when the lesions were of smaller size, with overall hemorrhage rates reduced initially but reverting to a rate similar to that of the natural history after the first two years post-radiosurgery [Kida et al 2015]. A study that carefully reviewed post-radiosurgery changes in individuals with CCM or AVM found that more than 30% developed radiation necrosis [Blamek et al 2010]. Seizures. Standard treatment for focal seizures using antiepileptic medication with early evaluation for surgical resection is appropriate (see Recurrent hemorrhage or mass effect). Headaches. Standard treatment and management of headaches is indicated unless the headache is severe, prolonged, or progressive, or associated with new or worsening neurologic deficits. In this circumstance, urgent brain imaging could lead to surgical management. Neurologic deficits. Rehabilitation is indicated for those with temporary or permanent neurologic deficits.

Surveillance

 Brain MRI imaging with GRE or SWI is indicated in individuals experiencing new neurologic symptoms. Interpretation can be difficult because new hemorrhages may be asymptomatic.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Limited evidence suggests an increased risk of hemorrhage with certain analgesic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, naproxen) and aspirin. Individuals with headaches and other pain should avoid these medications if suitable substitutes are available. Other medications that increase risk of hemorrhage (e.g., heparin, sodium warfarin [Coumadin®]) should be avoided or, when such medications are necessary for treatment of life-threatening thrombosis, should be closely monitored by the affected individual’s medical team [Schneble et al 2012, Flemming et al 2013, Erdur et al 2014]. The use of narcotic pain medications is also discouraged in chronic pain conditions because of the potential for addiction and because of their association with rebound headaches. Radiation to the central nervous system is associated with de novo lesion formation in FCCM [Larson et al 1998, Nimjee et al 2006, Golden et al 2015]. The pathology of these lesions appears to be histologically different from the cavernomas found prior to radiation [Cha et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate both symptomatic and apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of screening and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. Brain and/or spinal cord MRI imaging including GRE or SWI if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnant women with FCCM who have had recent brain or spinal cord hemorrhage, epilepsy, or migraine will require closer observation during pregnancy. Baseline MRI one year prior to delivery is recommended to determine lesion locations [De Jong et al 2012, Witiw et al 2012, Yamada et al 2013]. Simonazzi et al [2014] reported six women with CCM who had symptoms such as seizure or focal neurologic deficit during pregnancy or within six weeks post-delivery. Reviewing the literature they found ten further cases in which pregnancy outcome was published. Of the 16 women, hemorrhage occured in ten. Preterm delivery occurred in four of six cases, one because of neurologic symptoms at 30 weeks. Cæsarean (C-)section was performed in nine cases, eight of which were for concern over CCM. Affected women and obstetricians are frequently concerned that the risk of increased blood pressure and intrathoracic pressure during stage 3 labor (pushing phase) could lead to CCM hemorrhage. However, in a study of 168 pregnancies (64 women), 28 with sporadic CCM and 36 with FCCM, only five symptomatic cerebral hemorrhages were reported, most commonly manifesting as seizures. Nineteen deliveries in this study were by C-section, mostly due to fear of possible intracranial hemorrhage. The risk of CCM hemorrhage was higher in the familial cases (3.6% compared with 1.8% in sporadic cases) [Kalani & Zabramski 2013]. In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016]. To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, visit MotherToBaby.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Recent advances in the understanding of the pathobiology and molecular signaling of the CCM proteins (see Molecular Genetics) has identified several pathways which may be amenable to drug targeting. These are being investigation in in vitro assays and in live animal models. Fasudil, a specific Rho kinase inhibitor, has been demonstrated in Krit1(+/-) and Ccm2 (+/-) mouse models of FCCM to reduce both lesion size and number, as well as to lesson hemorrhage, proliferation, and inflammation [Stockton et al 2010, McDonald et al 2012]. Fasudil is approved in Japan for treatment of vasodilation; it is not currently available with FDA approval in the United States. Statin medications are nonspecific Rho kinase inhibitors and may be suitable for repurposing to treat CCM lesions. Strong in vitro data [Whitehead et al 2009] led to simvastatin being studied in people with CCM who are eligible to take this medication for other indications such as hyperlipidemia. This trial is in the final data collection and analysis phase (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01764451). However, a Ccm2 knockout mouse model treated with simvastatin did not show a significant decrease in lesion burden, raising questions about dosing and efficacy of statin drug therapy [Gibson et al 2015]. A further proof-of-concept human trial is planned for atorvastatin therapy (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02603328). The chemotherapeutic drug sorafenib [Wüstehube et al 2010] has been investigated in murine models of FCCM caused by mutation of KRIT1 with the finding of reduced capillary sprouting. Loss of function of KRIT1 leads to an increase in signaling of the TGFβ pathway leading to an inappropriate endothelial-to-mesenchymal cellular transition (EndMT): endothelial cells change to become more proliferative, with increased invasiveness and sprouting. Chemical inhibition of TGFβ decreases both the size and number of CCM lesions in mouse models [Maddaluno et al 2013]. Furthermore, inhibition of upstream Wnt/B-Catenin signaling related to EndMT with the drug sulindac restores junctional integrity between endothelia, and also reduces number and size of CCM lesions in a Pdcd10 knockout mouse model [Bravi et al 2015]. Sulindac is used clinically in humans for other indications, including for the treatment of colon cancer. A repurposing drug screen identified vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) and tempol (a superoxide scavenger) as potential therapeutic drugs for CCM. Both of these molecules reduced lesion number in mouse models of CCM [Gibson et al 2015]. Vitamin D3 inhibits the signaling activation of RHOA, while tempol targets superoxide, suggesting a role for oxidative stress in CCM disease pathogenesis. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.