http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cco

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with central core disease (CCD), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination with attention to features of congenital myopathy (hypotonia, failure to thrive, joint contractures, scoliosis), weakness of the limbs, and muscle cramps Physical and occupational therapy assessments Evaluation for feeding difficulties, including assessment for sucking and ability to swallow Pulmonary function testing in most patients, especially those with scoliosis, hypotonia, signs of respiratory distress, and/or history of recurrent chest infections. History should be taken for symptoms of nocturnal hypoxia including early morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, loss of appetite, and deteriorating school performance. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Since prognosis is mainly influenced by respiratory status and scoliosis, treatment geared towards these manifestations is essential. Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms, but mainly consists of supportive measures and rehabilitation that address the following problems: Hypotonia and weakness. Patients may benefit from physical therapy. Interventions may include stretching programs and mild to moderate low-impact exercise; activities should be balanced in such a way that exhaustion is avoided. Scoliosis and joint contractures. Some patients may only require physical therapy, while others may need orthopedic surgery (e.g., scoliosis surgery, corrective surgery for congenital hip dislocation and foot deformities). Respiratory. Patients with more severe symptoms may require respiratory support. Breathing exercises and chest physiotherapy for handling secretions may also be beneficial. Feeding difficulties. Individuals may require diet supplementation and feeding by means of nasogastric/orogastric routes or gastrostomy.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Secondary complications can include respiratory compromise from scoliosis; hence, orthopedic intervention may reduce the risk of this problem. Immunization against influenza is encouraged. Prompt treatment of respiratory infection is important. Joint contractures may be prevented by encouraging mobility and by active participation in physical therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Routine assessment of the spine for scoliosis and joints for contractures Routine assessment of respiratory parameters such as respiratory rate, peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced vital capacity (FVC), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) Sleep studies especially when patients show signs of nocturnal hypoxia Regular assessment of motor abilities in order to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and assistive devices for ambulation, such as a wheelchair

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Although it is unknown how CCD is associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility or which pathogenic variants in RYR1 are absolutely related to MH susceptibility, it is prudent for individuals with CCD to avoid inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details. Individuals suspected of having MH susceptibility are advised to avoid extremes of heat, but this does not mean restriction of athletic activity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because CCD is associated with an increased risk for MH susceptibility, it is appropriate to test at-risk relatives of a proband (whether symptomatic or not) for the RYR1 pathogenic variant identified in the proband in order to caution those with the pathogenic variant about potential risks of inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility for more details. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because all patients with CCD are considered to be at risk for malignant hyperthermia, inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine should be avoided while considering general or regional anesthesia for delivery. Similar to most neuromuscular disorders, clinical progression of disease can be expected in CCD [Sax & Rosenbaum 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.