http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cda1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I), the following evaluations are recommended: Hemoglobin concentration and serum bilirubin concentration Serum ferritin concentration and other modalities used to assess iron overload including liver and myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for biliary stones Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Intramuscular or subcutaneous injections of interferon (IFN)-α2a or INF-α2b given two or three times a week increase hemoglobin and decrease iron overload in the majority of treated individuals [Lavabre-Bertrand et al 2004]. Peginterferon-α2b has also been given once a week. The mechanism behind this response is unknown. To date, only a limited number of individuals, including infants, have been treated.Treatment should be given by a physician who is experienced in interferon administration. Successful allogenic bone marrow transplantation has been described in three children [Ayas et al 2002] and should be considered only in those transfusion-dependent persons who are resistant to IFN therapy. Splenectomy is of unproved value; failure of this procedure to increase hemoglobin levels and also thromboembolic complications may follow splenectomy. Therefore, splenectomy should be cautiously considered in patients with CDA I, as is recommended for non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Treatment of iron overload with regular phlebotomies, if possible, along with iron chelators as necessary, is indicated. Iron overload therapy should follow the guidelines used for non-transfusion dependent thalassemia [Taher et al 2013].

Surveillance

 Recommended monitoring for iron overload: Measurement of hemoglobin, bilirubin, iron, transferrin and serum ferritin concentration every three months starting at age ten years Annual myocardial T2* MRI and hepatic R2* MRI, if available, starting at age ten years

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid any preparation containing iron.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Evaluation of the younger sibs of a proband for early manifestations of CDA I is recommended so that monitoring of hemoglobin and ferritin levels and treatment can begin as soon as necessary in those who are affected. Evaluation of at-risk family members should include CBC to identify macrocytic anemia as well as typical findings on blood smear including macrocytosis, elliptocytes, and basophilic stippling. The diagnosis can be confirmed by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family have been identified. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Anemia places pregnancies of affected women at high risk for delivery-related and outcome complications [Shalev et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.