http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cdg-1a

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) the following evaluations are recommended [Jaeken & Carchon 2001, Jaeken & Matthijs 2001, Grunewald et al 2002, Kjaergaard et al 2002, Miller & Freeze 2003, Grünewald 2009]: Liver function tests Measurement of serum albumin concentration Thyroid function tests to evaluate for decreased thyroid binding globulin, elevated serum concentration of TSH, and low serum concentration of free T4 Coagulation studies including protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, and factor IX Urinalysis to evaluate for proteinuria Measurement of serum concentration of gonadotropins in adolescent and adult women to look for evidence of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism Echocardiogram to evaluate for pericardial effusions Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for microcysts Formal ophthalmologic evaluation since ocular anomalies are frequent and can involve both the structural components (development of the lens and retina) as well as ocular mobility and intraocular pressure [Morava et al 2009, Thompson et al 2013] Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor with inclusion in a multi-disciplinary team if needed

Treatment of Manifestations

Failure to thrive. Infants and children can be nourished with any type of formula for maximal caloric intake. They can tolerate carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Early in life, children may do better on elemental formulas. Their feeding may be advanced based on their oral motor function. Some children require placement of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube for nutritional support until oral motor skills improve. Oral motor dysfunction with persistent vomiting. Thickening of feeds, maintenance of an upright position after eating, and antacids can help children who experience gastroesophageal reflux and/or persistent vomiting. Consultation with a gastroenterologist and nutritionist is often necessary. Children with a gastrostomy tube should be encouraged to eat by mouth if the risk of aspiration is low. Continued speech therapy and oral motor therapy aid transition to oral feeds and encourage speech when the child is developmentally ready. Developmental delay. Occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy should be instituted. As the developmental gap widens between children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their unaffected peers, parents need continued counseling and support. "Infantile catastrophic phase." Very rarely, infants may have a complicated early course presenting with infection or seizure and hypoalbuminemia with third spacing that may progress to anasarca. Some children are responsive to aggressive albumin replacement with lasix, others may have a more refractory course. Symptomatic treatment in a pediatric tertiary care center is recommended. Parents should also be advised that some infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) never experience a hospital visit while others may require frequent hospitalizations. Strabismus. Intervention by a pediatric ophthalmologist early in life is important to preserve vision through glasses, patching, or surgery. Hypothyroidism. Thyroid function tests are frequently abnormal in children with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). However, free thyroxine analyzed by equilibrium dialysis, the most accurate method, has been reported as normal in seven individuals with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Diagnosis of hypothyroidism and L-thyroxine supplementation should be reserved for those children and adults with elevated TSH and low free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis. Stroke-like episodes. Supportive therapy includes hydration by IV if necessary and physical therapy during the recovery period. Coagulopathy. Low levels of coagulation factors, both pro- and anti-coagulant, rarely cause clinical problems in daily activities but must be acknowledged if an individual with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) undergoes surgery. Consultation with a hematologist (to document the coagulation status and factor levels) and discussion with the surgeon are important. When necessary, infusion of fresh frozen plasma corrects the factor deficiency and clinical bleeding. The potential for imbalance of the level of both pro- and anti-coagulant factors may lead to either bleeding or thrombosis. Care givers, especially of older affected individuals, should be taught the signs of deep venous thrombosis. Osteopenia. While present from infancy there does not appear to be a significant increased risk of fracture. Should fracture occur, management should follow standards of medical care. 
Additional management issues of adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) Orthopedic issues—thorax shortening, scoliosis/kyphosis. Management involves appropriate orthopedic and physical medicine management, well-supported wheelchairs, appropriate transfer devices for the home, and physical therapy. Occasionally, surgical treatment of spinal curvature is warranted. Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). DVT has been reported in two adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia). Rapid diagnosis and treatment of DVT are essential to minimize the risk of pulmonary emboli; sedentary affected adults and children are at increased risk for DVT. Independent living issues. Young adults with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) and their parents need to address issues of independent living. Aggressive education throughout the school years in functional life skills and/or vocational training helps the transition when schooling is completed. Independence in self-care and the activities of daily living should be encouraged. Support and resources for parents of a disabled adult are an important part of management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because infants with PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) have less physiologic reserve than their peers, parents should have a low threshold for evaluation by a physician for prolonged fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. Aggressive intervention with antipyretics, antibiotics if warranted, and hydration may prevent the morbidity associated with the "infantile catastrophic phase." Although only one individual with skeletal dysplasia in PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) has been reported, plain spine films assessing cervical spine anomalies may be useful [Schade van Westrum et al 2006].

Surveillance


Annual Assessment by a physician with attention to overall health and referral for speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy Eye examination Liver function tests, thyroid panel, protein C, protein S, factor IX, and antithrombin III 
Other Periodic assessment of bleeding and clotting parameters by a hematologist Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis and counseling about the risk of fractures Follow up with an orthopedist when scoliosis becomes evident

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Acetaminophen and other agents metabolized by the liver should be used with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.