http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cdh-ov

Management



Treatment of Manifestations

 Proper management of newborns with CDH must start in the delivery room; recently, therapy may start in the prenatal period. Postnatal treatment. Emphasis must be on preventing secondary lung injury. Newborns should be intubated immediately in the delivery room to avoid bag-mask ventilation and inflation of bowel that has herniated into the chest. Care should be taken not to induce barotrauma from bag ventilation before the neonate can be transitioned to an appropriate ventilator. In the 1990s, it was recognized that minimizing aggressive ventilation by limiting ventilator settings and/or allowing the neonate to do some of the breathing work resulted in improved outcomes. It was also recognized that infants did not need to be rushed to surgery and benefited from stabilization of respiratory and cardiovascular status prior to diaphragmatic repair. Assuring end-organ perfusion and stability instead of perfect physiologic values or immediate anatomic correction is now the standard of care [Wung et al 1995, Boloker et al 2002, Mohseni-Bod & Bohn 2007]. Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) continues to be used frequently in some centers as a rescue therapy for neonates with critical cardiopulmonary deterioration, but has a limited or non-existent role in other centers. It is unclear whether ECMO improves survival in CDH; Muratore et al [2001] and Stege et al [2003] concluded that the introduction of ECMO did not significantly change mortality; centers that do not have ECMO report similar survival rates to those that use ECMO. However, population biases may play a role in the evaluation of these statistics. From 1995 to 2004, the survival rate of 3100 infants reported to the Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Study Group who received ECMO and survived CDH repair was 67% [Seetharamaiah et al 2009]. When ECMO does rescue an infant who would have otherwise died in the perinatal period, it is unclear whether those infants have a good long-term outcome. For these reasons, a randomized controlled trial of ECMO in neonates with CDH is needed [Harrington & Goldman 2005]. Treatment of pulmonary hypertension is a recent focus in the clinical management of CDH. Unfortunately, therapies that have been extremely successful in treating the usual persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) have not been widely successful in attenuating CDH-associated pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure. Since some patients respond to nitric oxide (NO) [Okuyama et al 2002], a trial of NO with a careful documentation of response with echocardiography prior to continuation is warranted. More recently, phosphodiesterase inhibitors have been used in some cases [Mohseni-Bod & Bohn 2007, Noori et al 2007]. Other therapies that have been introduced in the acute neonatal treatment phase for CDH but are controversial include the use of surfactant and perflubron [Fauza et al 2001, Hirschl et al 2003]. Unfortunately, the lack of large randomized controlled trials makes it difficult to determine which of these treatments may be beneficial. The presence of surfactant deficiency in those with CDH may depend on the sub-population, thus making it difficult to determine whether exogenous surfactant would be efficacious in large trials [Jani et al 2009, Janssen et al 2009]. Prenatal treatment. Treatment of severely affected infants has shifted to the prenatal period, as rescue of severe pulmonary hypoplasia is possible if done at the correct time. The discovery that laryngeal obstruction leads to lung distension from retained fluid prompted tracheal occlusion studies in animal models and in humans [Lipshutz et al 1997, Harrison et al 2003]. In one US randomized trial of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion, the treatment group experienced a high rate of pre-term delivery and did not have improved morbidity or mortality rates [Harrison et al 2003]. However, since that time, advances have been made in tracheal occlusion techniques and in predicting which fetuses would most likely die without any intervention. Currently, high-risk fetuses in Europe or in a few US centers may receive tracheal occlusion by fetal endoscopic balloon placement. The procedure is performed in the second trimester when the observed/expected lung area to head circumference ratios are equal to or less than 1.0. Generally, fetuses selected for this procedure have isolated CDH (as well as can be determined by prenatal imaging) without chromosome aberrations. Although the treatment remains controversial without a recent randomized clinical trial, survival rates in high-risk fetuses are increased when compared to historical controls [Deprest et al 2009, Jani et al 2009].

Surveillance

 Since both pre- and postnatal advances in treatment have increased survival of high-risk patients, it is important to provide close follow-up and support for potential long-term morbidities. Long-term follow-up for infants with CDH is ideally provided at a specialized center by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a pediatric surgeon, surgical nurse specialist, cardiologist, nutritionist, pulmonologist, and developmental pediatrician. This type of team can recognize, treat, and coordinate care for the many medical complications frequently found in long-term survivors with CDH.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Animal models of CDH. Click here (pdf) for information on animal models used for studying CDH.