

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata 1 (CDPX1), the following evaluations are recommended: Full skeletal survey Flexion, neutral, and extension lateral views of the C-spine in every patient. If clinical evidence suggests cervical myelopathy or if significant instability is demonstrated radiographically, a cervical MRI should be performed. Special consideration should be given to performing this study in flexion and extension positions as spinal cord compression may only occur with these movements (i.e., a normal neutral cervical MRI does not rule out dynamic compression). Growth measures Developmental assessment Hearing assessment Assessment of upper and lower airways if stridor is present Polysomnography Ophthalmologic evaluation Cardiac ultrasound examination Brain imaging studies Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management is supportive. Respiratory difficulty can require frequent monitoring, nasal stents, and oxygen. Severe maxillary hypoplasia or maxillary retrognathia may require reconstructive surgery in older individuals [Carach et al 2002]. Instability of the cervical spine may require a cervical collar or spinal fusion; cervical spine stenosis may require decompression. Surveillance of the following is according to recommended pediatric practice, with closer follow-up recommended if abnormalities are identified: Hearing Growth Development Thoracic and lumbar spine (for scoliosis)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an individual with CDPX1 in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early screening for hearing loss. If the ARSE pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.