http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cdsp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with systemic primary carnitine deficiency (CDSP), the following evaluations are recommended: Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram Serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration Liver transaminases Pre-prandial blood glucose concentration Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 L-carnitine supplementation. The main treatment for CDSP is oral levocarnitine (L-carnitine) supplementation. Typically, a high dose (100-400 mg/kg/day, divided in 3 doses) is required. Individuals with CDSP respond well if oral L-carnitine supplementation is started before irreversible organ damage occurs. Metabolic decompensation and skeletal and cardiac muscle function improve with L-carnitine supplementations. Oral L-carnitine supplementation in infants with CDSP identified through newborn screening results in slow normalization of the plasma carnitine concentration. The carnitine dose needs to be adjusted according to the plasma carnitine concentrations, which should be measured frequently. L-carnitine supplementation has relatively few side effects: High doses of oral L-carnitine can cause increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and intestinal discomfort. Oral L-carnitine can be metabolized by intestinal bacteria to produce trimethylamine, which has a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for 7-10 days and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor [Longo et al 2006]. Note: (1) An unaffected infant born to a mother with CDSP can have low carnitine levels detected on newborn screening; in these infants oral L-carnitine supplementation is followed by a rise in plasma carnitine concentration within days or a few weeks [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. (2) Asymptomatic adults with CDSP have been reported; however, the limited literature and the lack of follow up make it unclear whether these individuals have potential health risks. Because some fatty acid oxidation defects such as medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency can remain asymptomatic until they results in sudden death or another acute presentation during stress, it is prudent to treat asymptomatic individuals with CDSP with L-carnitine supplementation to prevent the possibility of decompensation during intercurrent illness or stress [El-Hattab et al 2010]. 
            Other Hypoglycemic episodes are treated with intravenous dextrose infusion. Cardiomyopathy requires management by specialists in cardiology.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Maintaining appropriate plasma carnitine concentrations through oral L-carnitine supplementation (see Treatment of Manifestations) and preventing hypoglycemia (with frequent feeding and avoiding fasting) typically eliminate the risk of metabolic, hepatic, cardiac, and muscular complications. Note: Hospitalization to administer intravenous glucose is recommended for individuals with CDSP who are required to fast because of medical or surgical procedures or who cannot tolerate oral intake because of an illness such as gastroenteritis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 L-carnitine supplementation is well tolerated and has relatively few side effects: increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, and a fishy odor. Oral metronidazole and/or decreasing the carnitine dose usually results in the resolution of the odor.

Surveillance

 The following evaluations have been suggested [Magoulas & El-Hattab 2012]: Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. Perform annually during childhood and less frequently in adulthood. Individuals with cardiomyopathy require management and follow up by specialists in cardiology. Plasma carnitine concentration. Monitor frequently until levels reach the normal range, thereafter, measure three times a year during infancy and early childhood, twice a year in older children, and annually in adults. Serum CK concentration and liver transaminases. Consider measuring during acute illnesses.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with CDSP should avoid fasting longer than age-appropriate periods.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Sibs of affected individuals should be tested by measuring plasma carnitine concentrations. If the carnitine levels are low, further evaluation for CDSP is recommended by molecular genetic testing if the SLC22A5 pathogenic variants have been identified in the family or fibroblast carnitine transport assay. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy is a metabolically challenging state because energy consumption significantly increases. In addition, plasma carnitine levels are physiologically lower during pregnancy than those of non-pregnant controls. Affected women can have decreased stamina or worsening of cardiac arrhythmia during pregnancy, suggesting that CDSP may manifest or exacerbate during pregnancy [Schimmenti et al 2007, El-Hattab et al 2010]. Therefore, all pregnant women with CDSP, including those who are asymptomatic, require close monitoring of plasma carnitine levels and increased carnitine supplementation as needed to maintain normal plasma carnitine levels.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.