

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of a newborn or infant diagnosed with cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED), the following evaluations are recommended: CT scan to determine if sagittal synostosis is the cause of dolichocephaly X-ray of thorax and long bones to determine the extent of skeletal findings Examination of the skin, hair, nails, and teeth Renal ultrasound examination and urine measurements (including a urine collection test (and an optional DDAVP test) to assay polyuria, and osmolarity sampling of morning urine to determine concentrating ability). A biopsy is often taken after detection of abnormalities. Liver ultrasound examination and measurement of liver enzymes Ophthalmologic evaluation Evaluation by a pulmonologist Cardiac evaluation for detection of possible structural heart defects Developmental evaluation Brain MRI in individuals with developmental delay to assess the cause of the delay Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment includes the following: Surgery for correcting craniosynostosis (usually in first year of life) [Sensenbrenner et al 1975, Levin et al 1977, Genitori et al 1992, Gilissen et al 2010, Bacino et al 2012, Hoffer et al 2013]. Correction of polydactyly (optional) Orthopedic care as required (e.g., for hip dysplasia) Growth hormone treatment to stimulate growth when standard criteria for this treatment are met [Wilson et al 2003]. Growth hormone should only be prescribed to children with severe growth retardation in whom the therapy is expected to be successful. Dental care. Timely detection and intervention of structural tooth abnormalities and/or olgiodontia may limit aesthetic, functional, and psychological issues. Standard treatment for renal and liver abnormalities. While liver transplantation is a treatment option in advanced stages, it has only been proposed once for an individual with CED [Zaffanello et al 2006]. For those with progressive visual impairment, low vision aids and appropriate educational programs Mechanical ventilation as required in newborns to treat respiratory insufficiency due to pulmonary hypoplasia. Pneumonia should be treated with antibiotics. Patients susceptible to recurrent respiratory infections should be treated with long-term prophylaxis. Asthma can be treated with steroids. Standard treatment for cardiac abnormalities For those with developmental delay, speech therapy and physical therapy to improve motor skills and appropriate educational programs Surgical intervention as required for inguinal/umbilical hernias [Fry et al 2009]

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Monitoring growth and development during infancy and childhood starting at the time of diagnosis Beginning at age one year, examination of teeth with regular follow-up during to detect tooth damage and oligodontia Periodic monitoring starting at the time of diagnosis for signs of nephronophthisis (renal insufficiency, renal cyst formation), including osmolarity testing in morning urine, urine collection assays to test for polyuria, measurement of blood pressure, determination of serum creatinine and blood urea concentrations to establish renal function, and periodic renal ultrasound examination to establish kidney size and presence of cysts. Periodic measurement of liver enzymes starting at the time of diagnosis. Annual ophthalmologic examinations starting at age four years. Note: Electroretinography (ERG) and fundoscopy can be performed at an earlier age if it is evident that vision is reduced. Evaluation for respiratory infection (with x-rays and sputum analysis) when clinical findings suggest pneumonia In those with structural heart defects, periodic monitoring of cardiac function including auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the pathogenic variants are known in a family, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk infants to allow early diagnosis and appropriate management and surveillance, particularly for respiratory complications, renal and liver disease, and visual impairment. If the pathogenic variants are not known in a family, the following is recommended for at-risk children: In the newborn period: physical examination by a pediatrician, and consultation with a clinical geneticist as determined by the clinical findings Age 0-3 months: kidney and liver evaluation, including ultrasound examination and measurement of blood pressure, serum creatinine concentration, and liver enzymes At six-month intervals: repeat the kidney and liver evaluations. Parents should be alerted to the signs of CED and advised to contact their child’s healthcare provider if suspicious symptoms, such as polydipsia and/or jaundice, appear. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.