http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cebpa-aml

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual newly diagnosed with AML, the following evaluations are recommended: Cardiac scan in individuals with a personal history of – or signs and symptoms suspicious for – heart disease and in those who have received previous anthracycline therapy HLA typing in anticipation of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) Lumbar puncture (LP) if symptoms suggest central nervous system disease. The timing of LP in AML is controversial. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Evaluation of an individual with a confirmed diagnosis of CEBPA-associated familial AML should include: Assembly of a detailed pedigree to identify additional affected individuals and potential carriers of the inherited pathogenic variant; Recommendation of consultation with a genetic counselor for all at-risk family members; Molecular testing of family members at risk using buccal, salivary or skin DNA. Peripheral blood DNA may also be used in individuals with no history of preceding hematologic disease and normal complete blood count (CBC). Comprehensive evaluation and screening of family members enables improved characterization of the clinical manifestations and penetrance within the pedigree. Family members without the inherited pathogenic variant may be offered human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing to assess their compatibility for stem cell donation to their affected relative. Note: In all familial leukemia syndromes with a known inherited pathogenic variant, it is essential that screening of the pathogenic variant be performed in all relatives at risk prior to consideration of stem cell donation.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of CEBPA-associated familial AML does not differ from that of sporadic CEBPA-associated AML [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2009, Döhner et al 2010]. Treatment usually includes cytarabine/anthracycline-based induction and cytarabine-based consolidation chemotherapy with or without HSCT according to clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular risk. For younger individuals with AML (even those without a clear family history), there is now increasing awareness that germline variants should be investigated and excluded prior to consideration of HSCT using sib/related donors. Specific treatment strategies are based on characteristics of the individual, response to chemotherapy, treatment setting, and protocol (if the individual is enrolled in a clinical trial). Note: Whenever possible, persons with AML should be treated as part of a clinical trial protocol. Relapses are treated with cytarabine-based salvage chemotherapy followed by allogeneic HSCT (if a suitable donor is available and if cure is the intent of treatment).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of secondary complications is similar to that for other types of AML: Supportive care includes blood products such as red blood cell and platelet transfusions as needed and treatment of infections with antibiotics. Prophylactic antibiotics and antifungal agents are administered during periods of severe neutropenia including the consolidation and post-transplantation periods [National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2009].

Surveillance

 Affected individuals. Surveillance for CEBPA-associated familial AML is similar to that for other forms of AML. There are no generally accepted minimal residual disease (MRD) markers in CEBPA-associated AML or in most other AML subtypes with normal karyotypes. Individuals are monitored and evaluated in accordance with administered treatment, clinical course, symptoms, and protocol, if enrolled in clinical trials. When complete remission is achieved and intensification therapy is complete, individuals are monitored with: CBC and platelet counts every one to three months for two years with the frequency decreasing to every three to six months for up to five years; Bone marrow aspiration when cytopenia and/or an abnormal peripheral blood smear are present. Note: The use of flow cytometry for MRD monitoring is controversial. Individuals with a germline CEBPA pathogenic variant who are cured of their initial disease episode may be at risk for new leukemic episodes, often occurring after a prolonged period of remission (>3 years post presentation) [Pabst et al 2009, Tawana et al 2015]. In light of these data, lifelong clinical surveillance is warranted to ensure prompt recognition and appropriate management of disease recurrence. Repeat testing of CEBPA at recurrence is important to help distinguish conventional relapse from new, independent leukemic episodes. Asymptomatic carriers. Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic CEBPA germline variant may be reviewed with CBC profiling every six to 12 months. Bone marrow examination may be performed if there is an appropriate clinical indication (e.g., abnormalities in CBC). Referral for post-testing genetic counseling should be considered as appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Use of sib or related donors for HSCT without prior assessment of the pathogenic germline variant in these individuals.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 To date, all individuals with germline pathogenic CEBPA variants have presented with overt AML without any preceding blood count abnormalities or myelodysplasia, this in contrast with other familial leukemia syndromes such as those associated with germline RUNX1 or GATA2 pathogenic variants [Nickels et al 2013]. The decision to test for an inherited pathogenic variant is ultimately governed by personal choice, the reassurance of regular clinical follow up, and provision of genetic counseling. It is noteworthy that clinical monitoring may enable earlier diagnosis (and treatment) of AML, hence minimizing the risks associated with delayed presentation (e.g., severe anemia, neutropenic sepsis, and severe hemorrhage), providing further rationale for molecular evaluation of at-risk relatives. There are currently no preemptive treatments available for asymptomatic carriers of a germline CEBPA pathogenic variant. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.