

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED), the initial evaluation should include the following: Complete skeletal survey (if not performed as part of the diagnostic work up) Assessment for cranial nerve deficits, including neurologic examination, hearing screen, and ophthalmologic evaluation Baseline blood pressure if considering treatment with losartan CBC to evaluate for anemia in individuals with significant endosteal involvement If acute bone pain is present, consideration of ESR and bone scan as baseline measures of disease activity In individuals with radiographic evidence of skull base sclerosis and neurologic symptoms, consideration of baseline CT of the head and neck to determine the extent of disease and allow consideration of surgical treatment options Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 No consensus management guidelines have been developed to date. Corticosteroids may relieve many of the symptoms of Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED). Several investigators report success with corticosteroid treatment in reducing pain and weakness; improving gait, exercise tolerance, and flexion contractures; and correcting anemia and hepatosplenomegaly [Lindstrom 1974, Baş et al 1999, Wallace et al 2004]. Unsuccessful steroid therapy was reported in one adult. Individuals with severe symptoms can be treated with a bolus of prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg/day followed by rapid tapering to the lowest alternate-day dose tolerated. Less symptomatic individuals can be started on 0.5-1.0 mg/kg every other day. Some individuals may be able to discontinue steroid therapy during quiescent periods. Higher-dose steroids may help with acute pain crises. Note: Steroids may delay bone hyperostosis and prevent or delay the onset of skull involvement. Although histologic studies following steroid therapy showed increased bone resorption and secondary remodeling with increased osteoblastic activity and decreased lamellar bone deposition, several authors reported no regression of sclerosis on radiographic evaluation [Verbruggen et al 1985] or on scintigraphic evaluation [Baş et al 1999]. Lindstrom [1974] and Baş et al [1999] reported diminished sclerosis on radiographs following steroid therapy. Verbruggen et al [1985] and Inaoka et al [2001] reported reduced radioactivity on bone scintigraphy. Long-term follow-up studies should be conducted to evaluate the success of corticosteroid therapy in preventing anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, headaches, and cranial nerve impingement. Calcitonin. Pain relief from intranasal calcitonin is reported in one patient [Trombetti et al 2012]. Losartan. Reduced bone pain and increased physical activity are reported in two patients treated with losartan [Ayyavoo et al 2014, Simsek-Kiper et al 2014]. Losartan has an anti-TGFβ effect and is being tested in individuals with Marfan syndrome. Other analgesics and non-pharmacologic methods are frequently used for alleviation of pain. Surgical treatment for persistent bone pain by intramedullary reaming was reported in a woman age 22 years diagnosed with Ribbing disease [Oztürkmen & Karamehmetoğlu 2011]. Pain in the tibia resolved completely following the surgery; at five-year follow-up, the individual remained pain free. Craniectomy relieved increased intracranial pressure and headaches in two patients [Author, personal observation]. Hearing loss evaluation by an otolaryngologist should include a BAER and a CT with fine cuts through the inner ear. Reports of successful treatment of hearing loss in CED are rare. Surgical decompression of the internal auditory canals can improve hearing. However, the skull hyperostosis is progressive, and cranial nerve compression often recurs. Corticosteroids may delay skull hyperostosis and cranial nerve impingement. Lindstrom [1974] reported no change in conductive hearing loss with steroid therapy. A woman age 30 years with a 75-dB neurosensory hearing loss on the right and a 65-dB neurosensory hearing loss of the left experienced some improvement in hearing with prednisone. Her hearing stabilized after decompression of the right internal auditory canal. Bilateral myringotomy can improve conductive hearing loss resulting from serous otitis in individuals with CED. A woman age 71 years with bilateral conductive hearing loss and patent internal auditory canals underwent a cochlear implantation, and speech detection improved from 75 dB to 45 dB [Friedland et al 2000]. General contraindications for cochlear implants include a narrowed internal auditory canal and absence of a functioning eighth nerve, both of which can be found in individuals with CED. Carlson et al [2010] report six individuals with CED and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Three underwent internal auditory canal decompression with mixed results. Conservative management was used in the other three individuals with no worsening of symptoms (see also Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Initiation of steroids prior to the onset of proximal muscle weakness and/or sclerotic bone changes has not been reported. Because of the variable symptomatology and decreased penetrance, treatment of asymptomatic individuals cannot be recommended. 
            Prevention of Secondary Complications Monitor blood pressure in individuals treated with corticosteroids and treat hypertension if necessary. Individuals taking losartan also need regular blood pressure monitoring due to the increased risk for hypotension. Taper corticosteroid dose as tolerated to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and compression fractures of the spine.

Surveillance

 After initiating corticosteroids, affected individuals should be followed monthly, with efforts to taper the steroids to the lowest tolerated dose. Blood pressure should be monitored at each visit, as hypertension can develop following the initiation of steroid therapy. When a maintenance steroid dose is achieved, ongoing evaluations should include the following: Annual: Complete neurologic examination CBC Measurement of blood pressure Hearing screen Evaluation of bone mineral densityNote: CED does not appear to cause an increase in spine density; therefore steroid therapy could lead to osteoporosis of the spine [Author, personal observation]. Routine monitoring of linear growth in children due to the possible side effect of delayed or stunted growth The authors are aware of one affected teenage individual who died of a dilated ascending aorta dissection. Whether this is related to CED is unknown. Because the mechanism of CED involves increased TGFB1 signaling, also found in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, this death is of some concern. The authors are unaware of any other similar cases. Note: No recommendations for routine evaluation of the aorta can be made at this time.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid 

 Bisphosphonates. Bone pain and uptake of 99mTc methylene diphosphonate by scintigraphy increased with pamidronate in a woman age 27 years with CED [Inaoka et al 2001]. Clodronate infusion caused increased bone pain in one individual with CED and no improvement in another individual reported by Castro et al [2005]. Excess phosphate. Treatment with cellulose phosphate led to worsening hypocalcemia and proximal myopathy in another individual.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify the diagnosis as early as possible, avoid potential misdiagnosis, and provide appropriate treatment for extremity pain. If the TGFB1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, radiographic evaluation for hyperostosis can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.