http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/celiac

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with celiac disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Small-bowel biopsy in those who are well established on a gluten-containing diet to assess the degree of villous atrophy (Table 1). However, the degree of villous atrophy does not correlate with the severity of the clinical findings. Baseline bone-density test in adults to evaluate for osteoporosis/osteopenia. In those with osteoporosis, vitamin D and parathyroid hormone concentrations should be evaluated [Green & Jabri 2003]. Screening tests for anemia, abnormal liver function, and nutrient deficiencies (iron, calcium, vitamin D, vitamin B12, folic acid) Evaluation for a coexisting malignancy or autoimmune disease in symptomatic and/or elderly individuals [Alaedini & Green 2005, Pietzak 2005]

Treatment of Manifestations

 Celiac disease. Ideally, the care of a newly diagnosed individual should be provided by a team including a gastroenterologist, primary care physician, and experienced nutritionist (see Figure 4). Local branches of national support groups can be helpful as additional resources [NIH Consensus Committee 2005] (see Figure 4). The only treatment for individuals with celiac disease is strict adherence to a gluten-free diet that requires lifelong avoidance of wheat, rye, and barley: Treatment with a gluten-free diet should be started only after the diagnosis has been established by intestinal biopsy. A dietitian experienced in treating celiac disease should be involved. In approximately 70% of affected individuals, symptoms improve within two weeks after starting a gluten-free diet. For some patients, even a small amount of gluten (i.e., 100 mg) can damage the small intestine. Note that a slice of bread contains approximately 2.5 grams of gluten. It can be difficult to adhere to the gluten-free diet, as gluten is found in many foods and other ingested products. Some hidden sources of gluten: Non-starchy foods such as soy sauce and beer Non-food items such as some medications, and cosmetics (e.g., lipstick) Nutritional deficiencies and metabolic bone disease should be treated in the usual manner. ‘Unresponsive celiac disease’ refers celiac disease in patients who show no improvement on a gluten-free diet: The most common reason for unresponsive celiac disease is the presence of small amounts of gluten in the diet. This gluten ingestion may be intentional, such as “cheating” at social events or using communion wafers, or unintentional, including ingestion of gluten in medications and gluten-containing foods in restaurants. Advice from a nutritionist experienced in management of the gluten-free diet is recommended to achieve the best results. Assessment for lactose or fructose intolerance is important, as these conditions can be responsible for lack of response to the gluten-free diet [Green & Jabri 2003]. Assessment for alternative or additional diagnoses such as microscopic colitis, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, IBS, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and eating disorders is necessary in those in whom gluten contamination is not the explanation. For individuals who are not responding to a gluten-free diet, identification of a celiac disease-susceptibility HLA haplotype can provide motivation to continue the diet, to examine the diet for hidden sources of gluten, to address the possibility of refractory sprue, or even to dismiss the previous diagnosis of celiac disease. Refractory sprue or celiac disease. Individuals with persistent symptoms and intestinal inflammation despite adherence to a gluten-free diet may need to be treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., local-active budesonide) and immunosuppressants [Green & Jabri 2003, NIH Consensus Committee 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations. Breast-feeding had been thought to exert a protective effect against the development of celiac disease in early childhood; however, this was not shown to be the case in two recent clinical trials [Lionetti et al 2014, Vriezinga et al 2014]. Earlier studies comparing breast-fed children with children who were not breast-fed found that breast-fed children who then developed celiac disease were more likely to have: A later age of onset of symptoms; Fewer classic symptoms such as diarrhea, growth disturbance, vomiting, abdominal pain, or distention [Ivarsson et al 2002]; A higher rate of “non-classic” symptoms [D'Amico et al 2005].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Treatment with a gluten-free diet can: Reverse growth failure and the reduced bone mineralization in children with celiac disease; Decrease the rate of spontaneous abortions and frequency of low-birth-weight infants in women with celiac disease; Reduce to the general population level the risk for certain types of cancers including small-intestine adenocarcinoma, esophageal cancer, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; Reduce the excess risk of mortality in symptomatic individuals.

Surveillance

 For individuals with celiac disease, abnormal celiac disease serologies should be followed to normalization, which usually occurs within six to 12 months of starting a strict gluten-free diet. Follow-up biopsy can be considered to confirm healing of intestinal villi. Because some patients on a strict gluten-free diet can heal gradually, this should typically be done at least two years after the initial diagnosis. For asymptomatic relatives who have the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 celiac disease-susceptibility haplotype on molecular genetic testing and negative antibody results, tTG IgA testing should be performed at three- to five-year intervals to screen for the development of celiac disease-associated antibodies [Hill et al 2005, NIH Consensus Committee 2005, Pietzak 2005].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Gluten in the diet (see Treatment of Manifestations and Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing of first-degree relatives of individuals with celiac disease can identify those who are susceptible to developing celiac disease and who would benefit from serologic testing to screen for celiac disease or silent celiac disease. Of note, first-degree relatives do not need to be symptomatic to consider molecular genetic testing. (See Testing Strategies, In a Symptomatic Individual who is on a Gluten-Free Diet, Molecular genetic testing.) Early diagnosis of celiac disease and treatment with a gluten-free diet can prevent secondary complications. Individuals who do not have the celiac disease-associated HLA alleles DQ2 and DQ8 do not need to undergo serologic screening for celiac disease. Individuals who have celiac disease-associated HLA alleles (Table 3) are followed by celiac disease-associated antibody testing at three- to five-year intervals. Small-bowel biopsy is recommended when celiac disease-associated antibody testing is positive. A definitive diagnosis of celiac disease is made in a person with a positive small-bowel biopsy and clinical and/or histologic improvement on a gluten-free diet. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Click here (pdf) for information on therapies under investigation for treatment of celiac disease. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.