

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), the following evaluations are recommended: Hematologic indices including reticulocytes and bilirubin (to assess hemolysis) and iron profile (to assess iron storage) Serum calcium and vitamin D concentrations; bone densitometry Hepatic function tests Dermatologic evaluation Ophthalmologic evaluation Dental assessment Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Urine and erythrocyte porphyrins can be determined periodically after bone marrow transplant as a monitor of engraftment.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Cutaneous photosensitivity. There is no FDA-approved treatment for this disease or specific treatment for the photosensitivity. Currently the only effective treatment is prevention of blistering by avoidance of light exposure, including the long-wave ultraviolet sunlight that passes through window glass or light emitted by fluorescent sources: Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats Protective window films for cars and windows at home as well as at school/work to prevent exposure to UV light Replacement of fluorescent lights with reddish incandescent bulbs or installation of filtering screens Reflectant sunscreens containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Note, however, that these may be cosmetically unacceptable and, in any case, do not replace strict avoidance of sun/light exposure. Skin trauma should be avoided. Wound care is essential to prevent infection of opened blisters. Antiseptic and topical/oral antibiotic treatment may be indicated to avoid progression to osteomyelitis and bone resorption with subsequent mutilation. Surgical intervention may be indicated for severe mutilation (repair of microstomia, correction of ectropion, reconstruction of the nose). Laser hair removal can be used to treat facial hypertrichosis. Note: (1) Beta-carotene has been tried in some individuals but without significant benefit. (2) Phototherapy with narrowband ultraviolet B radiation did not show any benefit. 
            Ocular manifestations Avoidance of damage to the eyelids and cornea by wrap-around sun glasses Topical antibiotics for corneal ulcers, scleritis, and blepharitis Artificial tears and lubricants to help prevent dry eyes in those with ectropion Corrective surgery of eyelids to help protect the cornea from injury in those with ectropion [Katugampola et al 2012a] Bone manifestations. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with osteoporosis [Katugampola et al 2012a]. 
            Hemolytic anemia Consider blood transfusions when hemolysis is significant. Chronic transfusions (every 2-4 weeks) with a target hematocrit greater than 35% can suppress erythropoiesis and decrease porphyrin production, which reduces porphyrin levels and photosensitivity [Piomelli et al 1986]. Note: In those who receive frequent transfusions, the body iron burden can be reduced with parenteral or oral chelators [Poh-Fitzpatrick et al 1988]. Iron deficiency induced by treatment with deferasirox improved photosensitivity and hemolysis in one patient [Egan at al 2015]. Note: Although oral charcoal and cholestyramine were thought to increase fecal loss of porphyrins, a clear clinical benefit has not been shown [Tishler & Winston 1990]. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only cure for CEP and should be considered in children with severe cutaneous and hematologic involvement. Autologous as well as allogeneic stem cell transplants have been performed successfully [Thomas et al 1996, Tezcan et al 1998, Harada et al 2001, Shaw et al 2001, Dupuis-Girod et al 2005, Taibjee et al 2007, Faraci et al 2008]. The age of children with CEP receiving BMT ranges from younger than one year to 13 years [Katugampola et al 2012b]. Of note, although some of the first individuals with CEP to successfully undergo BMT in childhood should be in their 20s now [Thomas et al 1996, Zix-Kieffer et al 1996], no follow-up information is available and the long-term outcome in individuals with CEP post-BMT is unknown.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Strict avoidance of sunlight and protection from light are indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Vitamin D supplementation is advised as affected individuals are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency due to sun avoidance. Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance

 Monitor the following: Hematologic indices including iron profile, reticulocyte count, and bilirubin to assess hemolysis every six months Note: Individuals receiving transfusion therapy need closer monitoring. Iron profile on a regular basis to assess for iron overload for those who are transfusion dependent Hepatic function every six to twelve months Vitamin D 25-OH levels in all patients whether or not they are receiving vitamin D supplements

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following are appropriate: Avoidance of sunlight and UV light In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs which may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens) In patients undergoing surgeries, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs as newborns or infants in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early intervention (no phototherapy, strict sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of hemolytic anemia. Evaluations include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known; Biochemical testing for urinary or erythrocyte uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I isomer elevation if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Successful pregnancies in women with CEP resulting in healthy and unaffected children have been described [Hallai et al 2007, Katugampola et al 2012b]. Protective filters for artificial lights should be used in the delivery/operating room to prevent phototoxic damage to the mother during delivery [Wahlin et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

 To date, gene therapy has been evaluated only in the murine CEP model [de Verneuil et al 2008, Fortian et al 2011, Di Pierro et al 2015]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.