http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cystic fibrosis (CF) the following evaluations are recommended. 
            Respiratory Sinus CT to assess for pan sinusitis in individuals with chronic nasal congestion and/or recurrent sinusitis Pulmonary function testing (PFT), including infant PFT at specialized centers Chest radiographic examination to screen for bronchiectasis, or chest computed tomography (CT) examination as indicated for worsening symptoms or concern for progression Sputum culture in affected individuals who can expectorate a sputum sample, or culture of deep oropharyngeal swab in those who cannot Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage to evaluate lower airway microbiology and inflammation as indicated 
            Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency Fecal elastase Fecal fat content based on 72-hour stool collection Vitamin A, D, and E serum concentrations Prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (INR) Random glucose 
            Overall clinical status / extent of disease CBC with differential and cell count Serum electrolytes, BUN, creatinine Liver function tests (ALT, AST) Consultation with a genetic counselor To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital absence of the vas deferens (CAVD) referral to a urologist is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



Cystic Fibrosis (CF)

 
              Respiratory Inhaled dornase alfa in all individuals age ≥6 years Inhaled hypertonic saline in all individuals age ≥6 years Azithromycin in individuals age ≥6 years with persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airway cultures Inhaled tobramycin in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures Inhaled aztreonam in individuals age ≥6 years with lung disease (mild, moderate, or severe) and persistent P. aeruginosa in airway cultures Ibuprofen in individuals age 6-17 years with FEV1 ≥60% predicted Recommended sequence for inhaled medications: Bronchodilator Hypertonic saline Dornase alfa Airway clearance An aerosolized antibiotic Ivacaftor for individuals age ≥2 years who are heterozygous for p.Gly551Asp and other specific pathogenic variants Ivacaftor/lumacaftor combined therapy for individuals age ≥12 years who are homozygous for p.Phe508del Lung or heart/lung transplantation; an option for some individuals with severe disease Topical steroids, antibiotics, and/or surgical intervention if required for nasal/sinus symptoms 
              Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency Oral pancreatic enzyme replacement with meals Nutritional therapy that may include breast milk, special infant formulas, supplemental feeding, salt supplementation, fat-soluble vitamin supplements, and zinc Management of CF-related diabetes mellitus with endocrinology consultation and (if required) glucose monitoring and insulin therapy Gastrointestinal. Meconium ileus and distal intestinal obstructive syndrome requires surgical evaluation and management. 
              Liver disease Biliary sludging or frank obstruction, and associated hepatic inflammation, are treated with oral ursodiol. Liver transplant indications include progressive hepatic dysfunction, intractable variceal bleeding, and hepatopulmonary and portopulmonary syndromes Fertility. Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Congenital Absence of the Vas Deferens (CAVD)

 Assisted reproductive technologies include microscopic sperm aspiration from the epididymal remnant in conjunction with in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination using donor sperm.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations – Cystic Fibrosis

 
            Respiratory A variety of airway clearance techniques (ACTs) can mobilize airway secretions, minimize airway obstruction, and reduce airway infections. ACTs include manual chest percussion with postural drainage, hand-held devices (e.g., flutter valve, or Acapella®), and inflatable vest therapy devices that vibrate the chest wall. These treatments are most effective when used at least twice daily. Dornase alfa and hypertonic saline help mobilize airway secretions in individuals age six years or older. Airway clearance should be used in conjunction with inhaled medications given in a standard sequence: Bronchodilator Hypertonic saline Dornase alfa Airway clearance Inhaled corticosteroids and/or long-acting beta agonist (for select individuals) Aerosolized antibiotic The rationale for this sequence is to open the airway, decrease sputum viscosity, promote expectoration of secretions, and then deliver anti-inflammatory treatments and/or antibiotics as widely and deeply as possible within the bronchial tree. Aggressive antibiotic treatment at the time of initial isolation of P. aeruginosa from cultured airway secretions helps prevent chronic airway infection. All routine immunizations should be given at the recommended times. Especially important are vaccines that protect against microorganisms associated with pulmonary manifestations, including pertussis, measles, varicella, Haemophilus influenzae type B, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Influenza vaccine should be administered annually in infants age six months and older. Note: (1) Because the influenza vaccine may not be fully protective, consider immunizing an affected individual’s entire family. (2) CF individuals with suspected influenza should receive anti-viral medications targeted toward influenza A and B. Anti-RSV monoclonal antibody (Synagis®) should be considered for infants up to age 12 months for the duration of the local RSV season, particularly in individuals with ongoing pulmonary symptoms. Physical activity, exercise, and conditioning help maintain bone health and improve airway clearance. 
            Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency Pancreatic enzyme replacement and supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins High-calorie, high-fat nutritional supplements Consultation with a nutritionist specializing in CF Extra salt and water for hydration and salt losses in hot dry climates

Surveillance – Cystic Fibrosis

 
            Respiratory Newborns are examined monthly by a CF care provider for the first six months of life and then bimonthly until age one year. Individuals age one year and older should be examined quarterly by a CF care provider to monitor for subtle changes in physical examination that are not yet manifest as symptoms. Culture respiratory tract secretions at least four times yearly. Some individuals may benefit from more frequent visits and respiratory tract surveillance cultures (see Therapies Under Investigation). Pulmonary function studies, chest radiographic examination, and at least annual blood tests for electrolytes, fat soluble vitamin levels, and IgE levels are appropriate. Bronchoscopy and chest CT examination are indicated for individuals with symptoms and signs of lung disease who fail to respond to intervention. 
            Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency Weight gain and caloric intake are monitored monthly in newborns until age six months. Fecal elastase may need to be repeated during the first year of life, particularly if infants have signs or symptoms of malabsorption or inadequate weight gain. Measure oral glucose tolerance annually after age ten years during a period of stable health. Plasma glucose is measured fasting and two hours after an oral glucose load of 1.75 g/kg, or 75 g maximum. Evaluate bone mineral density in adolescence. Liver disease. Annual screening of liver function tests and liver ultrasound to monitor progression of liver disease is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid – Cystic Fibrosis

 Avoid the following: Respiratory irritants (e.g., smoke, dust) Individuals with respiratory infections Dehydration; add extra salt and water to diet in hot, dry climates because of perspiration-related salt losses (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who should be referred to a cystic fibrosis center for initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Sweat chloride testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancies are well tolerated with improved nutrition, improved pulmonary treatment, aggressive management of infections, and a multidisciplinary care team, especially in women with mild to moderate disease. Pregnancy is not associated with an increased risk of death [Goss et al 2003]. In all studies published to date, the most important predictors of pregnancy outcome are the severity of maternal pulmonary impairment and nutritional status; deterioration during pregnancy may precipitate preterm delivery. Females with CF of reproductive age should receive preconception counseling and take steps to optimize health prior to pregnancy. The management of pregnancy and the immediate post-partum period for a woman with CF requires a dietician, members of the CF team, and a maternal fetal medicine specialist. Maternal nutritional status and weight gain should be monitored and optimized aggressively and pulmonary exacerbations should be treated early. Traditional screening paradigms for gestational diabetes mellitus may not be useful in pregnancies of women with CF; therefore, screening at each trimester of pregnancy has been suggested to improve the detection of diabetes mellitus. As in pregnancies of women with other forms of diabetes mellitus, fetal outcome is optimized when glycemic control is achieved prior to pregnancy. Mode of delivery is based on usual obstetric indications.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Ursodeoxycholic acid may be cytoprotective and increase bile flow to improve hepatic enzyme levels, bile drainage, liver histology, and nutritional status [Desmond et al 2007, Cheng et al 2012, Leeuwen et al 2014]. However, whether ursodiol therapy can prevent progression of liver disease in the subset of individuals with CF who are at risk for this complication is uncertain [Brigman & Feranchak 2006, Leeuwen et al 2014]. CFTR pathogenic variant-specific candidate drugs: CF correctors such as VX-661 are small-molecule therapies being developed to increase the quantity of functional CFTR protein at the cell surface in individuals with specific CFTR pathogenic variants (including the most common CF variant, p.Phe508del). Inhaled dry powder mannitol has demonstrated relative sustained improvement in lung function in both European and American trials [Bilton at al 2011, Aiken et al 2012]. Alternate ion channel regulation is being investigated as a strategy to restore airway surface liquid. Gene therapy. Gene therapy is in early clinical trials. Gene therapy is not able to control or treat the symptoms related to CF at this time [Prickett & Jain 2013] Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 While there has been much interest in developing active and passive immunization strategies against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an effective vaccine against P. aeruginosa has not yet been developed.