

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with or suspected to have cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended. Evaluations are based on published consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span [Pierpont et al 2014] Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Complete physical examination including measurement of growth parameters Nutrition and feeding evaluation; consideration of swallow study Endocrine evaluation Psychomotor developmental evaluation Neurologic evaluation MRI of the brain to detect any structural changes Electroencephalogram if seizures are suspected Audiologic examination Ophthalmologic examination Cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram and electrocardiogram Full abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal and urogenital anomalies Obtain history for possible bleeding diathesis Dermatologic evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Consensus guidelines for workup at initial diagnosis or as ongoing medical management throughout an individual’s life span have been published [Pierpont et al 2014]. CFC syndrome affects many organ systems and, therefore, the vast majority of individuals require ongoing care by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare providers. At present, phenotypic features caused by germline pathogenic variants in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, or KRAS are treated as in the general population. Severe feeding issues during the first years of life require management by a pediatric gastroenterologist. Many children with CFC syndrome require nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding because of failure to thrive. Increasing caloric intake may be of benefit. Children with severe gastroesophageal reflux may require a Nissen fundoplication. Constipation affects the majority of individuals; increased fiber in the diet, under the direction of a pediatrician, may be beneficial. Some individuals are growth hormone- and or thyroid hormone-deficient and may benefit from management by an endocrinologist. Individuals with a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy must be monitored closely while on growth hormone therapy. Enrollment in early-intervention therapies to promote motor and intellectual development (e.g., occupational therapy, physical therapy, or speech therapy) is highly recommended. Seizures are treated as in the general population. However, seizures may be refractory to single-agent therapy and may require polytherapy. Recurrent otitis media may require placement of PE tubes. Ocular abnormalities such as myopia or hyperopia are corrected with lenses as in the general population. Cardiovascular management is dictated by the abnormality, with treatment similar to that in the general population: structural defects are managed surgically as needed; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is followed by serial echocardiograms, and cardiac arrhythmias are medically managed in an aggressive manner. Xerosis and pruritus may be relieved by increasing the ambient humidity or using hydrating lotions. Hyperkeratoses are treated as in the general population. Signs and symptoms of skin infection, especially in the presence of lymphedema, warrant thorough and immediate evaluation by a physician for the consideration of antibiotic treatment. Musculoskeletal abnormalities, such as scoliosis or pectus deformity, are managed as in the general population. Note: Specialized NF/Ras pathway genetics clinics are available in the US and United Kingdom.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valve dysplasias) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE). Anesthesia. Individuals with CFC syndrome may have an unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, tracheomalacia, or a predisposition to cardiac rhythm disturbances and should be evaluated for these issues prior to anesthetic administration.

Surveillance

 If anomalies are identified in any organ system, lifelong periodic follow up is warranted. Consensus guidelines for surveillance in CFC syndrome have been established [Pierpont et al 2014]. Gastrointestinal. Monitor for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal reflux, constipation, and generalized dysmotility. Endocrine. Monitor growth parameters to identify evidence of growth failure that may be associated with growth hormone deficiency. Monitor for signs of precocious puberty. Cognitive development. Assess periodically to be certain that school programs or other supports are addressing learning needs. Neurologic. Monitor neurologic signs and symptoms with period neurologic evaluations and MRI if indicated. Chiari malformation and later onset of seizures have been observed. Audiologic. Annual evaluation of hearing is recommended. Ophthalmologic. Periodic evaluation by an ophthalmologist to monitor for ocular issues (such as myopia, hyperopia, cataracts) is recommended. Cardiac. If the initial cardiac evaluation is normal, periodic follow-up evaluations including an echocardiogram and an electrocardiogram are necessary as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and rhythm disturbances may develop later in life. Dermatologic. As affected individuals age, formation of nevi may be progressive. At present, the natural history of the nevi is unknown. Periodic and routine dermatologic evaluation of nevi may be warranted to monitor for malignant change, although no individuals with CFC syndrome have been reported to have a malignant change. Musculoskeletal. Periodic evaluation for scoliosis during young childhood is recommended. Malignancy. No screening protocol exists at present, as it is unclear if individuals with CFC syndrome are at an increased risk for malignancies.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Over-exposure to heat. Individuals with CFC syndrome report heat intolerance.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 A pregnant female suspected of having CFC syndrome warrants obstetric care from a trained maternal-fetal-medicine physician due to possible polyhydramnios, cardiac issues, and/or hypertension.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Because the Ras/MAPK pathway has been studied intensively in the context of cancer, numerous therapeutics that specifically target this pathway are in development. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.