

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, the following evaluations are recommended: Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Ophthalmologic examination Determination of resting gaze position, head position with eyes in resting gaze position, and vertical and horizontal gaze restrictions Evaluation for aberrant movements including synergistic convergence and divergence, globe retraction, Marcus Gunn jaw wink Palpebral fissure size measurement Anterior segment evaluation to detect corneal exposure Levator function testing Optional forced duction testing Refraction, including cycloplegic refraction in children Photographic documentation for future comparison Neuroimaging suggested if there are any additional neurologic symptoms or developmental delays Strongly recommended if eye muscle surgery is planned: Brain and brain stem MRI scan to determine the size and/or course of the oculomotor and trochlear nerves High-resolution orbital MRI (1- to 3-mm cuts) to detect abnormalities in the size and/or course of the extraocular muscle(s) and atrophy of the superior rectus-levator complex

Treatment of Manifestations

 Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings: Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem. Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment. Lubrication of ocular surface (particularly cornea) may be required. In cases of severe exposure, a PROSE lens can be of significant benefit [Papakostas et al 2015]. Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle and/or ptosis surgery): Correction of ptosis Eye muscle surgery To correct or improve a compensatory head posture To improve alignment in primary gaze position To improve ambulation and gross motor development in young children Principles of surgical approach: Orbital imaging is recommended before surgery to assess muscle size and position. Extraocular muscles may be found at surgery to be attached in unexpected locations. Resections or plications may be helpful in some cases to provide traction against large recessions during healing. Surgery is likely to be technically difficult because of tightness of rectus muscles. Recessions need to be larger – sometimes considerably larger – than indicated by standard tables, especially recessions of the inferior rectus muscles. Dysinnervation causing esotropia in attempted upgaze may mask an underlying exotropia that will be unmasked after inferior rectus muscle weakening. Inferior rectus muscle weakening may be enhanced by superior oblique weakening. Profound weakening procedures (e.g., suturing muscle to orbital rim, rectus muscle myectomy) may be necessary. Botulinum toxin may be helpful for residual misalignment in some cases.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following are appropriate: Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less-preferred eye Eye lubrication to avoid dry eyes, particularly following ptosis surgery but also after successful strabismus surgery in some cases Surgical repositioning of the eyes and lids to help correct head position and alleviate secondary musculoskeletal complications from chronic head turn

Surveillance

 CFEOM is congenital and is believed to be non-progressive. Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia and complications of corneal exposure [Yazdani & Traboulsi 2004]. Routine ophthalmologic care is indicated, with visits every three to four months during the first years of life, and annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals not at risk for amblyopia. In individuals with specific TUBB3 variants, surveillance for endocrine abnormalities, facial or vocal cord weakness, and interventions for developmental delays are indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, clinical ophthalmologic exam can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.