http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cftd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital fiber-type disproportion, the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history and physical examination with particular attention to the following: Weakness Hypotonia Failure to thrive Scoliosis Contractures Comprehensive respiratory evaluation in individuals with and without respiratory symptoms including the following: Respiratory rate Signs of respiratory distress History of recurrent chest infections Ability to maintain oxygen saturation Pulmonary function studies Sleep study to evaluate for nocturnal hypoxia and assess the need for ventilator support Note: Some individuals with CFTD who have nocturnal hypoxia without symptoms can develop respiratory failure without warning. Feeding evaluation including assessment of suck and swallow and gastroesophageal reflux Speech therapy assessment, particularly if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech are present Cardiac evaluation for heart disease, including cor pulmonale and cardiomyopathy, particularly for those with pathogenic variants inTPM2 or MYH7 or those with an unknown genetic etiology. Evaluation should include echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment Screening for skeletal and orthopedic issues, including skeletal examination for scoliosis (after the child starts sitting), joint contractures, congenital hip dislocations, and foot deformities Examination by a general dentist with referral for orthodontic evaluation if dental crowding becomes apparent Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

It is recommended that care be provided by a multidisciplinary team coordinated by a clinician familiar with treatment of neuromuscular conditions [North & Goebel 2003, North 2004]. Teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, orthopedist, and clinical geneticist. Hypotonia, weakness, and joint contractures may benefit from physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or orthopedic intervention. Interventions may include exercise and stretching programs, orthotics or splinting, serial casting, or walking supports/wheelchairs [North 2004]. Regular low-impact exercise, stretching, and submaximal strength training may be helpful. These activities should be balanced with sufficient rest time to avoid exhaustion [North 2004]. Respiratory issues may benefit from breathing exercises, chest physiotherapy for handling secretions, seating assessment, immunization against influenza and other respiratory infections, antibiotics for chest infections, tracheostomy, or ventilatory support [North 2004]. Feeding and swallowing difficulties may benefit from speech therapy, diet supplementation, and feeding by gavage or gastrostomy. Gastrostomy and fundoplication should be considered if feeding issues continue beyond a few months of age [North 2004]. Referral to an orthopedist for evaluation of scoliosis and joint contractures is recommended. If scoliosis is present, serial x-rays can be used to define and monitor the degree of curve. The need for bracing or corrective (spinal fusion) surgery is based on the progression of the curve, the effect on pulmonary function, and the likelihood that surgery could affect motor function [North 2004]. Foot deformities may benefit from physical therapy, splinting/casting, or corrective surgery by an orthopedic surgeon [North 2004]. Cardiac involvement should be monitored by a cardiologist and treated as necessary [North 2004]. Orthodontic evaluation and appropriate intervention may be necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Although malignant hyperthermia has not been described in CFTD, it has been seen in other congenital myopathies, particularly RYR1-associated myopathies; therefore, precautions for malignant hyperthermia prior to anesthesia should be considered (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.) Preoperative assessment of pulmonary and cardiac function is recommended to avoid complications. Prevention of scoliosis, respiratory and feeding issues, and cardiac disease may be possible with comprehensive early screening and regular monitoring as described in Treatment of Manifestations. Contractures may be avoided by consistent joint movement or therapy.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Regular monitoring for scoliosis [North 2004], particularly in childhood and adolescence Regular pulmonary monitoring including assessment for evidence of decreased nocturnal ventilation, such as morning headaches, daytime drowsiness, and decreased appetite or school performance; sleep studies; and lung function tests, including FEV1 and FVC After an initial cardiac evaluation, consideration of ongoing cardiac monitoring on a case-by-case basis. Monitoring is advisable in those who have been found to have pathogenic variants in MYH7 and TPM2 and/or baseline cardiac abnormalities. Other subsets of individuals with CFTD may require cardiac monitoring in the future as more data are gathered regarding the incidence of cardiac complications in these people. Regular assessment of motor abilities to determine need for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and physical support, such as walkers or wheelchairs

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Extended immobilization following surgery can exacerbate muscle weakness and thus should be avoided [North 2004].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy has not been specifically studied in women or fetuses with CFTD. Women with congenital myopathies generally do not experience significant complications during pregnancy or delivery; however, gestation may lead to an increase in symptoms in some women with CFTD and other congenital myopathies, including exacerbation of fatigue and muscle weakness [Rudnik-Schöneborn et al 1997, Sobrido et al 2005]. The pregnancy of a fetus with a congenital myopathy is at an increased risk for complications such as polyhydramnios and reduced fetal movements and the delivery is at an increased risk for breech presentation, fetal distress, failure to progress, and/or prematurity [North & Goebel 2003, North 2004].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.