

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), evaluation should include the following: Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Tests looking for evidence of infection, such as C reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), which are sensitive but non-specific markers of inflammation Complete blood count (CBC). Anemia is common either due to anemia of chronic disease or iron deficiency anemia. Poor iron absorption is common in CGD-related colitis. Albumin. Hypoalbuminemia is found in 70% of persons with GI involvement and in 25% of persons without GI manifestations [Marciano et al 2004]. Endoscopy and colonoscopy if signs and symptoms of colitis are present Imaging as it pertains to specific symptoms for diagnosis and management of infection. Because CGD can affect almost every organ system different imaging modalities can be used depending on the site affected. Because of its relative ease and sensitivity, CT scan is often used; however, ultrasound and MRI can be used instead in many instances. Positron emission tomography (PET) using fluorine-18-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) uptake can help discriminate active from resolved infection. High FDG uptake is consistent with active inflammation [Güngör et al 2001].

Affected Organs / Manifestations of CGD on Imaging

 Lungs / pneumonia [Godoy et al 2008] Chest x-ray. Consolidation, reticular nodular opacities, scarring 
                  CT
                 Consolidation, ground-glass opacity, tree-in-bud opacity, centrilobular or random nodules, septal thickening, air trapping, scarring Empyema or abscess Mediastinal or hilar adenopathy, honeycomb lung, pleural thickening in chronic cases Contiguous spread to chest wall, associated osteomyelitis of ribs and vertebral bodies Lymph nodes / suppurative adenitis [Towbin & Chaves 2010] CT. Enhancing lymph node with central area of hypodensity and enhancing septations 
                  US
                 Swirling debris, thickened septa, and increased color Doppler flow Calcifications if granuloma present Liver / abscess [Garcia-Eulate et al 2006] Single to multiple small or large abscesses, sharply defined; variable enhancement but usually with small central area with poor enhancement Calcifications Musculoskeletal / osteomyelitis [Galluzzo et al 2008] Multifocal, occurring in ribs, vertebral bodies, small bones of hands and feet Genitourinary / cystitis [Walther et al 1992] Inflammatory pseudotumors of the bladder; on US appear as focal wall thickening Gastrointestinal / obstruction and colitis [Marciano et al 2004, Laskey et al 2009] Obstruction Esophagus: strictures, diverticula, dysmotility Thickening of bowel wall, fistulae Upper GI: gastric outlet obstruction with gastric dilation, delayed gastric emptying, circumferential antral narrowing, thickened gastric folds Gastric wall thickening on US, CT, or MRI Colitis: Bowel wall thickening, skip lesions, luminal narrowing, fistulae, cobblestone mucosal pattern Head and neck / sinusitis [Towbin & Chaves 2010] MRI. Fungal sinusitis hypointense on T1 and T2-weighted images, associated with bony destruction CT. Fungal sinusitis hyperdense Central nervous system / abscess [Towbin & Chaves 2010] Abscesses with typical appearance on MRI with ring-enhancing lesions

Treatment of Manifestations

 Serious infections may occur at any time in persons with CGD. Infections that are asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic may be identified at initial presentation. Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection. Imaging is important in detecting and understanding the severity of infections. CT or MRI should be followed closely until resolution of infections. A definitive microbiologic diagnosis is essential to proper treatment of infections. Biopsies to identify the pathogen should be pursued prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy unless infections are life threatening. Often obtaining an appropriate sample for diagnosis requires fine needle aspiration or percutaneous drainage of an abscess. Initially antibiotics and antifungals are often used empirically, with more selective use after the pathogen is identified. Newer azole drugs (voriconazole, posaconazole, isovuconazole) have expanded therapeutic options for fungal infections in CGD. Long courses of antimicrobials are often needed for adequate treatment. For example, those who do develop fungal infections on itraconazole prophylaxis develop them at an older age and may require longer duration of therapy. The primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts. However, if invasive yeast infections occur, organism-specific antimicrobials are warranted. Percutaneous drainage itself can be therapeutic, especially for liver or other intra-abdominal abscesses. Lymphadenitis and liver abscesses often require excisional surgery [Feld et al 2008]. Staphylococcal liver abscesses can be effectively treated without surgery using a combination of drainage of liquid pus (if present), intravenous antimicrobials, and moderate dose corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day tapered over 1-2 months) [Leiding et al 2012]. Colitis. Treatment of colitis in CGD can be difficult. Corticosteroids are usually effective but have long-term complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, and increased risk of infection. The authors’ current practice is to initiate therapy for proven colitis with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day for one to two weeks followed by a slow taper to 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day over one to two months [Holland 2010]. Metronidazole to reduce bowel flora, salicylic acid derivatives, 6-mercaptopurine, and mesalamine are also useful in treatment of CGD colitis. In CGD, the use of TNF-alpha inhibitors, specifically infliximab, a chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody to TNF alpha, is successful in closing fistulae but leads to increased frequency of severe infections with typical CGD pathogens or death. A report of infliximab in five persons with CGD found severe infections in all five and death in two. Of note, none of the five developed mycobacterial infections, as has been reported with use of infliximab in other conditions [Uzel et al 2010]. Successful bone marrow transplantation appears to cure CGD and the related colitis [Kang et al 2011]. Corticosteroid treatment of heightened inflammatory response. Simultaneous administration of antimicrobials and corticosteroids can help resolve the infections and extensive areas of inflammation that can occur with chronic colitis [Marciano et al 2004], granulomatous cystitis [Kontras et al 1971], pulmonary infections with Nocardia [Freeman et al 2011], and staphylococcal liver abscesses [Leiding et al 2012]. Successful treatment of mulch pneumonitis, the exuberant inflammatory response following inhalation of mulch or other organic matter, requires the simultaneous administration of antifungals and corticosteroids [Siddiqui et al 2007]. Aggressive treatment of the syndrome of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) in CGD with antimicrobials, IVIg, and steroids can lead to clinical improvement and remission [Parekh et al 2011]. Because the HLH-like syndrome in CGD represents a reaction to bacterial or fungal infection, these infections must be aggressively treated if patients receive immunosuppression for HLH. Although the merit of immunosuppression in the setting of infection-triggered HLH in CGD is unclear, treatment of the infection is essential. Granulocyte infusions. The value of granulocyte infusions has not been evaluated in prospective controlled trials; however, multiple case reports suggest its utility in treating serious bacterial and fungal infections [von Planta et al 1997, Ozsahin et al 1998, Bielorai et al 2000, Ikincioğullari et al 2005]. The principle is that a small number of normal phagocytes complement the oxidative defect in CGD phagocytes by supplying diffusible hydrogen peroxide. Transfused granulocytes have been recovered from sites of infection and appear to have normal respiratory burst activity and to traffic normally. Granulocyte infusions are generally well tolerated; however, adverse effects include fever, development of leukoagglutinins, and rarely, pulmonary leukostasis. Alloimmunization is a major concern, as many patients with histories of severe infections may also be considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Heim et al 2011]. The possibility of CMV transmission is also a cause for caution.

Males with X-Linked CGD

 For males with X-linked CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome early consideration should be given to autologous blood banking (see also Establishing the Diagnosis, Special Consideration in a Male with Suspected CGD and Other Medical Issues). Persons with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome do not express the erythrocyte blood group Kell antigen (i.e., they are Kell negative). Should they require transfusion of blood products, Kell-positive blood products must be avoided in order to prevent a transfusion reaction. Kell-negative blood products are rarely available.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Antibacterial prophylaxis. No randomized prospective clinical trials of antibacterial prophylaxis in persons with CGD have been performed; however, several retrospective studies suggest that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective in preventing bacterial infections. Lifelong daily antibacterial prophylaxis with oral TMP-SMX is recommended at 5 mg/kg up to 320 mg administered in two divided doses. Note: In liquid TMP-SMX the concentration of TMP is 40 mg / 5 mL and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg / 5 mL; the therapeutic dose of TMP-SMX is determined by the TMP component. Alternatives to TMP-SMX for patients allergic to sulfonamides include trimethoprim as a single agent, dicloxacillin, cephalosporins, and fluroquinolones. Antifungal prophylaxis. The use of azole antifungal drugs has markedly reduced the frequency and severity of fungal infections in CGD. Lifelong antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole 5 mg/kg oral solution to a maximum of 200 mg once daily is recommended [Gallin et al 2003]. In a randomized trial, 39 patients were assigned to receive either placebo or itraconazole (100 mg/day in patients age 5-12 years; 200 mg/day in those age >13 years and weight >50 kg); only one person receiving itraconazole had a serious fungal infection compared to seven in the placebo group [Gallin et al 2003]. For those unable to tolerate itraconazole, posaconazole has been studied in the oncology setting and is likely to be effective in CGD as well [Segal et al 2005]. Of note, the primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts. Immunomodulatory therapy. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) has become part of the prophylactic regimen in most centers in the United States; however, opinions differ on its use as primary prophylaxis and in the treatment of acute infections. The exact mechanism of IFN-gamma in CGD is not known, adding to the debate over its utility. An international multicenter randomized prospective placebo-controlled trial showed a decrease in the rate of serious infections in the group receiving IFN-gamma (22%) versus placebo (46%) after a follow-up period of 8.9 months. This improvement was independent of age, CGD genotype, or concomitant use of other prophylactic antibiotics. Three prospective Phase IV trials showed decreased rates of infections ranging from 0.13 to 0.4 per patient year. However, one prospective study comparing treatment with TMP-SMX and itraconazole alone versus addition of IFN-gamma showed no difference in the rates of infection [Martire et al 2008]. Some practitioners use IFN-gamma only in the setting of acute infection, rather than as primary prophylaxis. The data for this are anecdotal and unimpressive. The authors typically discontinue IFN-gamma during acute infection, as its utility is unclear and the exacerbation of malaise and fever can confuse the clinical picture and alter decision making [Holland 2010]. Administration by injection, cost, and lack of familiarity with cytokine therapy all affect the use of IFN-gamma in CGD. The authors use IFN-gamma in addition to antimicrobials as prophylaxis [Holland 2010]. Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA). For BSA >0.5/m2 the dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously 3x/week; for BSA ≤0.5/m2 the dose is 1.5 μg/kg subcutaneously 3x/week. Fever, myalgias, and malaise are the most common side effects but can be alleviated with concurrent administration of acetaminophen. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is the only known cure for CGD. Historically, HSCT has been associated with high morbidity and mortality and thus reluctantly offered. However, the use of non-myeloablative conditioning regimens has greatly decreased the risk of regimen-related toxicity as well as allowing for transplantation in the setting of active infection; recent reports place transplant survival at greater than 90% [Güngör et al 2014] with roughly equal survival among patients with matched related, matched unrelated, and umbilical cord blood donors. The issue of which individuals with CGD should undergo HSCT remains complex. While transplant-related mortality rates have fallen dramatically and successful cure has risen, issues of long-term risk, sterility, graft-versus-host disease, donor matching, expense, center experience, availability, and insurance coverage all strongly influence family and physician choices regarding transplantation. Levels of residual superoxide production have correlated well with overall survival [Kuhns et al 2010]; that is, individuals with very low superoxide production had worse long-term survival than those with higher levels of residual superoxide production, suggesting that this latter group could benefit more from transplantation. However, even within this group some patients do relatively well for long periods. Patients with CGD may experience behavioral, emotional, and learning difficulties as a consequence of chronic disease, recurrent hospitalization, and limitations of activity. Older children and adolescents are especially likely to be non-compliant with respect to prophylaxis and risk avoidance, increasing their risk for CGD-related complications. The inflammatory bowel disease present in up to 50% of persons with X-linked CGD may result in discomfort and growth impairment, and may require colostomy or colectomy. Overall quality of life is reduced in children with CGD, whereas patients with CGD who have undergone transplant report quality of life comparable to healthy children [Cole et al 2013]. Thus, with improved outcomes HSCT presents an increasingly reasonable alternative and the possibility of a normal life. As HSCT becomes safer, more reliable and more available it will likely be an early and initial choice for the management of CGD. Currently, many centers offer HSCT after the first life-threatening infection, but with advances in the technique, the availability of donors, especially for minority populations, and the availability of experienced centers, that equation and timing may change. Even without HSCT the majority of persons with CGD will live into adulthood. There is currently very little difference in overall survival over the first decades of life between medical and transplant management. However, the significant mortality in medical management begins to accrue after age 20 [Kuhns et al 2010]. Aggressive prophylaxis and infection management increase the likelihood of doing well. The European Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Working Group 2011 statement [EBMT Working Group 2011] recommends allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CGD in the case of unavailability of reliable specialist medical care, non-compliance with long-term antibiotic/antifungal prophylaxis, one or more life-threatening infections, severe granulomatous disease with progressive organ dysfunction (e.g., lung restriction), steroid-dependent granulomatous disease (e.g., colitis), or ongoing therapy-refractory infection (e.g., aspergillosis).

Surveillance

 Regular follow-up visits can aid in early detection and treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic infections and non-infectious complications such as colitis, pulmonary granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis [Roesler et al 2005]. Laboratory examinations include CBC, chemistries, CRP, and ESR. Significant rises in CRP or ESR should prompt evaluation for infection. Presence of microcytic anemia and hypoalbuminemia may indicate development of colitis. Monitor liver chemistries for transaminase and alkaline phosphatase elevation, especially drug-related hepatotoxicity. Although imaging is also important in detection of infectious and non-infectious manifestations, no specific guidelines address the intervals at which imaging should be used. CT or MRI should be followed closely to monitor progression of disease or until resolution of infections. Frequent follow-up visits also provide the treating clinician opportunities to encourage compliance with prophylaxis and educate the patient and family about the disease.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Exposures. Activities that expose the affected person to decayed organic matter (e.g., mulching, gardening, leaf raking, house demolition) are to be avoided as inhalation of fungal spores can result in fulminant pneumonitis leading to hypoxia and respiratory failure [Siddiqui et al 2007]. Therefore, the following should be avoided: Exposure to mulch Potting of plants or gardening Raking leaves or mowing lawns Swimming in stagnant water, brackish water, or ponds BCG vaccination should be avoided (live viral vaccines are likely safe). Transfusion considerations. Persons with CGD and McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome lack red blood cell Kell antigens and thus should not receive blood transfusions that are Kell antigen positive.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include the following: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known Routine DHR testing of peripheral blood, which will detect the CGD disease state (except for p40phox deficiency) if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The major concern during the pregnancy of a woman known to have CGD is continued use of prophylactic antimicrobials. Trimethoprim, a folic acid antagonist, is usually avoided in pregnancy Sulfamethoxazole is not known to increase the risk of birth defects in humans; however, it is typically administered in conjunction with trimethoprim for prophylaxis in affected non-pregnant women. Data regarding teratogenicity of itraconazole are limited. Although case reports of birth defects in infants born to women taking itraconazole during pregnancy have been published, this observation is not supported by larger case series. Given the lack of adequate data on the use of itraconazole during pregnancy, some practitioners suggest that it should be avoided during pregnancy until such data become available. The authors’ practice for women with CGD who are or are planning to become pregnant is to use antibacterial prophylaxis (e.g., penicillin- or cephalosporin-based therapies) for which more data on safety during pregnancy exist [Author, personal communication]. Although no antifungal prophylactic medications known to be completely safe during pregnancy are currently available, the risks and benefits of antifungal treatment must be weighed case by case. Interferon gamma is held during pregnancy and restarted after breastfeeding has ceased.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Gene therapy. CGD is an attractive target for gene therapy: the disorder results from a single gene defect, neutrophil superoxide production can be reconstituted in vitro, and correction of neutrophil superoxide production need not be complete to provide complete protection, as exemplified by X-linked carriers. Although initially unsuccessful, more recent gene therapy efforts have been encouraging. Early trials using retrovirus-based therapy were complicated by loss of engraftment. Most forms of CGD gene therapy seek to introduce a retroviral vector containing normal CYBB into mobilized CD34 stem cells. Ott et al [2006] reported successful early levels of gene-corrected oxidase-producing circulating neutrophils in two adults with X-linked CGD. While there was initial clinical benefit to both patients, over time gene silencing with loss of oxidase activity and myelodysplasia developed. Kang et al [2010] reported three individuals with X-linked CGD who underwent gene therapy: two had low-level correction of neutrophil superoxide production. One had resolution of infection with 1.1% of neutrophils regaining gp91phox expression. The lack of an intrinsic survival advantage for gene-corrected CGD cells further complicated low rates of correction. All three individuals lost corrected gene expression over the course of several months. Hematopoietic gene therapy in general and in CGD in particular has been complicated by the development of hematologic malignancies [Ott et al 2006, Stein et al 2010]. Two adults who were treated with retrovirus-based therapy developed monosomy 7 secondary to retroviral insertional activation of transcription of the oncogene MECOM (MDS and EVI1 complex locus). Promising results with the use of lentiviral vectors in a murine X-linked CGD model have been obtained [Chiriaco et al 2014]. Recently an international study using a lentiviral vector encoding a chimeric myeloid promoter in patients with X-linked CGD has opened. As is true for many forms of hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy, the treatment of CGD will require some chemotherapeutic bone marrow conditioning to facilitate long-term corrected cell engraftment and persistence. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.