

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc), the following evaluations are recommended: Swallowing assessment Electroencephalography to allow for early detection of signs indicating an increased risk for epileptic seizures and consideration of use of antiepileptic drugs Neuropsychological assessment to identify and address possible psychosocial complications Electromyography and nerve conduction testing to document the extent of neuromuscular disease Physical therapy evaluation to identify and address areas of possible benefit Clinical genetics consultation may be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Botulinum toxin may be helpful in increasing the oro-facio-lingual dystonia that interferes with eating [Schneider et al 2006]. Assistance with feeding is often necessary to prevent aspiration [Aasly et al 1999]. With progression to mutism, evaluation for computer-assisted speech systems is appropriate [Aasly et al 1999]. Mechanical protective devices may be needed for complications such as teeth grinding, head banging, and repeated falls. Use of a mouth guard has been reported to reduce psychiatric symptoms [Fontenelle & Leite 2008]. Splints can be tried for foot drop. Since the equinovarus deformity has a dystonic component, local injections of botulinum toxin have been used. Phenytoin, clobazam, valproate and levetiracetam are reported to be effective for seizure control. Use of psychiatric medications such as antidepressant or antipsychotic medications is based on conventional approaches. Behavioral compulsions, particularly those resulting in self-harm, should be aggressively treated with antidepressant medications that target obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Use of dopamine antagonists/depleters such as atypical neuroleptics or tetrabenazine as for chorea or Tourette syndrome should also be offered, although affected individuals should be carefully monitored for side effects of parkinsonism and depression [Borchardt et al 2000]. Deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus pars interna may improve chorea and dystonia [Miquel et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following are advised: Prevention of falls Keeping an object such as a handkerchief in the mouth to diminish damage to lips and tongue from involuntary biting

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Monitoring of nutritional status and adaptation of diet to assure adequate caloric intake and to prevent aspiration EEG approximately every third year

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Seizure-provoking circumstances (e.g., sleep deprivation, alcohol intake) Anticonvulsants that may worsen involuntary movements (e.g., carbamazepine, lamotrigine)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Deep brain stimulation was initially investigated in a few affected individuals with variable success [Wihl et al 2001, Burbaud et al 2002, Ruiz et al 2009]. A recent multicenter retrospective study by Miquel et al [2013] indicates that this therapy may be effective for several symptoms. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 The atypical dopamine antagonist clozapine was at least temporarily effective in a single observation [Wihl et al 2001]. The antiepileptic drug levetiracetam was effective in eliminating trunk jerks, blinking, and head nodding in a single case [Lin et al 2006]. Dopamine decreased dystonia in one individual but was ineffective in his sister [Kobal, personal communication].