http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/char

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Char syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: In infants and children suspected of having Char syndrome: a careful cardiac evaluation, usually including an echocardiogramNote: Evaluation in the newborn nursery may not be completely informative, as the ductus arteriosus may remain open for several days in any neonate. Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The major focus for managing individuals with Char syndrome concerns the cardiovascular involvement. Management of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) after the immediate newborn period is determined by the degree of shunting from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Surgical ligation or ductal occlusion at catheterization are treatment options. The most striking external aspects of Char syndrome, namely the dysmorphia and hand anomalies, require no special care early in life. The dysmorphic features do become important as affected individuals go through childhood and adolescence because of their stigmatizing effects. No data on the success of plastic surgical intervention for the facial features in Char syndrome are available.

Surveillance

Children with Char syndrome need pediatric attention during infancy and childhood. Although certain medical concerns including hearing loss, visual problems, and developmental delay are relatively rare among affected children, their prevalence is greater than in the general population. Ongoing developmental assessment for affected children by a pediatrician may be beneficial so that early intervention can be provided as needed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.