http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/charge

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with CHARGE syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Dilated ophthalmologic examination by pediatric ophthalmologist to determine the type and extent of the coloboma and associated findings such as strabismus, refractive error, or central vision impairment (CVI); when possible, clinical testing of visual fields Cardiac evaluation for cardiovascular anomalies Assessment for unilateral or bilateral choanal atresia and/or stenosis by nasal endoscopy or CT scan ENT and audiologic evaluation: In infants, brain stem auditory evoked response (BAER) to evaluate hearing as soon as the infant is medically stable In older children and adults, hearing evaluation as appropriate for age and developmental status See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of types of audiologic evaluation. CT scan of the temporal bones to evaluate for middle ear and inner ear defects Evaluation for cleft palate, including submucous cleft palate Assessment of cranial nerve function by physical examination for evidence of facial palsy and by swallowing studies Evaluation for esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal (TE) fistula with posteroanterior and lateral plain chest radiographs and radiographic visualization of a rigid nasogastric tube that fails to pass from the mouth to the stomach (Contrast-enhanced studies may be necessary to identify or locate a fistula.) Renal ultrasound examination Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of children with CHARGE syndrome requires coordinated multidisciplinary care: Airway can be compromised from choanal atresia, TE fistula, aspiration pneumonias, tracheomalacia, or an aberrant subclavian vessel impinging on the trachea. Studies have shown that 15%-60% of individuals with CHARGE syndrome require tracheostomy [Roger et al 1999, White et al 2005]. Heart defects are managed as in any individual with a congenital heart defect. Choanal atresia. Surgical correction by means of transnasal, transpalatal, or sublabial routes or airway bypass by tracheotomy or endotracheal intubation is usually necessary early in life. Multiple surgeries are often required to maintain the nasal airway. Feeding/swallowing dysfunction. In infancy, feeding can be compromised by oral-motor and/or sensory deficits. A multidisciplinary approach to therapy with specialists in speech-language pathology, occupational therapy, and nutrition can help promote early oral exploration and prevent or minimize oral defensiveness. For children with a G-tube, oral stimulation needs to be maintained to reduce future oral sensitivity/aversion. Gastroesophageal reflux can be significant enough to cause aspiration, often requiring Nissen fundoplication and G-tube insertion. Silent reflux should be considered in the evaluation of recurrent sinusitis. Renal evaluation. Renal ultrasound examination is recommended in all children. Evaluation for urinary tract infection is recommended in cases of unexplained fever or irritability in children unable to communicate. Endocrine evaluation. Early referral for endocrinology consultation is appropriate, especially if linear growth is falling from the normal curve in spite of adequate nutrition and normalized cardiac status. Some of these children may have growth hormone deficiency, which requires growth hormone replacement therapy. Individuals with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be considered for hormone replacement therapy for induction of puberty and for general health reasons including prevention of osteoporosis. Coloboma. Tinted glasses or a dark visor can be helpful for the photophobia that often accompanies iris colobomas. Parents, therapists, and teachers need to take into account visual field defects resulting from retinal coloboma and central visual defects resulting from optic nerve involvement and macular coloboma. For example, visual stimuli and sign language may need to be presented in child's lower visual field. For eyes with visual potential, cycloplegic refraction and spectacle correction may be necessary, since substantive refractive errors of mildly or even moderately micro-ophthalmic eyes have been observed. Retinal detachment, a potential complication of retinal coloboma, can result in total blindness; therefore, any change in vision status should be treated as a medical emergency. Hearing loss. Hearing loss should be assumed until proven otherwise. Hearing aids and hearing habilitation (which may include sign language in addition to the auditory and speech training) should be started as soon as hearing loss is documented. Many children benefit from bone conduction aids or (especially at school) an FM system. Headbands can be used to help keep the hearing aids in place if the ear cartilage is floppy or if the tape that secures the aid to the scalp is ineffective. PE tube placement for chronic serous otitis is common and often needs to continue until adolescence. Cochlear implants have been successful in providing sound awareness and even speech recognition in the presence of cochlear abnormalities. Bauer et al [2002] reported successful completion of cochlear implantation and measurable benefit in five individuals with CHARGE syndrome. Of note, variations in the temporal bone anatomy can lead to technical challenges and risk to the facial nerve during implantation. In some individuals, an aberrant course of the facial nerve may be a contraindication for cochlear implant [Bauer et al 2002]. Communication. Establishing an appropriate system of communication is more difficult in the presence of both hearing loss and vision loss than in the presence of hearing loss alone. Depending on the degrees of hearing and vision loss, communication may start with touch cues, followed by object cues and proceeding to auditory/oral and/or sign language. Communication training initiated by age three years is critical to the eventual development of symbolic communication [Thelin & Fussner 2005]. Deaf-blind service referral. Children with CHARGE syndrome who have combined vision and hearing loss can be considered “deafblind,” an important designation used for qualifying for educational resources in many states. Of note, “deafblind” does not imply total hearing loss or total vision loss: most children with CHARGE syndrome have some residual vision and/or hearing but are still classified as “deafblind.” Referral to deafblind education services (e.g., the Deafblind Project within the state of residence) should be made as early as possible after birth so that the parents and project personnel can begin to plan together. A growing body of evidence indicates that normal language development can occur if hearing habilitation is started prior to age six months for hearing-impaired children, whether or not they are visually impaired. Assistance of the Deafblind team to provide consultation to the early childhood education team is highly recommended since many educators and speech therapists have little or no experience with dual sensory loss. Psychological/school evaluations should be performed by a team that includes specialists in deafblindness when dual sensory loss is present. If a deafblind specialist is not available when a psychologist does an evaluation, a vision educator can show the tester where to place materials and whether the lighting and contrast of the printed materials is adequate. A hearing educator can help place the child for optimal hearing and/or do sign language interpretation. Dental procedures, when necessary, may be performed under general anesthesia. Low muscle tone and poor balance predispose children to rapid exhaustion. Many children need adjustments to the classroom or therapy setting to allow for better truncal support. Frequent rest breaks may be needed. Many children can work for longer periods if allowed to do so in a supine position [Williams & Hartshorne 2005]. Unpublished data suggest that hippotherapy (horseback riding) can be a helpful adjunct to physical therapy to prevent scoliosis as it requires frequent shifts in truncal muscular control — as do karate and other programs that promote good balance. Myofacial release can improve posture and flexibility. Sleep cycles are frequently disturbed even in those without significant visual impairments. Occasionally, sleep studies show obstructive apnea. If the cause is unknown, melatonin has been helpful for some children while others with severe visual impairment may need other medications to regulate sleep. Chronic constipation usually does not respond to simple measures such as increased fluid intake. GI consultation is often indicated. Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behavioral therapy combined with stress reduction is sometimes helpful alone, but treatment with medications can be a useful adjunct. Pervasive developmental disorder. While the behaviors may mimic autism, there are differences [Hartshorne et al 2005a]. Sensory processing issues are likely implicated. Management by behavior therapy, stress reduction, and sometimes medication is indicated. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. In many instances, establishing an appropriate method of communication and providing adequate stimulation for exploration in a safe environment are more helpful than medication. Increased pain threshold may predispose children to behaviors that are incorrectly interpreted by others as aggressive. Understanding this is critical to devising appropriate interventional strategies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Facial palsy. Because the facial nerves are often ectopic, an MRI to determine the location of the facial nerves is appropriate before craniofacial surgery or cochlear implantation is considered. Anesthesia. The airway problems associated with anesthesia in individuals with CHARGE syndrome can be attributed to choanal atresia, cleft lip and palate, and other upper-airway problems observed in approximately half of individuals with CHARGE syndrome. The soft cartilage and resultant floppy trachea add to potential anesthesia risk. Neurogenic incoordination of swallow and closure of the epiglottis may complicate the postoperative course, especially with repeated general anesthetics. If possible, procedures should be combined to reduce the overall use of anesthesia.

Surveillance

Regular ophthalmologic evaluations are appropriate to follow changes in acuity and risks for retinal detachment and/or cataract. Monitoring nonverbal infants and children who are unable to report subjective loss of vision can permit timely detection of retinal detachment and appropriate surgical repair where necessary. Frequent retesting of hearing by a pediatric audiologist may be necessary to determine the exact type and extent of hearing loss and to assess the success of hearing habilitation. Frequent clinical and radiologic dental evaluations should be performed. Wheeler et al [2000] recommended that LH and FSH be obtained between age two and three months, or by age 13-14 years if puberty has not occurred. If there is reason to suspect hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation test may be helpful.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Prophylaxis for retinal detachment is not appropriate.