http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/chd2-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination including: EEG, which may provide an assessment of the overall degree of epileptic encephalopathy and may lead to more focused use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs); MRI, which is initially important to differentiate the genetic epilepsy from a lesional epilepsy and may lead to intensified conservative treatment rather than presurgical work up. Developmental assessment Clinical genetics and/or child neurology consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Seizures should be managed by an experienced pediatric neurologist. At this time, no specific guidelines regarding choice of specific antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) exist, as the best AED regimen for CHD2-related neurodevelopmental disorders is not yet established. Most patients remain refractory to treatment and require multiple AEDs. Although a ketogenic diet may be a treatment option, it was not effective in three patients [Thomas et al 2015]. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Because clinical photosensitivity may result in injuries due to the consequences of induced seizures, the following are recommended: Avoid flickering lights that may provoke seizures. Advise patients and families that exposure to intensely flickering lights may provoke seizures including eyelid myoclonias, absence seizures, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Of note, most televisions do not transmit in the frequency range that is particularly provocative.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.