http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/chediak-higashi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS), the following are recommended: Assessment for evidence of the accelerated phase including [Filipovich 2006]: History of unexplained, persistent, or recurrent fever Splenomegaly Cytopenia of at least two cell lines Signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia Elevated serum ferritin concentration Elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor level Evidence of hemophagocytosis in bone marrow and/or cerebrospinal fluid Comprehensive neurologic examination Screening for a history of frequent or unusual infections Screening for clinical signs of lymphoma. The hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis associated with CHS may have this clinical appearance. Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations


Hematologic and immunologic defects The only treatment that cures the hematologic and immunologic defects is allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). A conditioning regimen, described in detail by Haddad et al [1995], generally includes a combination of etoposide, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide. The current standard of care is HSCT as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed and the accelerated phase has either been ruled out or is in remission. The most favorable outcome is achieved when HSCT is performed prior to development of the accelerated phase. If signs of the accelerated phase are present, hemophagocytosis must be brought into clinical remission before HSCT can be performed. Guidelines for treatment of the accelerated phase, revised in 2004 [Henter et al 2007], are the same as those for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH-2004 protocol). Combination therapy consists of etoposide, dexamethasone, and cyclosporine A. Select individuals may also receive intrathecal methotrexate and prednisilone. Remission is achieved in 75% of individuals within eight weeks [Filipovich 2006]; however, relapses are common and response to treatment declines over time. Once remission occurs, prompt HSCT is recommended. The overall five-year survival rate in 35 children with CHS who underwent HSCT was 62% [Eapen et al 2007]. Success was highest with HLA-matched siblings or unrelated donors; transplantation during the accelerated phase had a higher mortality rate. Individuals in remission following symptoms of the accelerated phase can have successful outcomes following HSCT [Eapen et al 2007]. 
Ocular abnormalities Correction of refractive errors may improve visual acuity. Sunglasses should be used to protect sensitive eyes from UV light. Skin hypopigmentation. Skin protection varies depending on the degree of hypopigmentation. Regardless, all individuals should use sunscreen to prevent sun damage and skin cancer. Neurologic abnormalities. Because of the progressive nature of the neurologic symptoms, older patients should engage rehabilitation specialists early in the course of the disease.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Patients should be protected from infectious exposures as much as is practical. Antibiotics and antiviral agents should be used promptly and aggressively to treat bacterial and viral illnesses. A study by Wolff et al [1972] did not find antibiotic prophylaxis to be beneficial; however, in situations of recurrent bacterial infections, it should be considered. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be given prior to dental or invasive procedures Widespread use of prophylactic antibiotics prior to invasive dental procedures has been under scrutiny. However, for individuals with compromised immune systems and neutropenia who will be undergoing invasive dental procedures or procedures that cause significant bleeding, prophylaxis should be considered according to American Heart Association guidelines [Tong & Rothwell 2000]. Immunizations are generally well tolerated and should be administered. Intravenous DDAVP (0.2-0.4 µg/kg/dose over 15 to 30 minutes) can be given 30 minutes prior to invasive procedures to help control bleeding. For serious trauma or extensive bleeding, platelet transfusion may be necessary.

Surveillance

No guidelines for surveillance of classic CHS exist. Current standard of care initiates evaluation for bone marrow transplantation as quickly as feasible after the diagnosis is confirmed. For atypical or adolescent- or adult-onset CHS, annual screening should include the following: Abdominal ultrasound examination to monitor for hepatosplenomegaly CBC to evaluate for cytopenias Evaluation for signs of liver dysfunction including hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia Measurement of serum ferritin concentration Soluble interleukin-2 receptor measurement Consideration of bone marrow biopsy and/or lumbar puncture if history or physical examination suggests CNS involvement or other manifestations of the accelerated phase If clinical status changes, the above tests should be repeated. For both classic and atypical CHS, annual ophthalmologic examination is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

All nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen) are to be avoided as they can exacerbate the bleeding tendency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband as early as possible. Early diagnosis may provide the opportunity to perform HSCT prior to the development of the accelerated phase. If the family-specific pathogenic variants are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, examination of peripheral blood for the presence of giant inclusions within white blood cells can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In the limited cases of pregnancy in females with CHS reported in the literature [Price et al 1992, Weisfeld-Adams et al 2013], presence of the disease had no impact on the pregnancy, labor, or delivery. The infants were normal. The pregnancy also did not appear to affect the course of disease in the affected mothers.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.