http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/chh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a cartilage-hair hypoplasia – anauxetic dysplasia (CHH-AD) spectrum disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Testing. Blood survey for macrocytic anemia and immunodeficiency [Rider et al 2009]: Complete blood count with differential cell count Serum concentration of IgG, IgA, IgM, and IgG subclasses CD3, 4, 8, 19, 16/56 Post-vaccine titers Other immunologic parameters: Allogeneic lymphocyte cytotoxicity (ALC) T-cell receptor excision circles (TREC) analysis T-cell repertoire Proliferation response to PHA Proliferation response to anti-CD3 Imaging. Full skeletal survey including (in AD) views of the cervical spine to identify cervical vertebral abnormalities and to assess the risk for atlantoaxial subluxation 
Consultations Orthopedic. Evaluation for complications of joint laxity, lumbar lordosis, chest deformity, scoliosis, and varus deformity of the lower extremities Immunologic. For further assessment and treatment if above testing is abnormal or if the child has infections, and to determine the vaccination program and the approach to varicella prophylaxis Hematologic. For further assessment and treatment if above testing is abnormal Pulmonary. Evaluation for evidence of respiratory disease Gastroenterologic. Evaluation for congenital megacolon if clinical observation is suggestive Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations


Skeletal dysplasia Corrective osteotomies may be warranted in late childhood or adolescence for excessive varus deformity of the lower extremities [Riley et al 2015]. In persons with AD, surgery may be needed to fuse malformed cervical vertebrae in infancy and to correct or prevent the progression of kyphoscoliosis. Orthopedic surgery may be complicated by low bone density. Short stature. Treatment with recombinant growth hormone has not shown any sustained benefit in individuals with CHH and cannot be recommended [Obara-Moszynska et al 2013]. Immunodeficiency and infection. The treatment of infections in individuals with immunodeficiency is based on their type, location, and severity. Immediate antiviral treatment with intravenous high-dose acyclovir must be considered at the first symptoms of varicella infection to prevent complications. Consider prophylactic antibiotic therapy if the individual has recurrent infections or if neutropenia/severe lymphopenia is present. Consider also immunoglobulin replacement therapy if immunoglobulin or IgG subclass levels are low, or if vaccine responses are inadequate. Individuals with bronchiectasis need proper management of infectious exacerbations and physiotherapy. Consider also long-term treatment with inhaled antibiotics or oral macrolide [Altenburg et al 2015]. Recurrent severe infections and/or the presence of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) may warrant bone marrow transplantation / hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [Guggenheim et al 2006]. HSCT has resulted in normalization of T-lymphocyte numbers and function, resolution of autoimmune manifestations, and catch-up growth, probably due to reduced infections. Overall survival rates have been reported at 63% for unrelated donor transplants and as high as 80% for matched sibs. HSCT should be considered in selected individuals with CHH with recurrent infections and autoimmune manifestations or bone marrow dysplasia for whom a well-matched donor is available [Bordon et al 2010]. Anti-TNFa therapy has been used successfully in the treatment of cutaneous and visceral granulomas. However, fatal progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by JC virus has been described during treatment with anti-TNFa antibodies. HSCT resulted in disappearance of granulomas in two out of three transplanted individuals [Moshous et al 2011]. 
Anemia Treatment of severe anemia secondary to depressed erythropoiesis may require repeated red cell transfusions in infancy and childhood; life-long transfusions or bone marrow transplantation are rarely needed [Williams et al 2005]. In individuals requiring repeated transfusions iron chelation is successful and well tolerated when needed [Taskinen et al 2013]. Although steroid treatment has been effective in treating anemia in some persons with CHH, the available data are not sufficient to recommend this therapy in general, especially considering the potential side effects of immune suppression and growth retardation. Malignancy. No specific recommendations for the treatment of the observed malignancies are available. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma often has a poor prognosis with conventional cytotoxic protocols [Taskinen et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If a cervical spine abnormality and/or instability is identified, special care should be exercised when general anesthesia is administered.

Surveillance


Skeletal dysplasia Children with CHH require annual measurement of linear growth and body proportions; comparison with published disease-specific growth curves [Mäkitie et al 1992a] is helpful. Pubertal development should be monitored during yearly follow-up visits and hypogonadism excluded if puberty is significantly delayed. Clinical assessment for deformities of the lower extremities and joints is appropriate. Radiographic evaluation and orthopaedic consultation is necessary if symptomatic misalignment, restricted knee or hip mobility, or symptomatic joint laxity is present. Individuals with AD require annual clinical and radiographic monitoring of the spine. 
Anemia Observe for clinical signs of anemia starting from the time of the initial diagnosis until early adolescence. Follow RBC, hematocrit, and hemoglobin levels in those in remission after treatment for anemia at least every six months or when clinical signs of anemia reappear. Note: (1) No data are available on the likely timing of recurrence of anemia after successful treatment; (2) severe anemia in adolescents and adults with CHH can be the presenting symptom of malignancy and may require extensive investigations with bone marrow evaluation and imaging studies. 
Immunodeficiency and infection As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to infection in children, ongoing follow up by physicians with experience in this condition is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of infection. Particularly in the first two years of life, children with normal initial immunologic assessment should be monitored for recurrent infections, especially life-threatening varicella infections [Notarangelo et al 2008, Rider et al 2009]. Laboratory markers for immunodeficiency may fluctuate in children with CHH, thus emphasizing the need for regular yearly follow up [Kainulainen et al 2014]. Bronchiectasis should be suspected especially in subjects with frequent respiratory tract infections and combined immune deficiency; high-resolution computed tomography should be used for diagnosis [Toiviainen-Salo et al 2008]. 
Malignancy Although no specific recommendations exist, it is advised that children be checked on a regular basis (once yearly) by their pediatrician or primary healthcare provider for lymphomas and other associated malignancies by careful clinical examination and routine blood tests. Skin should be inspected for abnormal changes, lymph nodes for enlargement, and abdomen for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or other abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound is recommended at a regular one- to two-year interval, as well as yearly laboratory tests including blood counts with differential, LDH, and uric acid. As no clinical parameters predict susceptibility to malignancy in adults, ongoing regular follow up beyond adolescence is recommended, including routine physical examination and laboratory testing for early detection of malignancy, as described above. The frequency of follow-up visits need to be determined on an individual basis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Routine immunizations with inactivated vaccines are considered safe in persons with CHH. However, immunization with live vaccines should be carefully considered in those with CHH and evidence of abnormal immunologic function, and should be avoided in those with CHH and SCID [Rider et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of relatives (i.e., sibs) at risk for CHH-AD spectrum disorders is important for early recognition and management of manifestations that can be associated with significant morbidity (e.g., infections, immunization with live vaccines, malignancies). Relatives at risk should be tested if clinical features, especially short stature, are present; completely asymptomatic individuals need not be tested. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Radiographic evaluation and RMRP sequence analysis if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No issues are known; however, experience is limited.

Therapies Under Investigation

Varicella vaccine is being investigated for children with CHH who have not had varicella. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on this and other clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.