

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with choroideremia (CHM), the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmologic examination including visual acuity and Goldmann visual field testing for a baseline Electroretinogram Funduscopic examination Optical coherence tomography (OCT) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Retinal detachment which may occur more commonly in patients with high myopia (as seen in CHM) is treated by conventional surgical techniques by an ophthalmologist. Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with a posterior subcapsular cataract. UV-blocking sunglasses may have a protective role when an affected individual is outdoors. Low vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs. Counseling from organizations or professionals who work with the blind and visually impaired may be needed to help the affected individual cope with issues such as depression, loss of independence, fitness for driving, and anxiety over job loss. Nutrition and ocular health have become increasingly topical: For those individuals who do not have access to fresh fruit and leafy green vegetables, a supplement with antioxidant vitamins may be important. No information is available on the effectiveness of vitamin A supplementation in the treatment of CHM. A source of omega-3 very-long-chain fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid, may be beneficial, as clinical studies suggest that a regular intake of fish is important.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Rare cases of choroidal neovascularization may be treated with intravitreal bevacizumab [Palejwala et al 2014]

Surveillance

 Regular ophthalmologic examination to monitor progression of CHM is recommended as affected individuals need advice regarding their levels of visual function. Goldmann visual field examinations provide practical information for both the clinician and the affected individual. Spectral domain-OCT (SD-OCT) is useful during therapeutic trials to measure macular thickness and the presence of cystoid macular edema [Genead & Fishman 2011].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 UV exposure from sunlight reflected from water and snow should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Gene therapy for individuals with CHM has been considered an achievable goal. Introduction of adenovirus containing the CHM coding region can restore in vitro protein levels and REP-1 activity in CHM-deficient lymphocytes and fibroblasts [Anand et al 2003]. Vasireddy et al [2013] reported encouraging preclinical results using induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with CHM as in vitro models as well as normal-sighted mice as in vivo models. Delivery of CHM cDNA via a recombinant adeno-associated viral vector (AAV2) did not induce cytotoxicity in either model, suggesting that a human clinical trial for this condition is possible. To date, a safety trial of AAV2-mediated gene therapy in human subjects with CHM has been completed [MacLaren et al 2014]. Despite the requirement for submacular placement of the vector through microsurgical techniques, no serious adverse events were noted. Morgan et al [2014] provided supporting evidence that the retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor layers should be the primary targets for experimental therapies based on their high resolution retinal imaging studies. Other preclinical studies suggest that AAV8 may also be a candidate vector for choroideremia human gene therapy trials [Black et al 2014]. Note: Gene therapy trials for CHM are currently planned or underway and are registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Genead et al [2012] studied the use of 2% topical dorzolamide ophthalmic solution to treat two CHM patients with cystoids macular edema. Clear improvements in retinal thickness were identified though changes to visual acuity, retinal sensitivity and other functional measures were not clinically significant.