http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/chrom17-lis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LIS1-associated lissencephaly/ subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), the following are recommended: Evaluation of: Growth Feeding and nutrition Respiratory status Development Seizures Clinical genetics consultation MRI should be interpreted carefully to provide as much prognostic information as possible. Note: Although most affected individuals have severe to profound intellectual disability, a minority have less extensive lissencephaly that results in only moderate intellectual disability, and a few have limited malformations that allow near-normal development. In the latter, the lissencephaly or SBH is typically less severe and less extensive on MRI. The resolution of brain CT scan is not usually sufficient to allow this.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Parents seem best able to deal with this severe disorder when accurate information regarding the prognosis is given as soon as possible after the diagnosis is recognized. For those with severe lissencephaly, it is usually appropriate to discuss limitations of care, such as "do not resuscitate" (DNR) orders, in the event of severe illnesses. Poor feeding in newborns is usually managed by nasogastric tube feedings, as the feeding problems often improve during the first weeks of life. But they often worsen again with intercurrent illnesses and with advancing age and size. At least 50% of children with LIS1-related lissencephaly (but not SBH) eventually have a gastrostomy tube placed for feeding. A large majority of children with lissencephaly have seizures, including frequent infantile spasms, which can be difficult to control. Management of seizures in children with ILS or SBH is based on the specific seizure type and frequency. In general, seizures should be treated promptly and aggressively by specialists, as poor seizure control frequently results in decline in function and health. Specifically, poor seizure control worsens feeding and increases the likelihood that a gastrostomy tube will be needed, and increases the risk for pneumonia.

Surveillance

 Whenever any unusual spells or any developmental regression is noted, a child neurology consultation should be performed, and EEG considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.