http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ciss

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with cold-induced sweating syndrome (CISS/Crisponi syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended: Brain MRI. Usually normal, but may be done to evaluate for complicating features including a thin corpus callosum [Okur et al 2008] or small subcortical white matter lesions [Yamazaki et al 2010, Tüysüz et al 2013] Swallowing tests and esophageal manometry. May be helpful in assessing the safety of oral feeding EEG when seizures are observed or suspected Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Infants require close monitoring in anticipation of episodes of laryngospasm with respiratory distress, bouts of hyperthermia (≤42º C [108° F]), seizures, and possible sudden death. Preparedness for appropriate countermeasures (e.g., supplemental oxygen, cooling blankets, antiepileptic drugs) is essential. An apnea monitor is recommended. Serial or continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring may be required during the first few weeks if seizures are observed. Anticonvulsants may be required. Nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding is indicated until at least age one year to overcome precarious feeding problems in infancy. Bracing, occupational therapy, or plastic surgery may be necessary to correct congenital finger and hand deformities. Surgical instrumentation or prolonged
bracing may be required to correct a progressive thoracolumbar scoliosis. Paradoxical sweating. Treatment should be reserved for adults and older children. The combined prescription of clonidine and amitriptyline can provide excellent and long-term symptom control. Clonidine. Episodes of cold-induced sweating are associated with a prominent increase in plasma noradrenaline. Clonidine, a central presynaptic α2-adrenoreceptor agonist, induces feedback inhibition of synaptic noradrenaline release. Oral clonidine, at starting doses of 0.05 mg to 0.1 mg twice daily, effectively reduces cold-induced sweating and is usually well tolerated. If there are no contraindications, the drug is maintained at the lowest dose required for acceptable symptom control. Before initiating a prescription of clonidine, check potential interactions with already prescribed medications. The beneficial effects of clonidine may lessen within a few weeks of starting the drug, due to habituation. A gradual increase in the daily dose of clonidine to tolerance (side effects: dry mouth, postural hypotension, sedation) or to a maximum of 0.1 mg four times daily may be required. If clonidine needs to be discontinued, the prescription should be phased out over four to six days; abrupt cessation of clonidine can lead to prominent hypertension. Amitriptyline, 10 mg orally at bedtime may be added to the prescription of clonidine when symptoms are not adequately controlled. The dose may need to be increased gradually to a maximum of 25 mg four times daily (taken together with clonidine). Moxonidine, prescribed at a maximum oral dose of 6 μg/kg/d, was shown to provide effective symptom relief in two teenage sibs with CISS [Herholz et al 2010]. Moxonidine was well tolerated in the short term; however, long-term observations are not yet available.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

 Surveillance includes monitoring for evidence of scoliosis and its progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Affected individuals should avoid heat exposure and prolonged physical activity in a hot climate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Females with CISS may conceive normally. No complications during pregnancy have been reported to date. Treatments for cold-induced sweating (clonidine, amitriptyline, moxonidine) should be discontinued during pregnancy, as the potential for teratogenic effects on the fetus is not well studied and remains possible. The prescription of clonidine should not be discontinued abruptly; the drug should be phased out over four to six days.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.