http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/citrin

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a phenotype of citrin deficiency, the following are recommended: 
            NICCD Assess the size of the liver and spleen. Seek evidence of fatty liver by abdominal US, CT, or MRI. Investigate feeding pattern. 
            FTTDCD Perform detailed anthropometric examination and evaluation using age- and gender-matched growth standards. Investigate feeding pattern. CTLN2. Investigate carbohydrate, protein, and lipid composition of the diet. All phenotypes. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations

 NICCD. The symptoms in most children with NICCD resolve by age 12 months following supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins and use of lactose-free and MCT-enriched therapeutic formulas [Ohura et al 2003, Song et al 2010, Hayasaka et al 2012, Zhang et al 2014a]. Two sibs improved after switching from breast milk to formula, which has higher proline content [Ben-Shalom et al 2002]. Some children with NICCD improve without treatment, which could be the effect of reduction of breast milk and/or common formulas while simultaneously introducing solid supplements such as eggs and meat, which are rich in protein and lipid and therefore beneficial for citrin-deficient individuals [Song et al 2010]. The treatment with therapeutic formulas is not lifelong. Most infants with NICCD will recover clinically and biochemically by age one year, at which point protein- and lipid-enriched textured or solid supplements could be introduced. Whether continued treatment beyond a year can reduce the likelihood of the FTTDCD and CTLN2 phenotype is currently unknown. Moreover, zinc deficiency is common in NICCD, and thus zinc supplementation should be encouraged when laboratory evidence indicates zinc deficiency, especially in individuals with marked failure to thrive. Four infants with NICCD and severe liver dysfunction were diagnosed as having tyrosinemia of unknown cause and underwent liver transplantation at age ten to 12 months [Tamamori et al 2002, Kobayashi et al 2006]. FTTDCD. Few treatment measures have been described for this novel citrin-deficient phenotype. A toddler with FTTDCD was fed in accordance with his own food preferences (including aversion to rice and fondness for fish); FTT improved gradually, with weight for age recovering beyond the third percentile at age three years. The dyslipidemia also improved gradually [Song et al 2009a]. In addition to dietary treatment, administration of sodium pyruvate may be effective in correcting growth restriction [Mutoh et al 2008, Saheki et al 2010]. Sodium pyruvate reduces the NADH/NAD+ ratio in the hepatocyte, a pivotal alteration for citrin deficiency development, and this could be associated with its ameliorating effect on growth restriction. CTLN2. The most successful therapy to date has been liver transplantation [Ikeda et al 2001, Kasahara et al 2001, Yazaki et al 2004, Hirai et al 2008], which prevents episodic hyperammonemic crises, corrects the metabolic disturbances, and eliminates preference for protein-rich foods [Kobayashi & Saheki 2004]. Nearly all individuals with CTLN2 required liver transplantation in the past; however, the introduction of arginine and sodium pyruvate and medium chain triglyceride (MCT) oil administration has altered the situation. Other treatments include the following: Administration of arginine (5-10 g/day) was reported to be effective in decreasing blood ammonia concentration. Reducing calorie/carbohydrate intake and increasing protein intake ameliorates hypertriglyceridemia [Imamura et al 2003]. Administration of sodium pyruvate (4-9 g/day) was effective in decreasing frequency of hyperammonemic episodes and improving growth in several cases [Mutoh et al 2008; Saheki et al 2010; Yazaki et al 2010; Ohura et al, personal communication; Okano et al, personal communication]. Administration of MCT oil (Mactone oil containing 85% MCT; 45 mL/day) was associated with complete recovery with all normal laboratory findings or improved with no hyperammonemic symptoms [Hayasaka et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 To prevent hyperammonemia and improve growth, a diet rich in protein and lipids and low in carbohydrates is recommended [Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006, Dimmock et al 2007, Saheki et al 2008, Dimmock et al 2009]. High-carbohydrate meals and alcohol should be avoided. Arginine administration may be effective in preventing hyperammonemic crises.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Vitamin D deficiency and zinc deficiency are common complications in NICCD [Song et al, personal communication]. Severe infection and liver cirrhosis have also been reported to be lethal complications in some individuals with NICCD. Therefore, vitamin D and zinc supplements and active infection control are recommended in persons with NICCD.

Surveillance

 To monitor for emergence of the FTTDCD phenotype in persons with citrin deficiency older than age one year, close surveillance of anthropometric indices (e.g., height, weight, and head circumference; serum lipid levels including triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and LDL-cholesterol) is appropriate. It is recommended that the following be measured every several months: Plasma ammonia concentration (especially in the evening or 2 hours after feeding) Plasma citrulline concentration Serum PSTI concentration Increases in plasma citrulline concentration and serum PSTI suggest onset of CTLN2 [Tsuboi et al 2001, Mutoh et al 2008] and should prompt initiation of treatment.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Low-protein/high-caloric (high-carbohydrate) diet. Although a low-protein/high-caloric diet helps prevent hyperammonemia in urea cycle enzyme deficiencies, it is harmful for individuals with all forms of citrin deficiency (i.e., NICCD, FTTDCD, or CTLN2) [Saheki et al 2004, Saheki & Kobayashi 2005, Saheki et al 2006]. A high-carbohydrate diet may increase NADH production, disturb urea synthesis, and stimulate the citrate-malate shuttle, resulting in hyperammonemia, fatty liver, and hypertriglyceridemia [Saheki & Kobayashi 2002, Imamura et al 2003, Saheki et al 2006, Saheki et al 2007]. Infusion of sugars including glycerol, fructose, and glucose. Severe brain edema treated with glycerol-containing osmotic agents has resulted in continued deterioration and is contraindicated in those with CTLN2 [Yazaki et al 2005]. Degradation of large amounts of glycerol and fructose generates NADH in liver cytosol, which may disturb liver function [Saheki et al 2004, Yazaki et al 2005, Takahashi et al 2006]. Infusion of high-concentration glucose may also exacerbate hyperammonemia [Tamakawa et al 1994, Takahashi et al 2006]. Note: Mannitol infusion appears to be safer [Yazaki et al 2005]. Alcohol. Drinking alcohol can trigger the onset of CTLN2 because alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) generates NADH in the cytosol of the liver. Medications. Acetaminophen and rabeprozole may trigger CTLN2 [Shiohama et al 1993, Imamura et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk asymptomatic sibs of a proband for citrin deficiency so that appropriate dietary management of infants (discontinuation of breast feeding and introduction of lactose-free and/or MCT-enriched formulas) can be instituted before symptoms occur. Because asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals with citrin deficiency do not always show biochemical abnormalities, definitive diagnosis of at-risk relatives (e.g., sibs) would depend heavily on SLC25A13 molecular genetic findings in the proband: If both SLC25A13 pathogenic variants in the index case have been identified, molecular genetic testing can be used reliably. If only one SLC25A13 pathogenic variant is ascertained in the index case, it may not be feasible to definitively exclude the diagnosis in at-risk relatives who have the one identified pathogenic variant. In such cases, serial clinical and biochemical assessment will be needed over time to confirm or rule out the diagnosis. If no SLC25A13 pathogenic variant is ascertained in the index case, molecular testing of at-risk individuals will not be helpful. In such cases, serial clinical and biochemical assessment will be needed over time to confirm or rule out the diagnosis See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.