http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/clcn7

Management

 Recently updated guidelines for diagnosis, therapy, and follow up are available online.

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with infantile malignant CLCN7-related autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO), the following evaluations are recommended: Full blood cell count to evaluate for leukocytosis or leukocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia with low reticulocyte count Investigation of calcium concentrations in blood and urine to evaluate for hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism Ultrasonography of abdomen to evaluate for hepatosplenomegaly MRI and/or CT of the neurocranium to evaluate for narrowed neuroforamina, hydrocephalus, and brain abnormalities in neuronopathic form of osteopetrosis Ophthalmologic examination including VEPs to evaluate for optic nerve atrophy Otorhinolaryngologic examination to evaluate for choanal stenosis EEG to detect pathologic changes associated with neurodegeneration; neurologic examination to evaluate development Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Due to the difference in severity, treatment strategies for ARO and ADOII differ. IAO lies between these two forms and has a variable prognosis. Therefore, treatment options must be evaluated on an individual basis.

ARO

 Hypocalcemic convulsions, occurring in a substantial number of neonates as the first disease manifestation, should be treated by calcium supplementation. The management of calcium homeostasis may be difficult and recommendations are conflicting: whereas physiologic doses of calcium and vitamin D have been used to treat children with osteopetrosis who have rickets, restriction of calcium and vitamin D has been used to prevent progression of disease and hypercalcemic crisis following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Treatment needs to take into account the particular situation of the affected individual. Bone marrow failure may require erythrocyte or platelet transfusions (irradiated products). In the case of leukocytopenia and/or hypogammaglobulinemia, which may develop in a subset of individuals, antibiotics and immunoglobulins may be given in a prophylactic or therapeutic manner. Newly diagnosed individuals should be transferred as soon as possible to a pediatric center experienced in allogeneic stem cell transplantation in this disease. Sensory and neurologic manifestations require the collaboration of pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, ophthalmologists, and psychologists. Surgical decompression of the optic nerve, a difficult procedure, has been performed with some success to prevent vision loss [Hwang et al 2000]. Fractures require treatment and surveillance by an experienced bone surgeon or orthopedist in collaboration with the treating pediatrician. Dental. Without HSCT, most children do not reach the age at which secondary dentition erupts. Children undergoing early HSCT may have normal secondary dentition despite defective primary dentition [Jälevik et al 2002]. In some cases, defective tooth eruption, ankylosis, abscesses, and the formation of cysts and fistulas may require surgical intervention. Special attention is required to prevent mandibular osteomyelitis and extreme brittleness of the alveolar bone [Luzzi et al 2006].

ADOII

 Orthopedic treatment is often required for fractures and arthritis. Post-surgical complications such as delayed union or non-union of fractures and infections are common (50%) because of the brittleness of the bones. Fractures near joints may require total joint arthroplasty [Strickland & Berry 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



ARO

 Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Since the defective osteoclasts in osteopetrosis are of hematopoietic origin, allogeneic HSCT can be curative. Most manifestations (bone sclerosis, bone marrow failure, and extramedullary hematopoiesis) can be prevented or reversed by HSCT. Secondary neurosensory impairments caused by nerve compression may be prevented by early transplantation, but not reversed when they are already present. Primary neurologic problems and retinal degeneration developing in the neuronopathic form of ARO, however, are independent of the bone disease and therefore cannot be improved or prevented by HSCT. Persons with ARO resulting from CLCN7 pathogenic variants who do not develop neurologic complications have been reported [Pangrazio et al 2010; A Schulz and U Kornak, unpublished results]. It is highly important but difficult to exclude individuals with the neuronopathic form from this invasive treatment. On the other hand, HSCT should be performed as soon as possible in the majority of those without primary neurologic sequelae to prevent irreversible secondary complications, including visual impairment. The evaluation of affected individuals and treatment by HSCT should therefore be performed in experienced pediatric centers after multidisciplinary evaluation to assess the severity of the disease and individual prognostic factors. The outcome of HSCT in ARO has been analyzed in a retrospective survey of the European Society of Immunodeficiencies (ESID) and the European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) [Sobacchi et al 2013]. The five-year disease-free survival was estimated at 88% for genoidentical transplants, 80% for matched unrelated transplants, and 66% for haploidentical transplants [Sobacchi et al 2013]. In a recently published report of 193 patients transplanted in various centers by a cyclophosphamide-based regimen, the five-year probabilities of survival were 62% after HLA-matched sib transplantation and 42% after alternative donor transplantation [Orchard et al 2015]. A further improved outcome was most recently reported from three large transplant centers using a fludarabine-based conditioning regimen [Natsheh et al 2016; Schulz and Moshous, personal communication]. Note: Because TCIRG1 pathogenic variants are more often the cause of ARO than are CLCN7 pathogenic variants, the majority of HSCTs have been performed in infants with TCIRG1 rather than CLCN7 pathogenic variants. However, there appears to be no significant difference in treatment outcome between individuals with TCIRG1 and CLCN7 pathogenic variants [A Schulz et al, unpublished results]. The incidence of severe complications post-HSCT is high, particularly when alternative stem cell sources are used. Complications include rejection, delayed hematopoietic reconstitution, venous occlusive disease, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercalcemic crisis [Steward et al 2004, Corbacioglu et al 2006, Shroff et al 2012]. Cranial nerve dysfunction (visual impairment caused by optic nerve atrophy) is irreversible in most cases. In the authors' series including about 30 individuals, about two thirds of affected individuals were visually impaired after successful transplantation [A Schulz, unpublished results]. Progressive neurologic sequelae, developmental delay, and repeated seizures occur in a subset of individuals after successful HSCT [Steward 2003]. Severe neurologic manifestations other than visual impairment have been seen in about 10% of individuals in the authors' series [A Schulz, unpublished results]. Other. Conservative treatment strategies include stimulation of host osteoclasts with calcium restriction, calcitriol, steroids, parathyroid hormone, and interferon [Kocher & Kasser 2003]. Since evidence for a favorable outcome in severe osteopetrosis is limited and because side effects are severe (particularly in infants), these drugs may be administered in special situations only.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 ARO. Restricted intake of calcium and vitamin D just before, during, and following HSCT to prevent hypercalcemia is recommended. Parents and patients should be informed about possible complications of the disease and recommendations for prevention should be given accordingly (e.g., severe CNS bleeding in patients with thrombocytopenia, pathologic fractures). Because of the heterogeneity of the disease, recommendations should be given on an individual basis. ADOII. Good routine dental care and oral hygiene may help prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible.

Surveillance

 
            ARO The possible manifestations and complications of osteopetrosis require repeat investigations; however, no general recommendations are available for the extent and frequency of investigations. A blood cell count and an ophthalmologic examination should be performed once a year at a minimum in all individuals with ARO. In individuals who have undergone HSCT, surveillance should be coordinated by the transplantation center; chimerism analysis should be performed repeatedly, as secondary graft failures have been reported. However, such individuals may be free of disease manifestation even in the case of stable mixed chimerism, if a substantial part of blood cells are donor derived (i.e., coexistence of hematopoietic cells of donor and recipient origin). ADOII. In ADOII, skeletal manifestations do not progress and therefore no special surveillance is necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 
            ADOII Activities with high fracture risk should be avoided. Orthopedic surgery should only be performed when absolutely necessary and the surgeon should be aware of potential complications and difficulties in handling osteopetrotic bone.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CLCN7 pathogenic variant(s) in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Studies have been initiated to investigate the relation of genotype and clinical outcome after stem cell transplantation (for current information, see the European Society of Immunodeficiencies [ESID] and European Group of Bone Marrow Transplantation [EBMT] websites).