http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/clpb-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CLPB deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete physical examination Complete neurologic examination, including brain MRI (if not performed at the time of diagnosis) Developmental assessment or IQ testing (depending on the age of the individual at the time of diagnosis) For those with significant neurologic problems: Complete evaluation of feeding and diet to determine if tube feeding or gastrostomy is necessary Evaluation of excessive drooling to determine if the risk of aspiration and/or dehydration is increased Complete ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for cataracts (if not performed at the time of diagnosis) Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is recommended to determine the need for granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) treatment. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys for evidence of nephrocalcinosis or cysts Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietitian, and physical therapist when possible. No specific dietary or other metabolic treatment is available. Thorough developmental assessment is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Early intervention may include physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy. Treatment of the neurologic manifestations is per current clinical practice based on the findings. To date no specific recommendations regarding the use of antiepileptic drugs are available. Excessive drooling can be reduced with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of saliva glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts [SB Wortmann, personal communication]. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) administered subcutaneously can be used to increase neutrophil counts to help reduce the frequency of infections, especially in individuals with the mild or moderate phenotype (see Clinical Description) [SB Wortmann, personal communication]. Note: Immunizations are not contraindicated and all children should be immunized as per national standards.

Surveillance

 Neurologic, ophthalmologic, immunologic/hematologic, and orthopedic evaluations are based on individual findings as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Drugs potentially toxic to mitochondria (including chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, linezolide, valproic acid, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.