http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cls

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS), the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference History and neurologic examination to assess for changes in gait or in bowel or bladder function and for epilepsy or movement disorder Developmental assessment and formulation of an intervention plan Complete musculoskeletal examination with particular attention to the chest and spine; radiographic assessment if clinically indicated Developmental, age-appropriate hearing assessment Dental evaluation Physical examination of the heart and ECG, with baseline echocardiogram by age ten years Ophthalmologic evaluation, including refraction and fundoscopy Evaluation of appropriate family members for signs of the condition Assessment of the family’s capacity to care for the child, especially if mother is affected intellectually Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Individuals with CLS should be provided with every opportunity to develop communication skills and to participate in activities and self-care in order to develop a degree of independence. Awareness of SIDAs should allow early intervention to minimize the occurrence of triggering stimuli and to provide protection from falls: Trials with different medications and efforts to optimize the dosage may improve outcome [O'Riordan et al 2006]. A trial of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., valproate, clonazepam, or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors) may be indicated [Fryssira et al 2002], although generally they are not effective. Benzodiazapines, sometimes in increasing doses, have proved effective in some cases [Touraine et al 2002, Nakamura et al 2005]. In an individual who was not helped by a variety of medications, Havaligi et al [2007] reported a good response with sodium oxybate. If attacks occur with great frequency, use of a wheelchair may be required to prevent falling and injury. Risperidone may be of benefit to individuals who display destructive or self-injurious behavior [Valdovinos et al 2002]. Feeding difficulties, abnormal growth velocity, and obesity, if present, should be assessed and treated in a standard manner. Treatment of behavioral problems is standard and requires periodic reassessment. Treatment of kyphoscoliosis is standard but requires reassessment well into adulthood.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Early recognition of spinal problems such as kyphoscoliosis and stenosis may allow prevention of progression and/or intervention to prevent long-term cardiovascular or neurologic complications. Intervention should be directed at preventing progression of kyphoscoliosis to the point of cardio-respiratory compromise, which may be life threatening. Similarly, early recognition of some cardiac anomalies may allow prevention of secondary complications or prolongation of adequate function. Some individuals with CLS may require SBE (subacute bacterial endocarditis) prophylaxis. Attention to vision and hearing may prevent some secondary behavioral changes. Identification and treatment of blepharitis may prevent eye rubbing and potential retinal damage. Attention to dental hygiene and gum disease may reduce the risk of premature tooth loss.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Periodic tests of hearing and vision Annual physical cardiac examination, with echocardiogram by age ten years. Even if normal, the latter should be repeated every five to ten years in light of uncertainty as to the incidence and range in age of onset of cardiomyopathy [Massin et al 1999, Facher et al 2004]. Monitoring of the spine for the development of progressive kyphoscoliosis. There should be a high index of suspicion for narrowing of the spinal canal with attention to change in gait and bowel/bladder habits, expression of pain, and focal neurologic changes such as clonus or abnormal tendon reflexes. Routine dental evaluation as in the general population but with particular attention to the risk of tooth loss Note: A table containing suggested guidelines for follow-up of individuals with CLS is provided in Hunter [2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with CLS who experience SIDAs should be protected as much as possible from being startled and/or from falls.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Significant social resources may be required to support families of women with CLS and developmental delay.