http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cmd-overview

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with congenital muscular dystrophy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Assessment of respiratory function with baseline pulmonary function tests, including forced vital capacity (FVC) in sitting and supine positions and blood gas exchange

Polysomnography to identify individuals with nocturnal hypoventilation, to evaluate individuals with symptoms of hypercapnea (daytime headache, restless sleep, loss of concentration), and to evaluate individuals with reduced forced vital capacity, particularly those with CMD subtypes associated with a rigid spine, axial weakness, and/or signs of diaphragmatic weakness (detected by a drop in FVC from sitting to supine). Additional indications for polysomnography include testing in the very young or those with developmental delay in whom reliable, consistent pulmonary function testing can be difficult to obtain.

Sleep-disordered breathing can be seen with FVC of less than 60%, while nocturnal hypoventilation correlates with FVC of less than 40% [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004, Shahrizaila et al 2006]. Independent of the FVC values, a very high suspicion for nocturnal hypoventilation must be maintained in those with SELENON (SEPN1)-related CMD to avoid a life-threatening respiratory failure.

Radiologic examinations if spinal deformity is observed. Assessment of spine and joint deformities by physiatrists and orthopedists

Feeding and nutritional assessment, weight and height measurement, serum vitamin D concentration and calculation of body mass index (BMI)

Assessment of strength and joint contractures by an occupational therapist and physical therapist

Assessment of cardiac function in those with a dystroglycanopathy or L-CMD, with particular awareness that cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia can occur in the absence of severe muscle disease

Evaluation for pulmonary hypertension and/or secondary right heart failure in those with significant respiratory involvement (mechanical ventilation, severe respiratory failure)

Complete eye examination in those with a dystroglycanopathy or if clinically indicated

Treatment of Manifestations



No definitive treatments exist for the congenital muscular dystrophies; however, multidisciplinary medical care improves quality of life and longevity. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMD subtype, and rate of progression.

Respiratory therapy and use of respiratory aids including assisted cough and hyperinsufflation devices, Percussionaire®, noninvasive ventilatory support, or mechanical ventilation via tracheostomy are appropriate for those with respiratory insufficiency [Wallgren-Pettersson et al 2004].

Physical therapy and stretching exercises help promote mobility and prevent contractures. Mechanical assistive devices including canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs can be used as needed to help ambulation and mobility. Posture in vertical, sitting, and supine positions has to be evaluated and assisted if necessary as improved posture may positively affect chest expansion.

Surgical intervention may be needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and scoliosis. Pros and cons of surgery for hip dislocation or joint contractures need to be considered given that any functional benefit may be insignificant compared to the high risk of pain and rapid relapse. Proactive trunk bracing (plexidur Garchois brace) is used in some countries to reduce the degree of deformity and to slow the progression of scoliosis in order to delay consideration of surgical intervention until puberty [Quijano-Roy et al 2010].

Speech therapy may be indicated.

Close attention to oral hygiene is indicated.

Assistance in education (school technical aide) and social and emotional support and stimulation can improve the sense of social involvement and productivity and can reduce the sense of social isolation common in those with CMD [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Steroid treatment using dosages based upon guidelines used in the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy has been reported in the dystroglycanopathies. In those who respond, the use of steroids appears to support prolonged ambulation [Godfrey et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The following are appropriate:

Stretching exercises to prevent contractures

Positive-pressure hyperinsufflation pulmonary exercises to enhance thoracic growth and reduce thoracic cage rigidity and contractures

Medications such as laxatives to prevent constipation, medication for gastroesophageal reflux (GER), and oral caloric supplements as required

Trunk bracing in those with severe axial or cervical hypotonia with spinal collapse to prevent severe spinal deformities and to allow a stable and comfortable position when sitting or standing (during use of an upright stander). Of note, when such bracing is used, pulmonary assessment is needed to monitor for evidence of secondary respiratory compromise or complications.

Surveillance



Surveillance includes the following:

Monitoring of respiratory function using pulmonary function testing or spirometry with measurements in sitting and supine positions to detect diaphragmatic involvement that increases the risk of nocturnal hypoventilation. When the forced vital capacity in the supine position is less than 60% of normal values, respiratory function should be monitored by pulse oximetry and/or arterial blood gases and, where available, polysomnography.

Clinical examination and x-rays as needed to monitor for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity, joint contractures, and spinal deformity (scoliosis, thoracic lordosis or kyphosis, lumbar hyperlordosis)

Monitoring of cardiac function every six to 12 months (by echocardiography, ECG, 24-hour Holter-ECG recording) in those individuals with respiratory insufficiency with or without mechanical ventilation and/or CMD subtypes prone to cardiomyopathy (L-CMD, dystroglycanopathies) and cardiac rhythm disturbances (L-CMD)

Monitoring of neurologic function and EEG in those with CMD subtypes associated with seizures or if clinically indicated

Routine complete eye examinations in those with dystroglycanopathies to monitor for changes in vision and/or changes that suggest development of cataracts and/or evidence of retinal detachment

Note: In those with laminin alpha-2 deficiency the white matter changes do not require follow-up brain MRI.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.