http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cms

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic/neuropediatric examination. Assessment of strength and motor function; in children, assessment of motor, speech, and cognitive development Respiratory care. Assessment of respiratory function with baseline pulmonary function tests including forced vital capacity in sitting and supine positions and blood gas exchange. Polysomnography to identify individuals with nocturnal hypoventilation. Symptoms of hypercapnea that should be discussed: daytime headache, restless sleep, loss of concentration, snoring, recurrent respiratory infections, and weight loss. Respiratory studies may be normal between episodes in patients who experience acute crises. Assessment of contractures and joint deformities by physiatrists and orthopedists; radiologic examinations if spinal deformity is observed Speech therapy evaluation if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present For early-onset forms, assessment of feeding abilities (sucking, swallowing, gastroesophageal reflux) and growth parameters to determine the need for feeding interventions such as gavage feeding or gastrostomy insertion Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There are no recent published consensus guidelines for the management of CMS treatment.

Medical Treatment

The choice of medical treatment varies with the CMS subtype [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. Therefore, it seems reasonable to consider a first-line genetic testing to evaluate the genetic subtype. However, there may be individual clinical situations demanding an immediate therapeutic trial. Monotherapy is the usual course of treatment for congenital myasthenia; however, a combination of drugs may be necessary to optimize the therapeutic effect and to minimize side effects. Acetylcholineesterase (AChE) inhibitors (pyridostigmine). Although the majority of individuals with CMS benefit from AChE inhibitors (pyridostigmine), some myasthenic symptoms may remain refractory to treatment even in individuals who are otherwise responsive. Certain CMS subtypes (see Table 2) including endplate (EP) AChE deficiency, slow-channel CMS (SCCMS), and DOK7-related CMS are refractory to or deteriorate with AChE inhibitors [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. 3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP). Alternatively or in addition to AChE inhibitors, the potassium channel blocker 3,4-DAP may be used [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013]. This drug increases the release of ACh and prolongs the presynaptic action potential. Of note, two children with fast-channel CMS (FCCMS; caused by autosomal recessive loss-of-function variants of the genes encoding the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunits that shorten the time that the AChR channel is open) died when started on 3,4-DAP [Beeson et al 2005]. Although a relation to 3,4-DAP has not been proven, clinicians must be cautious when using 3,4-DAP in young children and in individuals with FCCMS. Ephedrine treatment shows positive effects in different subtypes of CMS [Schara et al 2012, Finlayson et al 2013, Vrinten et al 2014] and may be an alternative treatment option for CMS subtypes that are refractory to AChE inhibitors, such as COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Bestue-Cardiel et al 2005, Schara et al 2009, Lashley et al 2010, Witting & Vissing 2014]. It is well tolerated by most patients and improvement in strength can be profound. Albuterol, an alternative to ephedrine, may have a role in the treatment of COLQ- and DOK7-associated CMS [Liewluck et al 2011, Burke et al 2013, Lorenzoni et al 2013, Witting & Vissing 2014]. Quinidine, fluoxetine. Some individuals with genetically defined SCCMS (caused by autosomal dominant gain-of-function variants of the genes encoding the AChR subunits that prolong the time that the AChR channel is open) have been successfully treated with quinidine, a long-lived open-channel blocker of AChR [Harper & Engel 1998]. Quinidine in turn may be detrimental in individuals with AChR deficiency. The therapeutic benefit of fluoxetine in SCCMS has been shown [Harper et al 2003, Colomer et al 2006]; however, it may induce suicidal ideation; thus, caution is strongly suggested in its use in childhood [Engel 2007]. Overall fluoxetine appears to be the accepted first-line treatment in SCCMS, whereas quinidine is the treatment of choice in children and teenagers because of the risk of psychiatric side effects associated with fluoxetine [Chaouch et al 2012a, Chaouch et al 2012b].

Non-Medical Treatment

In addition to medical therapy, a multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival. Management should be tailored to each individual, their specific CMS subtype, and rate of progression. Depending on the individual clinical situation the clinical management may include the following: Physical and occupational therapy Speech therapy Orthotics or a wheelchair A percutaneous gastric tube Ventilatory support

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Sudden respiratory insufficiency or apneic attacks provoked by fever or infections are common in individuals with pathogenic variants in CHAT or RAPSN, even if the myasthenic symptoms are mild between crises. These individuals should receive prophylactic anticholinesterase therapy. Note: Less frequently, acute respiratory events may also occur in other CMS subtypes. Parents of infants are advised to use apnea monitors and be trained in CPR.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Side effects of drugs used to treat myasthenic symptoms should be carefully monitored. If necessary, individual doses should be adjusted or treatment should be stopped. For example, quinidine has some major side effects including torsades de pointes (a potentially life-threatening arrhythmia), hypotension, cinchonism (or quininism), and hypersensitivity reactions. In individuals with CMS, adverse effects including exacerbation of weakness and development of respiratory failure may occur.

Surveillance

Routine surveillance of muscle strength and respiratory function is recommended. In some patients, especially those with COLQ and DOK7 pathogenic variants, slowly progressive respiratory impairment is seen with increasing age. Symptoms of nighttime hypoventilation should be considered.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

A number of drugs are known to affect neuromuscular transmission and therefore exacerbate symptoms of myasthenia gravis (e.g., ciprofloxacin, chloroquine, procaine, lithium, phenytoin, beta-blockers, procainamide, and quinidine). These drugs are not absolutely contraindicated and may be used with caution in CMS. See Medications and Myasthenia Gravis (Table 2) for a more complete.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures, especially newborns or young children, who could benefit from early treatment to prevent sudden respiratory failure. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; Neurologic/neuropediatric examination, electrophysiologic testing (repetitive nerve stimulation) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Data on pregnancies in CMS are limited. Seventeen pregnancies were reported in eight French patients with CMS [Servais et al 2013]. According to these data pregnancy was a frequent cause of clinical exacerbation but the vast majority of patients recovered their pre-pregnancy clinical status six months after delivery. The children’s outcome was excellent, except for one newborn who developed a severe, neonatal (autosomal dominant) slow-channel CMS. Pregnant patients should be closely followed by neurologists during the course of pregnancy. Careful respiratory and cardiac surveillance should be initiated in consultation with obstetric specialists.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.