http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cmt2c

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Physical/neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss Electromyography (EMG) with nerve conduction velocity (NCV) ENT consultation with laryngoscopy, as needed to document the status of the vocal folds Pulmonary function testing and dynamic breathing chest x-ray Hearing assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for different types of hearing assessment.) Skeletal x-rays to document any associated skeletal dysplasia Clinical genetics/genetic counseling consultation To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasia, the following evaluations are recommended: Skeletal radiographs to document involvement of the long bones and spine, which can help determine patient needs as well as provide a baseline for comparison with future studies Flexion/extension cervical spine films to determine if there is atlanto-axial instability secondary to odontoid hypoplasia Pulmonary function tests and/or sleep study if the thorax is particularly narrow and/or kyphoscoliosis is progressive Hearing assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for different types of hearing assessment.)

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005]. For treatment of findings common to all
TRPV4-associated disorders Sensorineural hearing loss. Referral to hearing loss specialists to determine the extent of hearing loss and the best habilitation options for sensorineural hearing loss (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for discussion of management issues.) Pain and depression. Symptomatic treatment For the TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders the following are indicated: Neuropathy Special shoes, including those with good ankle support Ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity as needed [Guyton & Mann 2000] Forearm crutches, canes/walkers for gait stability, and wheelchairs Exercise within the individual's capability (Many individuals remain physically active.) Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression [Gemignani et al 2004, Padua et al 2006] Vocal cord involvement Laryngeal surgery for vocal fold paresis (arytenoidectomy and tracheostomy) Speech therapy Respiratory dysfunction. Respiratory therapy/support (e.g., BiPAP) For the TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias the following treatments may be indicated: Physical therapy/exercise to maintain as much function as possible. Daily heel cord-stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening. Orthopedic evaluation with consideration of surgical intervention (i.e., spinal fusion) when kyphoscoliosis compromises pulmonary function and/or causes pain Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression. To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, it is preferred that intervention in children occur when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation. Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI. The patient should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility. Symptomatic treatment of pain and depression (which can influence physical function). Note that chronic pain management preceding or following orthopedic surgery is standard and often required.

Surveillance

TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders. Annual: Neurologic examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, and sensory loss Physical therapy examination to monitor feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery ENT consultation with laryngoscopy Dynamic breathing chest x-ray Hearing assessment 
TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias Annual assessment for the development of joint pain and scoliosis Cervical spinal films to assess for clinically significant odontoid hypoplasia before: A child reaches school age; Surgical procedures involving general anesthesia

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No specific data are available for TRPV4-associated neuromuscular or skeletal disorders. In general, obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult for individuals with neuropathy, skeletal dysplasia, or both. For neuromuscular disorders. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list. 
For skeletal dysplasias In individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension Activities and occupations that place undue stress on the spine and weight-bearing joints

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no registry or data regarding the frequency or outcome of pregnancies in women with a TRPV4-related disorder; however, the following general information may be reasonable to consider. Ideally a woman with a TRPV4-associated disorder would seek consultation from a high-risk OB/GYN or maternal-fetal-medicine specialist to evaluate her risks for pregnancy and delivery. TRPV4-associated neuromuscular disorders.
Argov & de Visser [2009] reviewed pregnancy issues in hereditary neuromuscular disorders including CMTs. About 50% of women with CMT described increased weakness during pregnancy that usually resolved post partum [Rudnik-Schoneborn et al 1993]. Operative deliveries were reported more commonly in women with CMT in Norway [Hoff et al 2005]. Greenwood & Scott [2007] described the obstetric approach to women with mild and severe forms of CMT. A recent German study reviewed 63 pregnancies in 33 women with CMT [Awater et al 2012] and found no increase in the frequency of Cesarean section, forceps delivery, premature birth, or neonatal problems. About one third of mothers felt a worsening of CMT symptoms during pregnancy; in one fifth of mothers the changes were felt to be persistent. TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias. In TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias, the degree of pulmonary compromise (from the short trunk and decreased lung capacity) may affect the ability to carry a pregnancy to term. Thus, it is unlikely a woman with metatropic dysplasia could carry a pregnancy. A pregnant woman with a TRPV4-assocaited skeletal dysplasia generally undergo cæsarean section delivery because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.