

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2E/1F (CMT2E/1F), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss  NCV to help distinguish demyelinating, axonal, and mixed neuropathies  Complete family history  Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Grandis & Shy 2005]. Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed.  Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.  Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking.  Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Holmes & Hansen 1993, Guyton & Mann 2000].  Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs.  Exercise is encouraged within the individual's capability and many individuals remain physically active.  Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.  Pain should be treated symptomatically [Gemignani et al 2004]. 

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Surveillance 

 Monitoring of gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, surgery is appropriate. 

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult.  Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.