

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4H (CMT4H), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, sensory loss, and skeletal deformities. In children with CMT, one should use the CMTPedS score defined by Burns et al [2012], a reliable, well-tolerated, valid, and sensitive global measure of disability for children with CMT from the age of 3 years [Burns et al 2012]. Although the CMT Neuropathy Score (CMTNS) and CMTNS version 2 (CMTNS2) are widely used in the diagnosis of CMT [Shy et al 2005, Murphy et al 2011], they have shown limited potential in measuring disability and disease severity in children younger than age ten years [Haberlová & Seeman 2010, Pagliano et al 2011]. The transition from the CMTPedS in childhood to the CMTNS2 in adulthood has been evaluated [Burns et al 2013]; together, the two measures provide a continuum for lifelong measurement of disability in patients with CMT. Orthopedic consultation to evaluate skeletal deformities such as foot deformities (pes cavus) and scoliosis and to determine the need for a surgery and/or ankle/foot orthoses Clinical genetics consultation and/or pediatric neurology consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Individuals with CMT4H are often evaluated and managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Grandis & Shy 2005]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following: Ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995] Physiotherapy with daily heel cord stretching exercises to help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening and physical activity adapted to the abilities of each individual to prevent contractures and help preserve flexibility Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008] Surgery to correct spine deformities Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability Wheelchairs as needed because of gait instability Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) [Carter et al 1998]

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes annual evaluation by a team comprising physiatrists, neurologists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.