http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cmt4

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4 (CMT4), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss NCV to help determine whether the disease is axonal, demyelinating, or mixed Detailed family history Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The affected individual is often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009, Rossor et al 2015]. Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following: Special shoes, including those with good ankle support Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008] Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% of affected individuals need wheelchairs. Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Daily heel cord stretching exercises are helpful in preventing Achilles' tendon shortening.

Surveillance

Children's feet should be watched at regular intervals to provide for properly fitting shoes and avoid sores and skin breakdown. It is appropriate to monitor gait and condition of feet to determine need for bracing, special shoes, and/or surgery.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult. Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risk from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No specific pregnancy management recommendations have been published. However, weight gain during pregnancy may produce additional gait disability.

Therapies Under Investigation

Ekins et al [2015] and Mathis et al [2015] have reviewed prior and ongoing treatment trials for CMT. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Career and employment may be influenced by the persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.