

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4C (CMT4C), the following evaluations are recommended: Examination by a child neurologist to evaluate for weakness and atrophy, gait stability, sensory loss, and other associated signs. It is important to distinguish between neuropathic pain and mechanical pain. Examination by a pediatric orthopedist to assess the amount and progression of spinal curvature and to determine the extent of foot deformities Examination by an otolaryngologist and/or ophthalmologist if problems with hearing or vision are present Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic. Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. See Grandis & Shy [2005] for a discussion of general treatment for CMT. 
            Treatment of spinal deformities
           Physiotherapy helps to preserve flexibility. If the curvature can be reduced with bracing, either a plaster or a thermo-molded plastic corset can be used. If bracing and physiotherapy together are not sufficient to correct the scoliosis, surgery can be performed at an early age, even before the end of linear growth (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Gabreëls-Festen et al 1999]. Surgical intervention requires consensus among the family, child (if possible), and attending physicians. 
            Treatment of foot deformities
           Special shoes with good ankle support and/or ankle/foot orthoses (AFOs) to correct foot drop and aid walking Physiotherapy to preserve flexibility In approximately 9% of individuals, surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity (Table 2) [Kessali et al 1997, Guyton & Mann 2000, Colomer et al 2006] 
            Treatment of pain and cramps
           Neuropathic pain can be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (e.g., pregabalin, gabapentin). Mechanical pain can generally be managed with a combination of physiotherapy and orthopedic treatment. Cramps can be controlled with quinine. However, quinine is known to induce tinnitus and reversible high-tone hearing loss. 
            Other
           Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; some need wheelchairs. Exercise to help the individual remain physically active according to his/her abilities is encouraged.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Daily heel cord stretching exercises help prevent Achilles' tendon shortening. Physical activity (e.g., swimming, bicycling, stretching) adapted to the abilities of each individual by a physiotherapist is useful to prevent contractures. Individuals with diabetes mellitus need excellent foot care to avoid foot ulceration and necrosis.

Surveillance

 Scoliosis needs to be closely followed. Monitoring four times a year is recommended. Hand function and foot strength should be evaluated by an orthopedist every six months starting from the date of diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult. Medications which are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a range of risks ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Consideration of motor nerve conduction velocities and nerve biopsy if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 CMT appears to be an independent risk factor for complications during pregnancy and delivery. The symptoms of CMT can worsen during pregnancy; in particular: cramps, subjective sensitivity (e.g., paresthesias), difficulty walking, and fatigue. In rare cases, crises occurring during pregnancy do not subside post partum. A retrospective study in Norway between 1967 and 2002 comparing 108 births to mothers with CMT with 2.1 million births to mothers without CMT determined that mothers with CMT more frequently needed interventions during delivery [Hoff et al 2005]. Bleeding post partum was also more common in mothers with CMT. It has been postulated that fetal presentation tends to be abnormal because of the combination of CMT in the mother and fetus [Rayl et al 1996, Hoff et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

 See Grandis & Shy [2005]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Career and employment may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet. Anesthesia. Relatively few studies reported in the literature address risks of anesthesia in patients with CMT. No complications were observed after anesthesia in a large cohort followed in specialized consultation, but the advice of the anesthesiologist should be followed. Although it had no adverse effects in 41 persons with CMT [Antognini 1992], use of succinylcholine for general anesthesia is usually contraindicated. Blockers of the neuromuscular junction should be used with caution. Local-regional anesthesia, especially epidural analgesia at child birth, has been used without problems in CMT. This use of anesthesia should be discussed on a case-by-case basis with the anesthesiologist.