

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 1 (CMTX1), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to determine extent of weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, gait stability, and sensory loss NCV to determine axonal, demyelinating, or mixed features Detailed family history

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic and affected individuals are often evaluated and managed by a team that includes neurologists, physiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. Special shoes, including those with good ankle support, may be needed. Affected individuals often require ankle/foot orthoses (AFO) to correct foot drop and aid walking. Orthopedic surgery may be required to correct severe pes cavus deformity. Some individuals require forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; fewer than 5% need wheelchairs. Exercise is encouraged within the affected individual's capability, and many remain physically active.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 No treatment that reverses or slows the natural process of CMT exists.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Daily heel cord stretching exercises to prevent Achilles' tendon shortening are desirable.

Surveillance

 Regular foot examination for pressure sores or poorly fitting footwear is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Career and employment choices may be influenced by persistent weakness of hands and/or feet.