

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CMTX5, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination Pure tone audiograms, auditory brain stem response test Evaluation of visual acuity, fundoscopic examination Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Peripheral neuropathy. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth Hereditary Neuropathy Overview, Management. Sensorineural hearing loss. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management. Optic atrophy. Use of routine low-vision aids as needed is appropriate.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Daily heel cord stretching exercises are desirable to prevent Achilles’ tendon shortening from peripheral neuropathy, which can occur in individuals with CMTX5. 

Surveillance

 Individuals should be evaluated regularly by a team comprising otologists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, physiatrists, and physical and occupational therapists to determine neurologic status and functional disability. While profound hearing loss begins during infancy, optic neuropathy and peripheral neuropathy in CMTX5 vary in age of onset of manifestations and progression. Thus, regular ophthalmologic and neurologic exams are warranted to monitor symptom development and progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity is to be avoided because it makes walking more difficult. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk males at birth with detailed audiometry to assure early diagnosis and treatment of hearing loss. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation could theoretically alleviate some of the symptoms of Arts syndrome by providing an oral source of purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. An adult with HPRT deficiency is reported to have benefitted neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006].  An open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome is continuing [J Christodoulou et al, unpublished data; approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia]. Oral SAM supplementation is presently set at 30 mg/kg/day. The boys appear to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however, slight deterioration in their vision has been noted.  Mildly affected carrier females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested. Whether treatment with SAM supplementation would benefit individuals with allelic disorders (PRS superactivity, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5) remains to be investigated.  Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.