

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Cockayne syndrome (CS), the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of growth  Developmental assessment  Dental evaluation  Dermatologic evaluations  Ophthalmologic evaluations (possibly including electroretinogram)  Audiologic evaluation (including audiogram)  Brain MRI  Laboratory studies to assess renal and hepatic function  Testing for diabetes mellitus and disorders of calcium metabolism  Skeletal x-rays to document the presence of skeletal dysplasia  Nerve conduction studies to document the presence of a demyelinating neuropathy 

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are appropriate: Individualized educational program for developmental delay  Physical therapy and assistive devices to maintain ambulation in the presence of gait abnormalities  Feeding gastrostomy tube placement for failure to thrive  Medication for spasticity (baclofen) and tremor (carbidopa-levodopa) if needed  Management of hearing loss  Management of cataracts and other ophthalmologic complications  Use of sunscreens for cutaneous photosensitivity  Use of sunglasses for lens and retina protection 

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Recommended measures: Physical therapy to prevent joint contractures  Aggressive dental care to minimize dental caries  Home safety assessments to prevent falls 

Surveillance

 Yearly reassessment for known potential complications (e.g., hypertension; renal or hepatic dysfunction; declining vision and hearing) is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Excessive sun exposure should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 In pregnant women affected with CS, the limited size of the pelvis and abdomen is the major obstacle to the growth of the fetus and the major threat to the outcome of the pregnancy. Prevention of premature labor and caesarean section under spinal anesthesia are usually needed [Lahiri & Davies 2003, Rawlinson & Webster 2003].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Growth hormone (GH) levels in individuals with Cockayne syndrome (CS) may be elevated or decreased [Park et al 1994, Hamamy et al 2005]. While individuals with CS do not appear to have an increased risk of malignancy (an effect which may be due to simultaneous transcription and cell proliferation deficiency), it is theoretically possible that GH treatment could reverse this compensatory effect and promote tumor growth. Therefore, in the absence of safety and efficacy data, GH treatment cannot be recommended in individuals with CS.