

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Cohen syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess visual acuity, position and size of the lens, refractive error, and severity of the retinal dystrophy Developmental assessment Hematologic evaluation including a white blood cell count with differential to identify neutropenia Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Ophthalmologic issues are among the most concerning for families of individuals with Cohen syndrome registered in the National Cohen Syndrome Database. Management includes the following: Spectacle correction of refractive errors Low vision assessment with training as needed for the visually impaired Psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families Early intervention and physical, occupational, and speech therapy are appropriate to address gross developmental delay, hypotonia, joint hypermobility, and motor clumsiness. If neutropenia is documented, consideration may be given to the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). In a study reported by Kivitie-Kallio et al [1997] response to adrenaline stimulation and to hydrocortisone was subnormal in 12 of 14 individuals and in eight of 16 individuals, respectively. However, recombinant G-CSF, administered to three individuals in the study, caused granulocytosis in all three. Recurrent infections should be treated per standard therapy.

Surveillance

 Annual ophthalmologic evaluation should assess visual acuity, refractive error, cataracts in older individuals, and/or retinal dystrophy. Annual hematologic evaluation should include complete blood count and differential to assess neutropenia. More frequent monitoring may be needed for individuals with lower ANC or more frequent infections. Growth and weight gain should be monitored.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Caution should be used regarding medications with the potential to decrease the neutrophil count.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Anecdotal reports notwithstanding, pycnogenol, a standard French maritime pine bark extract effective in improving visual acuity in retinal vascular leakage conditions [Schönlau & Rohdewald 2001, Spadea & Balestrazzi 2001], has not proven an effective treatment for the retinal dystrophy in Cohen syndrome.