http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/col4a1-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with COL4A1-related disorders, the following are recommended: Brain MRI including T1-weighted saggital, T2-weighted axial, and FLAIR axial images Brain angiographic CT scan Ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopic examination and slit-lamp examination Kidney and liver ultrasound examination or CT Measurement of serum CK concentration Measurement of serum creatinine concentration and estimation of the glomerular filtration rate Evaluation for the presence of hematuria Electrocardiogram (ECG); echocardiography and ambulatory ECG monitoring in individuals presenting with palpitations Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Hypertensive individuals must be treated to reduce the global risk of stroke. Supportive care including practical help, emotional support, and counseling are appropriate for affected individuals and their families. No specific support exists for individuals with COL4A1-related disorders. Seizures are managed using standard protocols. Cataract surgery may be required for individuals with severe lens opacities. Glaucoma is initially treated with topical anti-glaucoma medication. Surgery is reserved for eyes that do not respond to medical therapy. Symptomatic paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmia should be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs (beta blockers). Surgical or endovascular treatment should be discussed for asymptomatic intracranial aneurysms >10.0 mm in diameter.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Avoidance of anticoagulant exposure and activities that involve an increased risk for head trauma may decrease the risk for intracerebral hemorrhage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Surveillance

The interval at which individuals with COL4A1-related disorders should be seen for follow up depends on the severity and type of symptoms. Annual clinical evaluation is reasonable. Regular brain imaging can be proposed, especially to evaluate the size of asymptomatic cerebral aneurysms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided: Smoking because it increases the global risk of stroke Hypertension because it increases the risk of stroke Sustained head pressure during birth or postnatal physical activities that may cause head trauma [Gould et al 2006] Anticoagulant use [Gould et al 2006]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean delivery for pregnancies in which the fetus is at risk for a COL4A1-related disorder is recommended to prevent brain vascular injury attributable to birth trauma in newborns [Gould et al 2006].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.