http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/costello

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Costello syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete physical and neurologic examination Plotting of growth parameters, including head circumference Nutritional assessment Cardiologic evaluation with two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography, baseline electrocardiography, and Holter examination as needed. Children with HCM and arrhythmia require specialty pediatric cardiology care, which may include exercise testing in certain older cooperative individuals. Brain MRI, including MRI of the spinal cord as needed, in order to evaluate for Chiari I malformation and sryingomyelia Ophthalmology evaluation Clinical assessment of spine and extremities, with particular concern for hip joint abnormalities and range of motion Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Growth. Most infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. Because of gastroesophageal reflux and irritability, Nissen fundoplication is often performed. Pyloric stenosis is treated surgically. Anecdotally, affected children have very high caloric needs. Even after nutrition is improved through supplemental feeding, growth retardation persists. Cardiac. Treatment of cardiac manifestations is generally the same as in the general population. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with an identified cardiac abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history [Lin et al 2011]. Ongoing studies of the natural history will continue to define management for older individuals. Arrhythmias have been well documented, but incompletely defined from a management point of view. Non-reentrant tachycardia (chaotic atrial rhythm/multifocal tachycardia) may require aggressive anti-arrhythmic drugs or ablation. Pharmacologic and surgical treatment (myectomy) has been used to address severe cardiac hypertrophy. Individuals with Costello syndrome and severe cardiac problems may choose to wear a Medic Alert® bracelet. Skeletal. Ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers responds well to early bracing and occupational and/or physical therapy. Limited extension of large joints should be addressed early through physical therapy. Surgical tendon lengthening, usually of the Achilles tendon, is often required. Hip joint abnormalities are common and may require surgical correction. Kyphoscoliosis may require surgical correction. Central nervous system. When seizures occur, underlying causes (including hydrocephalus, hypoglycemia, and low serum cortisone concentration) need to be considered [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004]. Cognitive. Developmental disability should be addressed by early-intervention programs and individualized learning strategies. Speech delay and expressive language limitations should be addressed early with appropriate therapy and later with an appropriate educational plan. Alternate means of communication should be considered if expressive language is significantly limited. Respiratory. A high index of suspicion should be maintained for obstructive sleep apnea as the cause of sleep disturbance. Dental. Dental abnormalities should be addressed by a pediatric dentist. Papillomata. Papillomata usually appear in the perinasal region and less commonly in the perianal region, torso, and extremities. While they are mostly of cosmetic concern, papillomata may give rise to irritation or inflammation in hard-to-clean body regions and may be removed, as appropriate. Recurrent facial papillomata have been successfully managed with regular dry ice removal. Endocrinopathies. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Rarely, hypoglycemia occurs in older individuals and may present with seizures. Under these circumstances, growth hormone (GH) deficiency needs to be excluded as the underlying cause [Gripp et al 2000]. Hypoglycemic episodes unresponsive to GH therapy responded well to cortisone replacement in another individual [Gregersen & Viljoen 2004]; thus, cortisol deficiency may also be considered. Malignant tumors. Treatment of malignant tumors follows standard protocols.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Cardiac. Certain congenital heart defects (notably valvar pulmonic stenosis) require antibiotic prophylaxis for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), available by prescription from the cardiologist or other physician caregiver. Because aortic dilation has not been studied long term, is infrequent, is typically mild-moderate in severity, and has not been associated with dissection to date, there are no data to recommend treatment; care should be individualized. Sedation. Individuals with Costello syndrome may require relatively high doses of medication for sedation. No standardized information is available, but review of an individual's medical records documenting previously given dosages may provide guidance. Anesthesia may pose a risk to individuals with some forms of unrecognized hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or those who have a predisposition to some types of atrial tachycardia.

Surveillance

Hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypoglycemia has frequently been reported, and a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Monitoring of blood glucose concentration should follow typical protocols for neonates at risk for hypoglycemia. Cardiac. All individuals with Costello syndrome, especially those with a cardiovascular abnormality, should be followed by a cardiologist who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural history. Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we advise providers and families to receive individualized care by a pediatric cardiologist, transitioning to an adult specialist following the “best practices” for the particular defect. General guidelines [Lin et al 2011(see Figure 4)] can be pragmatically dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with close evaluation in the first two years of life depending on the severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations and appropriate risk stratification. It is beyond the scope of this review to delineate the complex decision making involved in treating HCM or atrial tachycardia. Tumor screening consisting of abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and urine testing for catecholamine metabolites and hematuria was proposed by Gripp et al [2002]. However, a subsequent report [Gripp et al 2004] on elevated catecholamine metabolites in individuals with Costello syndrome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful. Serial abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma was proposed every three to six months until age eight to ten years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annually beginning at age ten years to screen for bladder cancer [Gripp et al 2002]. Neither of the above screening approaches has yet been shown to be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important factor for early tumor detection continues to be parental and physician awareness of the increased cancer risk. Bone density. Osteoporosis is common in young adults with Costello syndrome [White et al 2005]. Bone density assessment is recommended as a baseline, with follow up depending on the initial result.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The Ras/MAPK pathway has long been a drug development target because of its involvement in malignant tumors [Rauen 2007]. It is likely that drugs targeting this pathway will be considered for use in Costello syndrome and other disorders caused by germline pathogenic variants affecting pathway-related genes [Rauen et al 2008]. In a mouse model, the ACE inhibitor captopril appeared beneficial in reducing systemic hypertension and cardiomyopathy [Schuhmacher et al 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Growth hormone (GH) treatment. If treatment with growth hormone is contemplated, its unproven benefit and potential risks should be thoroughly discussed in view of the established risks of cardiomyopathy and malignancy in individuals with Costello syndrome and the unknown effect of growth hormone on these risks. Unproven benefit. Individuals with Costello syndrome frequently have low GH levels: True growth hormone deficiency requires GH replacement. Three individuals with GH deficiency showed increased growth velocity without adverse effects after three to seven years of replacement therapy, but two continued to have short stature [Stein et al 2004]. It is unclear from the literature if the use of GH is beneficial in individuals with Costello syndrome with partial growth hormone deficiency. An abnormal growth hormone response on testing and a good initial growth response have been reported [Legault et al 2001]. Cardiac hypertrophy. Whether the anabolic actions of growth hormone accelerate pre-existing cardiac hypertrophy is not known, but early descriptive studies do not suggest a clear association [Lin et al 2002, Lin et al 2011]. In rare cases, cardiomyopathy has progressed after initiation of growth hormone treatment; whether the relationship was causal or coincidental is unknown (see, e.g., Kerr et al [2003]). Malignancy. The effect of growth hormone on tumor predisposition has not been determined. Two reports have raised the possibility of an association: Bladder carcinoma occurred in a 16-year-old treated with growth hormone [Gripp et al 2000]. A rhabdomyosarcoma was diagnosed in a 26-month-old receiving growth hormone from age 12 months [Kerr et al 2003].