

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: In affected individuals who have profound and/or prolonged exposure to hypoglycemia: a complete neurologic evaluation to detect secondary neurologic damage Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Guidelines for the treatment of CPT1A deficiency can be found at newbornscreening.info and ghr.nlm.nih.gov. When individuals present with acute hypoglycemia, sufficient amounts of intravenous fluid containing 10% dextrose should be provided as quickly as possible to correct hypoglycemia and to prevent lipolysis and subsequent mobilization of fatty acids into the mitochondria. Because individuals presenting with profound hypoglycemia have little to no residual hepatic glycogen, treating physicians should continue the glucose infusion beyond the time that blood glucose concentration has normalized in order to provide sufficient substrate for glycogen synthesis. A letter should be provided to affected individuals (or their parents/guardians) and involved health care providers alerting them to the potentially catastrophic metabolic crises for which these individuals are at risk and explaining the appropriate emergency treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 A high-carbohydrate diet (70% of calories) that is low in fat (<20% of calories) is generally recommended to provide a constant supply of carbohydrate energy, particularly during illness. Restriction of dietary fat intake is somewhat controversial when affected individuals are well. If the physician chooses to recommend a low-fat diet when the affected individual is well, supplementation with essential fatty acids is necessary. Provision of approximately one third of total calories as medium-chain triglycerides is recommended during periods of illness. C6-C10 fatty acids do not require the carnitine shuttle for entry into the mitochondrion. Frequent feeding is recommended, particularly for infants, given their limited glycogen reserves. Cornstarch feedings given overnight provide a constant source of slow-release carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycemia during sleep. Older children should not fast for more than 12 hours and for a shorter time if evidence of a febrile or gastrointestinal illness exists. Adults should be aware of the risks of fasting and they and their primary care physician should be aware of the risks during surgery when both metabolic stress and fasting occur. Brief hospital admission for administration of intravenous dextrose-containing fluid should be considered in individuals with known CPT1A deficiency who are required to fast more than 12 hours because of illness or surgical or medical procedures.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of hypoglycemia reduces the risk of related neurologic damage.

Surveillance

 At clinic appointments and during periods of reduced caloric intake and febrile illness that could precipitate metabolic decompensation, individuals with CPT1A deficiency should undergo liver function testing whether they are symptomatic or not. Tests should include liver enzymes, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and functional liver tests (including the blood-clotting tests PT and PTT).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Prolonged fasting should be avoided, especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness. Potentially hepatotoxic agents such as valproate and salicylate should not be given, even though adverse effects of pharmacologic agents have not been reported in individuals with CPT1A deficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Because presentation in later childhood is possible, it is appropriate to evaluate each sib of a proband, regardless of age, in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the CPT1A pathogenic variants in the family are known. Enzyme analysis in cultured skin fibroblasts if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Although data are limited, it is prudent to counsel unaffected female carriers regarding the risk for obstetric complications. Women who have had one child with CPT1A deficiency following an uneventful pregnancy remain at risk for acute fatty liver of pregnancy in subsequent pregnancies with an affected fetus. Pregnant females who are heterozygous for a CPT1A pathogenic variant should be monitored for acute fatty liver of pregnancy. In any pregnancies that follow identification of a child with CPT1A deficiency, liver function testing should be performed at each prenatal visit during the first two trimesters and more frequently during the third trimester when the risk for acute fatty liver of pregnancy is greatest. Management by a team comprising a maternal-fetal medicine specialist and a medical/biochemical geneticist is highly recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.