http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cpt2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) deficiency, the following are recommended: Neurologic examination Strength testing Review of dietary association of symptoms Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Current treatment for long-chain fatty-acid oxidation disorders: Avoid known triggers. Reduce the amount of long-chain dietary fat while covering the need for essential fatty acids. Provide carnitine to convert potentially toxic long-chain acyl-CoAs to acylcarnitines. Provide a large fraction of calories as carbohydrates to reduce body fat utilization and prevent hypoglycemia. Provide approximately one third of the calories as even-chain medium chain triglycerides (MCT). Metabolism of the eight to ten carbon fatty acids in MCT oil, for example, is independent of CPT I, carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase, CPT II, very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), trifunctional protein, and long-chain hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHAD) enzyme activities.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Appropriate measures include the following: Infusions of glucose during intercurrent infections to prevent catabolism Note: Oral glucose cannot achieve this effect. High-carbohydrate (70%) and low-fat (<20%) diet to provide fuel for glycolysis Frequent meals and avoidance of extended fasting Avoidance of prolonged exercise and other known triggers

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The most important aim while treating an individual with CPT II deficiency is to prevent renal failure during an episode of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria. Therefore, sufficient hydration and, if necessary, dialysis must be performed immediately when renal failure is imminent.

Surveillance

Annual or more frequent monitoring to regulate medication and diet is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Extended fasting and prolonged exercise are to be avoided. Reports of medication-induced side effects in individuals with CPT II deficiency are rare. Relying mostly on case reports, the following agents should be avoided: Valproic acid [Kottlors et al 2001] General anesthesia Ibuprofen Diazepam in high doses [Bonnefont et al 1999]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. In addition, predictive testing for at-risk asymptomatic family members may be advisable before general anesthesia. Complications of general anesthesia (including rhabdomyolysis and suxamethonium hypersensitivity in individuals with a variety of neuromuscular diseases and renal post-anesthetic failure in individuals with CPT II deficiency in particular) have been observed [Katsuya et al 1988, Wieser et al 2008]. Molecular genetic testing is appropriate if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, screening for alterations in acylcarnitines may be of use to identify other affected family members. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

While a variety of maternal complications have been observed in association with other fatty acid oxidation disorders (severe preeclampsia; acute fatty liver of pregnancy; maternal liver disease; and hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets), none of these complications has been associated with CPT II deficiency [Preece & Green 2002, Shekhawat et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

Promising results have been obtained with treatment of cardiomyopathy and rhabdomyolysis in long-chain fat oxidation disorders using anaplerotic odd-chain triglycerides [Roe et al 2002]. These results were confirmed in seven individuals with CPT II deficiency, who avoided rhabdomyolysis or hospitalization while on the triheptanoin (anaplerotic) diet. Affected individuals returned to normal physical activity including strenuous sports [Roe et al 2008]. Fibrates are a class of hypolipidemic drugs that increase high-density lipoprotein levels by mRNA upregulation of many lipid-metabolism genes through interaction with the steroid/thyroid transcription factor PPARa. Studies have demonstrated that bezafibrate increases CPT2 mRNA and normalizes enzyme activity in mild forms of CPT II-deficient cultured fibroblasts and myoblasts [Bonnefont et al 2009]. In a trial including six affected individuals treated with bezafibrate, the level of fatty acid oxidation in muscle biopsies was elevated, accompanied by a significant increase in palmitoyl-L-carnitine oxidation, increased CPT2 mRNA, and increased translated protein. A reduction of episodes of rhabdomyolysis could be observed, as well as amelioration of quality of life (measured by SF-36) as shown by an increase in physical activity and a decline in muscular pain [Bonnefont et al 2009, Bonnefont et al 2010]. Another study did not show beneficial effects of bezafibrate on fatty acid oxidation and other disease manifestations; this study, however, was heavily criticized for methodologic shortcomings [Ørngreen et al 2014, Bastin et al 2015] Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Carnitine supplementation is essentially a cure for the carnitine membrane transporter defect. While oral carnitine supplementation of 50 mg/kg/d is often prescribed in the treatment of other fat oxidation disorders, controlled trials of its effectiveness in CPT II deficiency are lacking. In addition, carnitine administration is controversial, given the possibility of accumulation of acyl-CoAs and consequent depletion of free CoA in the mitochondria [Yoshino et al 2003]. In acutely ill infants aggressive treatment with IV glucose and cardiac support is critical, and should be complemented with L-carnitine supplementation.