http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/craniosynostosis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FGFR-related craniosynostosis, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment for hydrocephalus by brain CT or MRI in all cases of syndromic craniosynostosis, with close observation in those with pathogenic variants known to cause a more severe phenotype Assessment for upper-airway obstruction or tracheal sleeve (in FGFR2-related Pfeiffer syndrome) Assessment for exposure keratopathy Spinal x-rays to evaluate for vertebral anomalies Imaging of the gastrointestinal system in individuals with Pfeiffer or Apert syndrome for intestinal malrotation or esophageal atresia

Treatment of Manifestations

Craniofacial. Children with any of the FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes benefit from the multidisciplinary team approach practiced in most craniofacial clinics affiliated with major pediatric medical centers. The specialists usually include plastic surgeons, neurosurgeons, otolaryngologists, and dentists as well as audiologists, speech pathologists, developmental pediatricians, social workers, and medical geneticists. The team can usually identify and address physical and developmental problems as well as psychosocial and other issues. Individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis usually require a series of staged surgical procedures; the number and type are tailored to the individual's needs [Posnick & Ruiz 2000, Honnebier et al 2008]. Three-dimensional skull CT can be used for morphologic mapping to help plan surgical treatment [Binaghi et al 2000]. Some individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis require a dozen or more surgeries over a lifetime. Seldom is the correction perfect, but significant cosmetic improvement is often possible. Evidence suggests that the calvarial bone needed for these surgeries is often more brittle, thinner, and less robust than cranial bone from unaffected donors [Tholpady et al 2004]. In contrast to children with nonsyndromic craniosynostosis, in whom the first surgery is usually performed between ages six months and one year, children with syndromic craniosynostosis often have their first surgery as early as age three months. The procedure is a bilateral craniotomy with a fronto-orbital advancement to expand the cranial vault. Because the procedure leaves uncovered areas of dura that fill in by age 15-18 months, it must be performed before the child is 18 months old. In a series of 2,317 individuals who underwent surgery for craniosynostosis, improved cosmetic and functional results followed early surgery; no increased operative risk was seen in infants [Lajeunie et al 2000, Renier et al 2000b]. Distraction osteogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton and long bones of the extremities may be a less invasive alternative approach to bone grafting in some individuals. In addition, the distraction procedures can expand the overlying soft tissues simultaneously. The devices used for distraction of the mandible, midface, and cranium tend to be the buried type and made of absorbable materials; cytokine administration may shorten the consolidation period. The usefulness and appropriateness of the distraction procedure must be assessed for each disorder [Matsumoto et al 2003]. In some cases, other complications including hydrocephalus, upper-airway obstruction, and exposure keratopathy of the cornea may prompt even earlier craniotomy or fronto-orbital advancement, or other interventions including ventriculo-peritoneal stunting, tracheostomy, or surgical eyelid closure. Timing of subsequent craniofacial surgeries influences their success. Procedures done prior to the cessation of growth in the particular facial region usually have poor long-term results and require additional operations. Individuals with Apert syndrome have the highest incidence of repeat surgery to correct forehead contour [Wong et al 2000, Thomas et al 2005]. Wilkie et al [2010] noted that children with craniosynostosis resulting from single-gene pathogenic variants were more likely to require repeat surgery compared to individuals whose craniosynostosis was caused by a chromosome abnormality. Spine. Congenital spine anomalies can cause scoliosis and spinal injury and thus need immediate attention. Limbs. Surgical correction of limb defects is usually not possible because the skeletal anomalies are developmental and the structures have never formed normally. In the mitten-glove syndactyly seen in Apert syndrome, surgical separation of the digits often provides relatively little functional improvement. With the elbow ankylosis seen in Pfeiffer syndrome types 2 and 3, some functional improvement can be gained by altering the angle at which the elbows are fixed. For example, in most affected individuals, elbow contractures are at approximately the same angle, often so that an individual cannot reach the mouth easily with the hands or clean appropriately following toileting; functional improvement can be achieved if the angle of each arm is altered so that one arm is positioned for eating and the other for toileting.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The primary treatment of craniofacial abnormalities associated with craniosynostosis is surgical reconstruction. Early treatment may reduce the risk for secondary complications (e.g., hydrocephalus, cognitive impairment). Patients with severe proptosis often require ophthalmologic lubrication to prevent exposure keratopathy.

Surveillance

Persons with a known risk for significant complications, including hydrocephalus, should be monitored from birth throughout life at intervals and by methods appropriate for the severity of the clinical findings. Six of 29 persons with the FGFR3 pathogenic variant p.Pro250Arg required reoperation for increased intracranial pressure, emphasizing the need for continued long-term monitoring [Thomas et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

At-risk relatives should be evaluated by clinical and radiographic criteria given that manifestations may not be readily evident in all affected individuals. When the pathogenic variant is known in the family, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate relatives for the disorder. Early diagnosis may allow mildly affected relatives to benefit from early surveillance and intervention. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.