http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cranio-md

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia (AD- CMD), the following evaluations are recommended: Radiologic assessment Audiologic assessment Ophthalmologic examination Neurologic examination Otolaryngologic evaluation Endocrinologic tests to assess bone metabolism Dental evaluation Clinical genetics consultation Craniofacial teams, often associated with pediatric hospitals, may offer a full evaluation of a patient including psychological assessment and speech therapy.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention. Compression of a nerve canal or narrowed foramen magnum can be surgically treated. Severe bony overgrowth of facial bones and nasal, forehead, and cranial regions can be contoured. However, surgical procedures can be technically difficult and bone regrowth is common. As severe complications have occurred, surgery is considered for conservative purposes to relieve severe symptoms caused by cranial nerve compression.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Delayed tooth eruption should be considered when planning orthodontic treatment [Chen et al 2014].

Surveillance

Because progressive thickening of craniofacial bones continues throughout life, regular neurologic evaluation, hearing assessment, and ophthalmologic examination are required for early diagnosis and management of complications of narrowing of the cranial foramina, including the foramen magnum. The frequency of neurologic evaluations depends on the individual's history of skeletal changes.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Early diagnosis of at-risk relatives may be beneficial for management of complications from progressive hyperostosis. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical evaluation and cranial and long bone radiographs can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Treatment with calcitriol, a stimulator of bone resorption, has not demonstrated long-term success. Calcitriol with a low-calcium diet to stimulate bone resorption by promoting osteoclast formation has been reported to improve facial paralysis but has no effect on metaphyseal deformity [Key et al 1988]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Calcitonin has been thought to be effective because of its inhibitory effect on bone turnover. However, previous case reports found calcitonin therapy to be ineffective in treating hyperplasia of craniofacial bones in persons with CMD [Fanconi et al 1988, Haverkamp et al 1996].