

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To assess the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with CCDS the following investigations should be performed: Detailed neurologic clinical evaluation for the degree of global developmental delay or intellectual disability, epilepsy, movement disorder, and behavior problems Neuropsychological assessment of cognition and speech Video documentation of movement disorder EEG, if any clinical seizures Prior to initiation of creatine monohydrate supplementation, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) for baseline assessment of kidney function Baseline determination of cerebral creatine level by brain 1H-MRS to document creatine deficiency [Stöckler et al 1996, Schulze et al 2001] ECG and echocardiogram for cardiac involvement Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are appropriate: Occupational therapy, physiotherapy and speech-language therapy for global developmental delay by physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech-language therapist Behavior therapy for behavior problems by developmental pediatrician Seizure management with antiepileptic drugs by epilepsy specialist Treatment of movement disorder by movement disorder specialist

GAMT Deficiency

 Treatment of GAMT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate and to decrease accumulation of neurotoxic GAA in the central nervous system by ornithine supplementation and protein- or arginine-restricted diet [Schulze et al 2001, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. Creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation decrease GAA accumulation by competitive inhibition of AGAT enzyme activity. A decrease in the level of GAA in cerebrospinal fluid was reported in two individuals with GAMT deficiency treated with creatine monohydrate and ornithine supplementation and with arginine restriction [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b]. Treatment is as follows: Creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014] Supplementation of ornithine ranging from 400-800 mg/kg BW/day. Administration of ornithine is divided into three to six daily doses [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001]. Dietary restriction of arginine to 15-25 mg/kg/day that corresponds to 0.4-0.7 g/kg/day protein intake [Schulze et al 1998, Schulze et al 2001, Schulze et al 2003] To prevent protein malnutrition, essential amino acid medical formula should be supplemented (0.5-0.8g/kg/day). Available databases (e.g., the US Department of Agriculture National Nutrient Database) can be used to determine exact arginine content of foods to allow precise calculation of daily arginine intake in individuals with GAMT deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b]. Because of the challenges involved in understanding arginine restriction, reading dietary labels, and calculating arginine intake (particularly since arginine content is not always indicated), many centers use protein restriction instead [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2012b, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2014b]. 
              Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency
             Global developmental delay and intellectual disability improved only in 21% of the individuals. None of the individuals achieved normal development or cognitive functions on treatment [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. Seizures. In 18% of individuals seizures were eliminated; in 49% seizure frequency decreased; 33% of individuals had no improvement in seizures [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. Movement disorder. Improvement was seen in 60% of individuals; in 40% of individuals, there was no change in the movement disorder [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2006, Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2014]. 
              Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with GAMT deficiency
             Normal neurodevelopmental outcome has been reported in three individuals with GAMT deficiency who were diagnosed and treated in the neonatal periodbased on a positive family history of GAMT deficiency in an older sib [Schulze et al 2006, El-Gharbawy et al 2013, Viau et al 2013]. Another asymptomatic sib treated from age eight days showed global developmental delay and hypotonia at age 11 months. The authors suggested compliance problems in this family [Dhar et al 2009].

AGAT Deficiency

 Treatment of AGAT deficiency aims to replenish cerebral creatine levels by supplementation with creatine monohydrate in oral doses ranging from 400 to 800 mg/kg BW/day in three to six divided doses. Treatment outcome of symptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. Treatment outcome results were reported in 11 individuals with AGAT deficiency [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. If initiation of treatment was after age ten years, no improvement in cognitive function or intellectual disability was seen [Battini et al 2002, Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. Normal cognitive function was reported in a female whose treatment was initiated before age two years [Ndika et al 2012]. Muscle weakness was improved in all individuals treated with creatine monohydrate [Edvardson et al 2010, Verma 2010, Nouioua et al 2013]. Treatment outcome of asymptomatic individuals with AGAT deficiency. An asymptomatic sib treated from age four months with creatine monohydrate supplementation therapy had normal neurodevelopment at age 18 months; in contrast, his sisters had already shown signs of developmental delay at this age [Battini et al 2006].

CRTR Deficiency

 The goal of treatment is to replenish cerebral creatine levels. Treatment of both males and females with CRTR deficiency with creatine-monohydrate was not successful [Stockler-Ipsiroglu et al 2012]. Only one heterozygous female with learning disability and mildly decreased creatine concentration on brain 1H-MRS showed mild improvement on neuropsychological testing after 18 weeks of treatment with creatine-monohydrate (250-750 mg/kg/day) [Cecil et al 2001]. Additionally, combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a]. Since the enzymes for creatine biosynthesis are present in the brain [Braissant & Henry 2008], individuals with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine and L-glycine, precursors in the biosynthesis of creatine. Treatment has included: Creatine monohydrate 100-200 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses Arginine (hydrochloride or base) 400 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses Glycine 150 mg/kg BW/day in 3 doses The authors recommend that all three of the supplements listed above be started together in new patients – especially in early childhood – to slow disease progression. The clinical effectiveness of treatment with three supplements has not been confirmed. Treatment outcome of individuals with CRTR deficiency. To date 22 males and three females with CRTR deficiency have been treated with L-arginine with or without glycine supplementation [van de Kamp et al 2014]. In some patients improvements were reported, but in general results appeared to be discouraging and cerebral creatine was not restored [van de Kamp et al 2014]. Four males and two females with CRTR deficiency treated for 42 months with creatine, arginine, and glycine showed increased muscle mass and improved gross motor skills [Valayannopoulos et al 2012]. Nine males with CRTR deficiency showed improvement in locomotor and personal social IQ subscales [van de Kamp et al 2012]. Combined arginine and glycine supplementation therapy successfully treated intractable epilepsy in a female with CRTR deficiency [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010a].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

 For patients undergoing treatment: Determination of cerebral creatine level by in vivo 1H-MRS should be performed: For individuals with GAMT and AGAT deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels during creatine supplementation therapy; For individuals with CRTR deficiency to monitor cerebral creatine levels for the assessment of treatment outcome [Mercimek-Mahmutoglu et al 2010b, van de Kamp et al 2012]. For GAMT deficiency: growth and nutritional status (plasma GAA levels, amino acids, ammonia, protein, albumin, pre-albumin levels) should be monitored every three to six months. For CRTR deficiency: plasma GAA levels and plasma amino acids should be monitored every three to six months as high-dose arginine and glycine supplementation can result in increased GAA levels. Repeat GFR annually for assessment of kidney function while on creatine supplementation therapy to detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy [Barisic et al 2002]. Perform neuropsychological assessment of cognitive functions and speech.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate neonates at-risk for GAMT deficiency or AGAT deficiency to allow for early diagnosis and treatment. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Biochemical genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Transport of dodecyl creatine ester incorporated into lipid nanocapsules (LNCs) was investigated using an in vitro cell-based blood-brain barrier model. It has been shown that these LNCs can cross the blood-brain barrier and enter brain endothelial cells. In human fibroblasts with deficient SLC6A8 protein function, all or part of the dodecyl creatine ester was released from the LNCs and biotransformed to creatine [Trotier-Faurion et al 2015]. A brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mouse was successfully treated with the cyclocreatine, which is a creatine analog. Brain cyclocreatine and cyclocreatine phosphate were detected on cyclocreatine treatment in the brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mice at nine weeks of cyclocreatine treatment compared to the creatine and placebo treatment in the same mice. Cyclocreatine-treated brain-specific Slc6a8 knockout mice showed improvements in cognitive abilities using novel object recognition and spatial learning and memory tests. Thus, cyclocreatine appears promising as a potential therapy for CRTR deficiency. Clinical trials are underway to prove its use in individuals with CRTR deficiency. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.