http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/csc-dys

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with congenital stromal corneal dystrophy, ophthalmologic evaluation that includes the following is recommended: Assessment of visual acuity Assessment of refractive error Slit lamp examination Measurement of corneal thickness using pachymetry Measurement of intraocular pressure Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are appropriate: Spectacles or contact lenses for correction of refractive errors Management of strabismus Penetrating keratoplasty. Most grafts remain clear after penetrating keratoplasty. Penetrating keratoplasty in children before the age of ten years has been performed successfully. However, only children with a risk for deep amblyopia should be considered for penetrating keratoplasty before age six or seven years.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Patching to prevent amblyopia in children with strabismus is appropriate.

Surveillance

 Visual acuity and routine ophthalmologic examination should be performed at least every year in children. Regular surveillance in adults is not necessary unless they have undergone penetrating keratoplasty. Affected individuals should be informed about penetrating keratoplasty and advised to contact their eye doctor in case of reduced visual acuity or increased glare.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 In families with known CSCD, at-risk children should be seen by an ophthalmologist within a few months after birth to determine if they have the condition. Alternatively, if the DCN pathogenic variant in the family has been identified, molecular genetic testing of at-risk children can be pursued. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.