http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ctlm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with citrullinemia type I (CTLN1), the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of: concentration of plasma ammonia, amino acids, and electrolytes; blood gases; urinary organic acids; and urinary orotic acid Assessment of intracranial pressure and overall neurologic status Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

As soon as a diagnosis of CTLN1 is made, acute (if needed) and chronic management should be initiated per established treatment guidelines [Batshaw et al 2001, Summar 2001, Urea Cycle Disorders Conference Group 2001]. See ACMG-ACT Sheet, ACMG Algorithm.

Acute Management of Hyperammonemia

Hallmarks of therapy include rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia concentration, reversal of catabolism, and avoidance and/or treatment of increased intracranial pressure [Häberle et al 2012]. Rapidly decreasing plasma ammonia concentration. When hyperammonemia is diagnosed or suspected, all protein intake should be withheld for a maximum of 24-48 hours. This time frame allows for the plasma ammonia concentration to be lowered via nitrogen scavenger therapy and/or dialysis and avoids an essential amino acid deficiency that would promote a catabolic state: Pharmacologic nitrogen scavenger therapy (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate and arginine) should be given intravenously as soon as hyperammonemia is diagnosed in an individual known to have CTLN1. (For information pertaining to the mechanism of action of this treatment, see Scavenger Therapy.) Priming infusion (to be given continuously over 90 minutes): Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2 Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2 10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2 Sustaining infusion (to be given continuously over 24 hours): Sodium benzoate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2 Sodium phenylacetate: 250 mg/kg or 5.5 g/m2 10% arginine HCl: 600 mg/kg or 12.0 g/m2 Note: Repeat boluses are not recommended unless the individual is receiving dialysis (see following). Dialysis is the most effective means of reducing plasma ammonia rapidly. Failure to control ammonia with scavenger therapy requires the emergency use of dialysis. Hemodialysis is the preferred method of dialysis and exceeds both peritoneal dialysis and hemofiltration in the rate of ammonia clearance. Scavenger therapy should be continued while dialysis is being performed. Note: Exchange transfusions have no place in hyperammonemic treatment. Reversal of catabolism. An anabolic state should be promoted through the provision of IV glucose (and insulin in the event of hyperglycemia) and intralipids. Complete protein restriction should be limited to 24-48 hours to avoid a catabolic state. In small infants, 40 kcal/100 mL given as D10W can be significant in averting catabolism. As soon as possible, osmolar load permitting, the individual should receive total parenteral nutrition (TPN) providing 0.25 g/kg/day of protein and 50 kcal/kg/day, advancing (as plasma ammonia concentration allows) to 1.0-1.5 g/kg/day of protein and 100-120 kcal/kg/day. Standard TPN solutions of dextrose, aminosol, and intralipid are used. Control of intracranial pressure. It is critical to monitor fluid balance, intake and output, and body weight. The affected individual should be maintained on the dry side of fluid balance: approximately 85 mL/kg of body weight per day in infants and appropriate corresponding fluid restriction in children and adults. Increased intracranial pressure is manifested by tension in the fontanel, acute enlargement of the liver, edema, and worsening neurologic signs including fisting, scissoring, ankle clonus, and coma. Cerebral edema and ischemia may be documented by MRI.

Chronic Management

Chronic therapy for those with CTLN1 consists of lifelong protein restriction, medications (nitrogen scavenger therapy and carnitine), and possible liver transplantation based on the degree of metabolic control achieved with dietary modification and medication therapy. Protein restriction. Lifelong dietary management is necessary and requires the services of a metabolic nutritionist. 
Nitrogen scavenger therapy When the affected individual is able to tolerate solid food, the oral medication sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®, Ammonaps®), at a dose of 450-600 mg/kg/day divided into three doses, and arginine-free base of 400 and 700 mg/kg/day are begun. As children grow, doses change to 9.9-13 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 8.8-15.4 g/m2/day of arginine. For details of management, the reader is referred to Brusilow & Horwich [2001] and Häberle et al [2012]. Glycerol phenylbutyrate (Ravicti®) is a more palatable option. The initial dosage for phenylbutyrate-naïve patients is 4.5-11.2 mL/m2/day (5-12.4 g/m2/day). If the individual is transitioning from sodium phenylbutyrate to glycerol phenylbutyrate, the daily dose of glycerol phenylbutyrate (mL) = daily dose of sodium phenylbutyrate (g) x 0.86. Success of therapy is defined by a plasma ammonia concentration lower than100 µmol/L and near-normal plasma glutamine concentration. Plasma arginine concentration may be up to 250% above upper normal limit for age. Treatment with L-carnitine has been advocated as auxiliary treatment to prevent systemic hypocarnitinemia, which may result from therapy with acylating agents. Liver transplantation for urea cycle disorders is the only known curative therapy [Morioka et al 2005]. Transplantation eliminates the need for dietary protein restriction but does not reverse any neurologic sequelae that affected individuals may have at the time of transplant. Liver transplantation should ideally be performed in affected individuals who are younger than age one year (prior to the development of any neurocognitive impairment) but older than age three months and/or above 5 kg body weight, to decrease complications and improve survival rates [Häberle et al 2012]. Liver transplantation of four individuals with CTLN1 between the ages of six and 64 months showed better developmental outcomes when the transplant was performed at earlier ages [Kim et al 2013]. Survival rates in those who underwent liver transplantation prior to age two years was between 90% and 95% five years post transplant [Bourdeaux et al 2007, Perito et al 2014]. Note: Although liver transplantation cures the ASS enzyme deficiency, arginine is extrahepatically synthesized and remains low post-transplantation, requiring ongoing supplementation. Living related-donor liver transplantation A successful living related-donor liver transplantation (240 g) from mother to six-year-old daughter has been reported. The allopurinol challenge test was normalized in this child, who previously had very brittle control with four to six hyperammonemic episodes per year [Ito et al 2003]. A living related-donor liver transplantation from mother to son resulted in continued elevation in plasma concentration of citrulline (200-400 µmol/L). The mother, a heterozygote, had 28% residual ASS1 enzyme activity [Ando et al 2003].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Prevention of hyperammonemia is achieved through lifelong protein restriction, nitrogen scavenger therapy, and possible liver transplantation based on metabolic control (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Intercurrent infections (particularly some viral exanthems) may induce a catabolic state. Affected individuals must be observed carefully during such episodes and medical attention sought to prevent hyperammonemia. Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided.

Surveillance

Follow up in a metabolic clinic with a qualified metabolic nutritionist and clinical biochemical geneticist is required. Monitoring should include: Evaluation of early warning signs of impending hyperammonemic episodes including mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, refusal to feed, and ankle clonus; Plasma ammonia and amino acid analysis to identify hyperammonemia and deficiency of essential amino acids and impending hyperammonemia, respectively. Plasma glutamine concentration may rise 48 hours in advance of increases in plasma ammonia concentration [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]. Monitoring should occur frequently in neonates and infants, based on disease severity. As affected individuals become older (teenage years and adulthood), clinical and biochemical monitoring can be extended to every six months to annually depending on clinical stability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Excess protein intake Obvious exposure to communicable diseases

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the long-term prognosis for individuals with citrullinemia type I depends on initial and peak plasma ammonia concentration, it is important that at-risk sibs be identified as soon as possible. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; in utero diagnosis (which permits appropriate oral therapy beginning with first feeds), if possible, is preferred. Measurement of plasma concentrations of ammonia and citrulline on day one of life. Elevation of either above acceptable levels (ammonia >100 µmol/L or plasma citrulline >~100 µmol/L) is sufficient evidence to initiate treatment. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because women with onset of severe symptoms during pregnancy or in the postpartum period have been reported, scrupulous attention needs to be paid to diet and medication during these periods.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy has been suggested; success has not been achieved to date. Phase I and Phase II clinical trials to assess the safety and efficacy of human hepatocyte transplantation as either an alternative to liver transplantation or as a temporizing measure for individuals with CTLN1awaiting transplantation has recently finished. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Ketoacids of essential amino acids were an early form of auxiliary waste nitrogen disposal enhancement, now replaced by the agents described in Treatment of Manifestations.