

Management

 Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of individuals with cystinosis, developed and approved by international experts on cystinosis, have been published. See Cystinosis Standards of Care [Nesterova & Gahl 2012].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cystinosis, the following evaluations are recommended. In individuals who are initially diagnosed at any age: Height and weight, plotted on age-appropriate growth charts Renal tubular and glomerular function, especially serum concentrations of creatinine, phosphate, bicarbonate, and potassium; and urine concentrations of creatinine, phosphate, bicarbonate, potassium, glucose, and protein. Quantitative measurement of urine amino acid loss helps to identify the severity of renal Fanconi syndrome [Charnas et al 1991]. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) or creatinine clearance test Thyroid function studies Lipid panel Renal ultrasound examination for evaluation of nephrocalcinosis Ophthalmologic evaluation, including slit lamp examination of the cornea to assess corneal involvement, ERG to assess retinal involvement, and fundoscopic examination for possible intracranial hypertension Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor In individuals who are initially diagnosed at an older age: In pre- and postpubertal males, measurement of serum concentration of testosterone, FSH, and LH Glucose tolerance test to assess for diabetes mellitus if symptoms are present Baseline ophthalmology evaluation, including a fundoscopic examination Evaluation of the extent of metabolic bone disease causing skeletal deformities by performing skeletal radiographs and DEXA scan Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 It is recommended that a multidisciplinary team that includes nephrologists, metabolic disease specialists, ophthalmologists, neurologists, gastroenterologists, nutritionists, and psychologists manage individuals with cystinosis. 
            Renal Fanconi syndrome
           Replacement of tubular losses of electrolytes, bicarbonate, minerals, and other small molecular weight nutrients For children, free access to water and bathroom privileges and supplementation with citrate to alkalinize the blood Phosphate replacement to prevent and treat rickets; vitamin D supplementation to assist the gastrointestinal absorption of phosphate and calcium Early treatment of skeletal deformities with the help of orthopedic specialists Careful attention to fluid and nutrient replacement is required during episodes of dehydration. (Obligatory urinary losses amount to 2-6 L electrolyte-rich water per day.) 
            Renal glomerular disease
           Reduction of cellular cystine concentration through treatment with the cystine-depleting agent cysteamine (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). Renal transplantation. Renal replacement is usually indicated when the creatinine clearance falls below 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and azotemia and hypertension rapidly progress. The time frame for appropriate renal replacement is the point at which the reciprocal serum creatinine value plotted against age reaches approximately 0.1. Symptoms often determine the exact time of transplantation. Ophthalmologic problems are treated symptomatically and with cystine-depleting agents: The photophobia, resulting from corneal crystal accumulation, can be ameliorated by sun avoidance, dark glasses, and lubrication with over-the-counter eye drops (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). Corneal transplantation is very rarely required for intractable pain resulting from recurrent corneal ulcerations. Retinal involvement is irreversible. Growth for children with cystinosis requires good nutrition, adequate phosphate supplementation, and robust intracellular cystine depletion (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations): Nutrition must be adequate for growth. Growth hormone therapy has proven beneficial for children with cystinosis in providing catch-up growth and bringing them into the normal percentiles for height [Gahl et al 2001, Wühl et al 2001, Gahl et al 2002]. Early and diligent treatment with supplements and oral cysteamine can obviate the need for growth hormone [Kleta et al 2004a]. 
            Other
           Oral L-thyroxine replacement for hypothyroidism Insulin for diabetes mellitus Testosterone to induce secondary sexual characteristics in males with primary hypogonadism Specific exercises for the muscle deterioration and swallowing difficulties of older individuals with cystinosis. Hand tendon transfer has been partially successful in improving strength. Speech therapy and physical therapy Standard treatment for benign intracranial hypertension. Other central nervous system complications are irreversible. Feeding via gastrostomy for those with dysphagia, poor nutrition, and risk of aspiration (Figure 2b)

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Cystine depletion therapy with cysteamine bitartrate (Cystagon®) has revolutionized the management and prognosis of people with nephropathic cystinosis. Cysteamine is now the worldwide treatment of choice for cystinosis. This free thiol can deplete cystinotic cells of more than 90% of their cystine content [Kleta & Gahl 2004]. Wilmer et al [2011] found that cysteamine also increased intracellular glutathione levels and restored the glutathione redox status of cystinotic cells. Cysteamine therapy should be considered for all affected individuals, regardless of age and transplantation status [Gahl et al 2007]. With early, diligent treatment many individuals with cystinosis have survived into their twenties without the need for renal transplantation [Gahl et al 2002]. Regular and diligent cysteamine therapy prevents or delays end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [Markello et al 1993] and hypothyroidism, enhances growth, and depletes muscle parenchyma of cystine [Gahl et al 2002]. It is critical to initiate cysteamine therapy immediately after diagnosis to allow for kidney growth and acquisition, rather than loss, of renal function [Kleta et al 2004a]. Cystagon® is taken orally every six hours at 60 to 90 mg of free base per kg per day (1.3 to 1.95 g/m2/day). The recommended adult dose is 500 mg free base every six hours; however, for both children and adults, the dose is titrated to reduce, if possible, leukocyte cystine concentration (measured 5-6 hours after a dose) to below 1.0 nmol half-cystine/mg protein [Belldina et al 2003, Kleta & Gahl 2004, Kleta 2006]. Procysbi® (cysteamine bitartrate) is a delayed-release capsule intended for affected individuals age six years and older. Procysbi® is taken every 12 hours. Blood testing showed Procysbi® was noninferior to Cystagon® in controlling cystine levels [Langman et al 2012]. Side effects of cysteamine treatment include nausea and vomiting, in part because of its unpleasant odor and taste [Schneider 2004]. Cysteamine increases gastrin synthesis and gastric acid production. Omeprazole may be of benefit for oral cysteamine treatment [Dohil et al 2003]. With long-term cystine-depleting therapy most late complications of cystinosis can be avoided. Despite diligent oral cysteamine therapy, cysteamine hydrochloride eye drops or CYSTARAN™ (cysteamine ophthalmic solution) 0.44% are required to achieve sufficient tissue concentration to dissolve corneal crystals [Gahl et al 2000]. Cysteamine eye drops are given ten to 12 times per day as a 0.55% solution with benzalkonium chloride 0.01% as a preservative [Tsilou et al 2007]. With good compliance photophobia is relieved within weeks (Figure 1b, 1c) [Kaiser-Kupfer et al 1987, Gahl et al 2000]. Systemic cysteamine treatment ameliorates or postpones retinal deterioration [Tsilou et al 2006].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Affected individuals who have undergone a renal transplantation should be monitored for the signs of immunodeficiency and infection. Carnitine supplementation may improve muscle strength in pre-transplant individuals. Treatment with proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole, relieves cysteamine-induced gastric acid hypersecretion and improves gastrointestinal symptoms [Osefo et al 2009].

Surveillance

 Clinical and laboratory examinations should be performed in individuals with nephropathic cystinosis according to disease severity and may include renal, endocrine, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and cardiac examinations [Kleta et al 2005]: Evaluation by a nephrologist every three to six months depending on the severity of renal impairment Renal function tests, electrolytes, and thyroid function tests at least every three to six months in those who are stable Serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase and intact parathyroid hormone; plain bone radiographs as well as DEXA scans to detect osteopenia and bone fragility predisposing to fractures, starting as soon as diagnosis is made and continued throughout the course of the disease Ophthalmologic evaluation with fundoscopic examination to screen for increased intracranial pressure every one to two years for those being treated appropriately Fasting blood glucose concentration throughout the course of the disease and testosterone concentration (in males) every two to three years, starting before puberty In advanced disease (i.e., poorly treated adults) and in late stages of disease, perform every two to three years: Chest CT for detection of coronary and other vascular calcification ECG Brain CT or MRI for evaluation of cerebral atrophy or calcifications Evaluation for the presence of progressive muscle weakness and swallowing difficulties using electromyography (EMG), oral sensorimotor examination, and modified barium swallowing studies with videofluoroscopy Pulmonary function tests Neurologic and neurocognitive evaluations including visual-motor integration, visual memory, planning, sustained attention, and motor speed beginning at age seven to eight years [Besouw et al 2010a]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Dehydration, which compromises remaining renal function Sun exposure, which can exacerbate photophobia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk (e.g., newborn sibs of a proband) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment to prevent life-threatening complications of cystinosis. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Biochemical testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancies in women with cystinosis are at increased risk for premature delivery and must be monitored closely [Ramappa & Pyatt 2010]. For women who are post-transplantation, the abdominal renal allograft creates mechanical issues. For women who have not undergone transplantation, fluid and electrolyte status require careful management.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Bone marrow-derived stem cell transplantation in mice improved chronic kidney disease [Yeagy et al 2011]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Development of a newborn screening test for cystinosis will potentially allow broader therapeutic success [Nesterova & Gahl 2008]. Two methods have been proposed: tandem mass spectrometry for the determination of derivative seven-carbon (C7) sugars in dried blood spots (DBS), which detects homozygosity for the CTNS 57-kb deletion, and molecular genetic testing for the most common CTNS pathogenic variants [Wamelink et al 2011]. Therapies proven to be ineffective include dietary restriction of sulfur-containing amino acids, supplementation with ascorbic acid, and the use of dithiothreitol.