

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, the following evaluations are recommended: EMG and nerve conduction velocity in order to evaluate for peripheral neuropathy Cardiologic evaluation including EKG and echocardiogram Laboratory investigations of lipids including measurement of plasma cholestanol level (if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation) Evaluation for osteoporosis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). Long-term treatment with CDCA (750 mg/day in adults) normalizes bile acid synthesis (leading to disappearance of abnormal metabolites from serum, bile, and urine), normalizes plasma and CSF concentration of cholestanol by suppressing cholestanol biosynthesis, and improves neurophysiologic findings [Mondelli et al 1992, Mondelli et al 2001] and other clinical manifestations including osteoporosis [Federico et al 1993]. For recent reports see: Bonnot et al [2010], Ginanneschi et al [2013], Martini et al [2013], and Yahalom et al [2013]. Treatment with CDCA has been reported to lead to the following [Mondelli et al 2001]: Normalization of nerve conduction velocities and subsequent stabilization Slow and continuous improvement in motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and sensory evoked potentials (SEPs) Overall stabilization of clinical manifestations without significant improvement of neurologic deficits. In peripheral nerves CDCA treatment did not influence the number of axons activated by maximum electrical stimulation but instead it increased the conduction of the still-excitable fibers. This suggests that CDCA treatment promotes myelin synthesis in nerve fibers with residual unaffected axons. The effect of therapy may therefore depend largely on the extent of irreversible structural damage to axons. CDCA treatment may be more useful when started early. In a case in which treatment onset was at birth the development of disease appears to be delayed [Authors, personal data; Luyckx et al 2014]. Inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase alone or in combination with CDCA are also effective in decreasing cholestanol concentration and improving clinical signs [Peynet et al 1991, Verrips et al 1999b]. However, because of clinical evidence that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may induce muscle damage and even rhabdomyolysis, caution is required in the use of these drugs [Federico & Dotti 1994]. Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis has been proposed as a possible treatment; results are controversial [Mimura et al 1993, Berginer & Salen 1994, Dotti et al 2004]. Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) treatment may improve muscle weakness. Liver transplantation, although never performed in individuals with CTX, remains a possibility. Eyes. Cataract extraction is typically required in at least one eye by age 50 years. Symptomatic treatments for epilepsy, spasticity, and parkinsonism have been utilized. Parkinsonism is poorly responsive to levodopa, whereas an antihistamine drug, diphenylpyraline hydrochloride, had an excellent effect in three individuals [Ohno et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Early treatment with CDCA in presymptomatic individuals appears to prevent clinical manifestations (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Calcium and vitamin D supplementation improve osteoporosis.

Surveillance

 Recommended annual surveillance includes the following: Neurologic and neuropsychologic evaluation Cholestanol plasma concentration Brain MRI Echocardiography Measurement of total body density (TBD)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Caution in the use of statins has been suggested [Federico & Dotti 2001].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CYP27A1 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, biochemical testing of at-risk individuals can be pursued. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid should not be interrupted during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Therapies with statins and LDL apheresis have been reported [Dotti et al 2004]. Cholic acid was used to treat two affected siblings from infancy with resulting improvement in symptoms [Pierre et al 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Therapies with ursodeoxicolic acid, lovastatin, and cholestyramine have been reported to be ineffective [Tint et al 1989, Batta et al 2004].