

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), the following evaluations are recommended: Resting ECG Holter monitoring, as arrhythmias develop when heart rate increases Exercise stress test both for diagnosis and monitoring of therapy Echocardiogram and/or MRI to evaluate for structural defects Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of CPVT is summarized in a specific consensus document from the Heart Rhythm Association (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) [Priori et al 2013b] (full text) and summarized in the recent version of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on ventricular arrhythmias [Priori et al 2015] (full text). Beta-blockers are the first therapeutic choice (class I indication) of proven efficacy for about 60% of individuals with CPVT [Leenhardt et al 1995, Priori et al 2002]. The proposed mechanism of action in an individual with CPVT is inhibition of adrenergic-dependent triggered activity. This effect can be due to both heart rate reduction and direct effect on calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Chronic treatment with full-dose beta-blocking agents prevents recurrence of syncope in the majority of affected individuals. The reproducible induction of arrhythmia during exercise allows effective dose titration and monitoring. Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day divided into two doses per day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day divided into 3-4 doses per day). Nadolol is reported to be more effective than selective beta blockers [Leren et al 2016]. However, selective beta-blockers can be used in individuals with asthma or other respiratory conditions. Importantly, the dose of beta-blockers should always be individualized with exercise stress testing. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006] (see Surveillance). Flecainide. Clinical [van der Werf et al 2011] and experimental [Liu et al 2011] data show that to improve arrhythmia control, flecainide (100-300 mg/day) can be given along with beta-blockers to persons who have recurrence of syncope or complex arrhythmias during exercise (class IIa). Although controlled clinical trials are lacking, the evidence for effectiveness of flecainide is sufficient to indicate the use of this drug whenever beta-blockers are not sufficient to control arrhythmias. Beta-blockers and flecainide are also indicated for affected individuals who have experienced a previous aborted sudden death to reduce the probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) shocks (class IIb). The antiarrhythmic effects of flecainide appear to be independent from the specific CPVT genetic subtype [Watanabe et al 2013]. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation in addition to beta-blockers with or without flecainide is recommended in individuals with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience cardiac arrest, recurrent syncope or polymorphic/bidirectional VT despite optimal therapy. Furthermore, in those individuals in whom the highest tolerated dose of beta-blockers fails to adequately control arrhythmias [Priori et al 2002, Sumitomo et al 2003], an ICD can be considered for primary prevention of cardiac arrest/sudden death [Zipes et al 2006]. Whenever possible, pharmacologic therapy should be maintained/optimized even in individuals with an ICD in order to reduce the probability of ICD firing. Left cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) may be considered in those with a diagnosis of CPVT who experience recurrent syncope, polymorphic/bidirectional VT, or several appropriate ICD shocks while on beta-blocker and flecainide and in those who are intolerant of or with contraindication to beta-blocker therapy (class IIb). However, LCSD is not without side effects, including palpebral ptosis, elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, and lack of sweating from the left arm and face. Recurrences of cardiac events have been also reported in those with LCSD. Therefore, pharmacologic therapy should always be optimized prior to considering LCSD.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Beta-blockers are indicated for primary prevention in all clinically affected individuals (see Treatment of Manifestations) and in individuals with pathogenic variants in the genes associated with CPVT who have a negative exercise stress test (class IIa). Recommended drugs are nadolol (1-2.5 mg/kg/day) or propranolol (2-4 mg/kg/day). For symptomatic individuals with CPVT, the maximum tolerated dosage should be maintained. Flecainide can be added for primary prevention of cardiac arrest when beta-blockers alone cannot control the onset of arrhythmias during exercise stress test.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Secondary complications are mainly related to therapy. Beta-blockers could worsen allergic asthma. Therefore, the cardiac-specific beta-blocker, metoprolol, could be indicated in some individuals with CPVT who have a history of asthma. The dose of metoprolol is based on the need of the affected individual (≤3 mg/kg). Note: It is important to keep in mind that metoprolol and newer beta-blockers (e.g., bisorpolol) may not have the same efficacy as nadolol or propranolol; the reasons for this are under investigation. For persons with an ICD, anticoagulation to prevent formation of thrombi may be necessary (particularly in children who require looping of the right ventricular catheter).

Surveillance

 Regular follow-up visits to the cardiologist every six to twelve months (depending on the severity of clinical manifestations) are required in order to monitor therapy efficacy. These visits should include the following: Resting ECG Exercise stress test, performed at the maximal age-predicted heart rate. For individuals on beta-blocker therapy (in whom maximal heart rate cannot be reached), the test should be performed at the highest tolerated workload. Holter monitoring Echo and MRI at least every two years The limit for any allowed physical activity can be defined on the basis of exercise stress test done in the hospital setting; the use of commercially available heart rate monitoring devices for sports participation can be helpful in keeping the heart rate in a safe range during physical activity but should not be considered as an alternative to medical follow-up visits.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Competitive sports and other strenuous exercise are always contraindicated. All individuals showing exercise-induced arrhythmias should avoid physical activity, with the exception of light training for those individuals showing good suppression of arrhythmias on exercise stress testing while on therapy. It is important to note that efficacy needs to be periodically retested [Heidbüchel et al 2006]. The risk for arrhythmias during sports in individuals who have pathogenic variants in genes associated with CPVT but no clinical phenotype (no exercise-induced arrhythmias) is not known; thus it may be safest for these individuals to refrain from intense physical activities. Digitalis favors the onset of cardiac arrhythmias due to delayed afterdepolarization (DAD) and triggered activity; therefore, digitalis should be avoided in all individuals with CPVT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Because treatment and surveillance are available to reduce morbidity and mortality, first-degree relatives should be offered clinical work up and molecular genetic testing if the family-specific pathogenic allelic variant(s) are known. Indeed, the availability of effective preventive therapies can reduce the number of fatal arrhythmic events if individuals with pathogenic variants are diagnosed early. If the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) are not known, all first-degree relatives of an affected individual should be evaluated with resting ECG, Holter monitoring, and – most importantly – exercise stress testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Beta-blockers (preferentially nadolol or propranolol) should be administered throughout pregnancy in affected women.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.