http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dbh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To determine the extent of functional disturbance in an individual diagnosed with dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) deficiency, the following are indicated:

Assessment of standing time (length of time that the affected individual is able to stand)

Medical history

Consultation with a clinical geneticist or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



For the most part, treatment for DBH deficiency is supportive and directed at relieving orthostatic symptoms.

The treatment of choice is administration of L-threo-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine (or droxidopa, marketed in the USA as Northera™). Droxidopa is converted directly to NE by L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, thereby bypassing DBH (Figure 1).

Administration of 100 to 500 mg droxidopa orally twice or three times daily increases blood pressure and concomitantly restores plasma NE to the normal range; however, urinary NE excretion exceeds normal levels.

Although NE becomes detectable, plasma epinephrine concentration still remains below a detectable level.

Droxidopa administration restores DOPA to within the normal range and reduces DA somewhat, but plasma concentration of DA and its metabolites remains somewhat elevated [Biaggioni & Robertson 1987].

This favorable alteration in catecholamines alleviates the orthostatic hypotension and restores function to a near-normal level. An affected female completed a marathon approximately five years after her diagnosis, while taking 1200 mg of droxidopa daily [Garland et al 2005b].

Individuals with DBH deficiency respond somewhat to standard therapeutic approaches for autonomic failure but not nearly as well as they respond to droxidopa.

Fludrocortisone, at dosages of 0.1-0.3 mg daily, has been used with some benefit, but marked orthostatic hypotension still occurs.

Indomethacin (50 mg 3x/day) has been of limited benefit in raising blood pressure.

Metyrosine, a tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor, raises blood pressure and reduces urinary DA concentration in individuals with DBH deficiency. However, the dose normally used for pheochromocytoma has too much of a pressor effect and has some side effects, including sedation.

Ptosis can be corrected by surgery.

Sinus problems should be treated as needed.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Droxidopa can improve the orthostatic hypotension and symptoms, but these recur if treatment is stopped.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The effect of droxidopa on renal function is unknown.

Surveillance



Renal function should be assessed by BUN and plasma creatinine at a minimum of every two years and more often if a loss of function is evident. Plasma magnesium and potassium should also be assessed.

Individuals on droxidopa should be encouraged to report any adverse events to their physician.

Affected individuals should be queried at least yearly about continued efficacy of droxidopa against orthostatic hypotension and symptoms. Adjustment of dosage may be required.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Untreated individuals with DBH deficiency should avoid hot environments, strenuous exercise, standing still, and dehydration.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



At least two affected women have successfully given birth [Scurrah et al 2002] following uncomplicated deliveries. Based on these experiences, it is recommended that affected pregnant women have their blood pressure monitored regularly throughout the pregnancy and delivery so that the droxidopa dose can be modified as needed. One or two extra doses of droxidopa should be available to be taken as needed at the time of delivery. Dose adjustment may also be required post partum. The effects of maternal droxidopa therapy on the developing fetus have not been studied in humans; however, studies on pregnant animals do not suggest an increased risk for malformations in offspring.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.