http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dbmd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a dystrophinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical therapy assessment

Developmental evaluation before entering elementary school for the purpose of designing an individualized educational plan, as necessary

At the time of diagnosis or by age six years, evaluation for cardiomyopathy by electrocardiography, cardiac echocardiography, and/or MRI [Towbin 2003, Bushby et al 2010b]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Appropriate management of males with DMD/BMD can prolong survival and improve quality of life.

Dilated cardiomyopathy. Recommendations are based on an American Academy of Pediatrics policy statement and various additional publications [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005, Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012].

A retrospective observational study found that ventricular remodeling may occur in males with DMD and BMD with early diagnosis and treatment of cardiomyopathy [Jefferies et al 2005]. Among 69 affected boys with a first echocardiogram indicating dilated cardiomyopathy (e.g., LVEP <55% or left ventricular dilation), 27 with DMD and four with BMD were started on an ACE inhibitor at a mean age of 15 years. If echocardiography at three months showed no improvement, a beta blocker (carvedilol or metoprolol) was added. When these 31 individuals had repeat echocardiography at a mean of 3.3 years later, left ventricular size and function had normalized in 19 (66%), improved in eight (26%), and stabilized in two (8%). Mean LVEF increased from 36% to 53%. Measurement of reduced sphericity indicated improved ventricular geometry.

Whether this therapy reverses the cardiomyopathy or only masks the manifestations of a progressive process is not clear; however, a more recent study [Duboc et al 2005] lends support to the hypothesis that early introduction of afterload reduction therapy may lead to improved preservation of myocardial function and reduced mortality [Colan 2005, Duboc et al 2007]. Further studies are underway to create evidence-based recommendations for the prevention and treatment of cardiomyopathy in men with DMD/BMD.

The authors' institution commonly treats children with DMD or BMD early with an ACE inhibitor and/or beta blocker. When used in combination, these appear to lead to initial improvement of left ventricular function; however, ACE inhibitors are also used without beta blockers. The impact of combined prophylactic treatment is currently under investigation in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial. The optimal time to start treatment in DMD is unknown, but most cardiologists will initiate treatment when the LVEF drops below 55% and fractional shortening is less than 28% [Jefferies et al 2005, Viollet et al 2012]. Angiotensin II-receptor blockers (ARBs) such as losartan are similarly effective and can be used in cases of poor tolerability of ACE inhibitors [Allen et al 2013]. In cases of overt heart failure, other heart failure therapies including diuretics and digoxin are used as needed. Cardiac transplantation is offered to persons with severe dilated cardiomyopathy and BMD with limited or no clinical evidence of skeletal muscle disease.

Scoliosis treatment as needed is appropriate.

Corticosteroid Therapy



Studies have shown that corticosteroids improve the strength and function of individuals with DMD.

Prednisone. It is hypothesized that prednisone/prednisolone has a stabilizing effect on membranes and perhaps an anti-inflammatory effect:

In a randomized double-blind six-month trial, prednisone administered at a dose of either 0.75 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day increased strength and reduced the rate of decline in males with DMD [Mendell et al 1989].

In two successive six-month trials of prednisone therapy, improvement began within ten days of starting the treatment, required a single dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day of prednisone for maximal improvement, reached a plateau after three months, and was sustained for as long as three years in those children maintained on doses of 0.5 and 0.6 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991].

One open-label study suggested that therapy with prednisone could prolong ambulation by two years. Side effects include weight gain (>20% of baseline) (in 40%), hypertension, behavioral changes, growth retardation, cushingoid appearance (in 50%), and cataracts [Mendell et al 1989, Griggs et al 1993].

Follow-up studies showed that a dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day was more beneficial than a dose of 0.3 mg/kg/day [Fenichel et al 1991]. However, a subsequent study proved the effectiveness of lower doses of prednisolone (0.35 mg/kg/day) in both DMD and BMD. One of the authors noted sustained effectiveness with doses initiated at 0.75 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose: 40 mg) and gradually reduced (usually because of advancing age and weight gain) to as low as 0.4 mg/kg/day. At lower doses of 0.3 mg/kg/day, the improvement is less robust [Darras, personal communication].

Alternate-day dosing and intermittent dosing (e.g., 10 days “on,” 10 or 20 days “off”) are also used.

A study showed reduced incidence of side effects by high-dose (5 mg/kg), twice-weekly dosing [Connolly et al 2002].

A randomized, cross-over, controlled trial of intermittent prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) therapy (prednisone or placebo) during the first ten days of each month for six months showed that prednisone slowed deterioration of muscle function in individuals with DMD [Beenakker et al 2005]; side effects did not negatively affect quality of life.

Similar conclusions regarding the effect and side-effect profile of prednisone treatment for DMD were reached by a Cochrane systematic review [Manzur et al 2004, Manzur et al 2008] and also by the 124th European Neuromuscular Centre workshop on the treatment of DMD [Bushby et al 2004].

High-dose weekly prednisone, 5 mg/kg, given each Friday and Saturday (total 10 mg/kg/week) can be considered as an alternative to daily treatment in males on a daily regimen with excessive weight gain and behavioral issues [Bushby et al 2010a].

Whether the improvement seen in individuals with DMD treated with prednisone is the result of an immunosuppressive effect remains unclear, as individuals treated with azathioprine did not have a beneficial effect.

Deflazacort, a synthetic derivative of prednisolone used in Europe but not currently available in all countries (e.g. U.S.A.), is thought to have fewer side effects than prednisone, particularly with regard to weight gain [Angelini 2007]. A larger study comparing deflazacort to prednisone, carried out in Europe, showed that the two medications were similarly or equally effective in slowing the decline of muscle strength in DMD. Another European multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial of deflazacort versus prednisone in DMD showed equal efficacy in improving motor function and functional performance [Bonifati et al 2000]. A more recent study of deflazacort treatment showed efficacy in preserving pulmonary function as well as gross motor function [Biggar et al 2006].

In a comparison of two different protocols of deflazacort treatment in DMD, a 0.9-mg/kg/day dose was more effective than a dose of 0.6 mg/kg/day for the first 20 days of the month and no deflazacort for the remainder of the month [Biggar et al 2004]; 30% of children on the highest dose developed asymptomatic cataracts that required no treatment. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 studies showed that deflazacort improved strength and motor function more than placebo; whether it has a benefit over prednisone on similar outcomes remains unclear [Campbell & Jacob 2003]. Despite the lack of conclusive evidence for superiority of deflazacort over prednisone in the area of effectiveness [Moxley et al 2005], some experts believe that the more favorable side-effect profile (particularly with regard to weight gain) associated with deflazacort makes it a better choice than daily treatment with prednisone.

Initiation and length of treatment. Data regarding the optimal age to begin treatment with corticosteroids or the optimal duration of such treatment are insufficient. It has been proposed that individuals with DMD begin treatment with low-dose prednisone as soon as the diagnosis is made (age 2-5 years) [Merlini et al 2003]; however, large-scale controlled trials to study the efficacy and safety of corticosteroid therapy in early DMD have yet to be conducted. A large, NIH-funded multicenter blind randomized trial (FOR DMD) comparing the efficacy, tolerability, and side effects of three regimens (prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day, prednisone 0.75 mg/kg/day switching between ten days on and ten days off treatment, and deflazacort 0.9 mg/kg/day) is currently being conducted in young (4–7 year old) steroid-naïve children with DMD. Thus, at this point corticosteroid therapy remains the treatment of choice for affected individuals between ages five and 15 years. Corticosteroid therapy is not recommended in children under age two years [Bushby et al 2010a].

Published guidelines. The following recommendations for corticosteroid therapy are in accordance with the national practice parameters developed by the American Academy of Neurology and the Child Neurology Society [Moxley et al 2005] (full text).

Boys with DMD who are older than age five years should be offered treatment with prednisone (0.75/mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 40 mg) as soon as plateauing or decline in motor skills is noted. Prior to the initiation of therapy, the potential benefits and risks of corticosteroid treatment should be carefully discussed with each individual.

To assess benefits of corticosteroid therapy, the following parameters are useful: timed muscle function tests, pulmonary function tests, and age at loss of independent ambulation.

To assess risks of corticosteroid therapy, maintain awareness of the potential corticosteroid therapy side effects (e.g., weight gain, cushingoid appearance, short stature, decrease in linear growth, acne, excessive hair growth, gastrointestinal symptoms, behavioral changes). There is also an increased frequency of vertebral and long bone fractures with prolonged corticosteroid use [King et al 2007].

The optimal maintenance dose of prednisone (0.75 mg/kg/day) should be continued if side effects are not severe. Significant but less robust improvement can be seen with gradual tapering of prednisone to as low as 0.3 mg/kg/day.

If excessive weight gain occurs (>20% over estimated normal weight for height over a 12-month period), the prednisone dose should be decreased to 0.5 mg/kg/day. If excessive weight gain continues, the dose should be further decreased to 0.3 mg/kg/day after three to four months.

Deflazacort (0.9 mg/kg/day, maximum daily dose: 36-39 mg) can also be used to treat DMD. Side effects of asymptomatic cataracts and weight gain should be monitored.

BMD. Information about the efficacy of prednisone in treating individuals with BMD is limited. Many clinicians continue treatment with glucocorticoids after loss of ambulation for the purpose of maintaining upper limb strength, delaying the progressive decline of respiratory and cardiac function, and decreasing the risk of scoliosis. Retrospective data suggest that the progression of scoliosis can be reduced by long-term daily corticosteroid treatment; however, an increased risk for vertebral and lower-limb fractures has been documented [King et al 2007]. Men on steroid therapy were less likely to require spinal surgery [Dooley et al 2010b].

Prevention of Secondary Complications




Cardiorespiratory

Evaluation by pulmonary and cardiac specialists before surgeries [Finder et al 2004]

Administration of pneumococcal vaccine and influenza vaccination annually [Finder et al 2004]

Nutritional. Assessment if:

Planning to commence steroids [Davidson & Truby 2009]

Dysphagia is present

Patient is chronically constipated

Major surgery has been planned

Patient is malnourished


Muscular

Physical therapy to promote mobility and prevent contractures

Exercise

All ambulatory boys with DMD or those in early non-ambulatory phase should participate in regular gentle exercise to avoid contractures and disuse atrophy.

Exercise can consist of a combination of swimming pool and recreation-based activities. Swimming can be continued in non-ambulatory patients under close supervision, if medically safe.

If patients complain of muscle pain during or after exercise, the activity should be reduced and monitoring for myoglobinuria should be carried out. Myoglobinuria within 24 hours after exercise indicates overexertion leading to rhabdomyolysis.


Bone health

Assessments [Bushby et al 2010b, Darras 2011]:

Blood

Measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphorus, and activity of alkaline phosphatase

25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) level in springtime or biannually

Magnesium and parathyroid hormone levels may be considered

Urine (calcium, sodium, creatinine)

Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning

At baseline (age ≥3 years) or at start of corticosteroid therapy

Repeated annually in those at risk (history of fractures, chronic corticosteroid therapy) and those with DEXA Z score <-2

Spine radiograph

If back pain is present

To exclude vertebral compression fracture

To assess degree of kyphoscoliosis if present on physical examination

Bone age if growth failure occurs (height for age < 5th percentile or if linear growth is faltering) in persons on or off corticosteroids

Interventions:

Exposure to sunshine and a balanced diet rich in vitamin D and calcium to improve bone density and reduce the risk of fractures. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with a dietician.

Vitamin D supplementation should be initiated if the vitamin D serum concentration is <20 ng/mL [Bachrach 2005, Biggar et al 2005, Quinlivan et al 2005] and should be considered in all children if levels cannot be maintained [Bushby et al 2010b]. Supplementation should be carried out in consultation with an endocrinologist and in accordance with country-specific pediatric guidelines.

Intravenous bisphosphonates; recommended in persons with symptomatic vertebral fracture(s), but a bone health expert should be consulted.

Use of oral biphosphonates for prophylaxis or treatment remains controversial.

Surveillance



Cardiac. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for optimal cardiac care in persons with DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] (full text) and consensus guidelines published in 2010 [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) include the following:


DMD

Complete cardiac evaluation at least every two years, beginning at the time of diagnosis or by the age of six until the age of ten years or at the onset of cardiac symptoms if they occur earlier

Note: At minimum, the evaluation should include an electrocardiogram and a noninvasive cardiac imaging study such as echocardiography or cardiac MRI.

At approximately age ten years, or at the onset of cardiac signs and symptoms, annual complete cardiac evaluation

Note: Most individuals with DMD demonstrating cardiac signs and symptoms are relatively late in their course.

If evaluation reveals ventricular dysfunction, the 2010 consensus guidelines recommend initiation of pharmacologic therapy and surveillance at least every six months

BMD. Complete cardiac evaluations beginning at approximately age ten years or at the onset of signs and symptoms. Evaluations should continue at least every two years.

The AAP recommendations for optimal cardiac care of female carriers for DMD or BMD [American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery 2005] include the following:

Education about the risk of developing cardiomyopathy and about the signs and symptoms of heart failure

Complete cardiac evaluation by a cardiac specialist with experience in the treatment of heart failure and/or neuromuscular disorders, with the initial evaluation to take place in late adolescence or early adulthood, or earlier at the appearance of cardiac signs and symptoms

Starting at age 25 to 30 years, screening with a complete cardiac evaluation at least every five years

Treatment of cardiac disease similar to that for boys with DMD or BMD


Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function testing before confinement to a wheelchair (usually age ~9-10 years)

Evaluation by a pediatric pulmonologist twice yearly after ANY of the following [Finder et al 2004]:

Confinement to a wheelchair

Reduction in vital capacity below 80% predicted

Age 12 years

The 2010 consensus guidelines [Bushby et al 2010b] (full text; purchase or institutional access required) make detailed recommendations regarding pulmonary care, including:

Use of self-inflating manual ventilation bag or mechanical insufflation-exsufflation device;

Manual and mechanically assisted cough techniques;

Indications for nocturnal and then daytime noninvasive ventilation as well as for tracheostomy.


Orthopedic

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, especially contractures and scoliosis in those with DMD and BMD

Evaluation for surgical interventions as needed

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with DMD/BMD should avoid botulinum toxin injections.

Although it is recommended that triggering agents like succinylcholine and inhalational anesthetics be avoided in patients with DMD or BMD because of susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia or malignant hyperthermia-like reactions (rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, hyperkalemia), it should be noted that an extensive literature search did not find an increased risk of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility in people with DMD or BMD when compared with the general population [Gurnaney et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Heterozygous females need to be identified for the purpose of cardiac surveillance (see Surveillance). Therefore, genetic counseling and molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variant is known) should be offered to females who are the sisters or maternal female relatives of an affected male and to females who are a first-degree relative of a known or possible carrier female.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management for Heterozygous Females



Symptomatic heterozygous women should undergo an evaluation for dilated cardiomyopathy ideally prior to conceiving a pregnancy or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. Asymptomatic heterozygous women should consider undergoing a cardiac evaluation prior to conception or when a pregnancy is recognized. Those with evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy should be treated and/or monitored by a cardiologist and a high-risk obstetrician.

Therapies Under Investigation



Aminoglycosides. Up to 15% of individuals with DMD exhibit the pathogenic variant known as a premature stop codon. Suppression of stop codons has been demonstrated with aminoglycoside treatment of cultured cells; the treatment creates misreading of RNA and thereby allows alternative amino acids to be inserted at the site of the mutated stop codon. In the mdx mouse, in vivo gentamicin therapy resulted in dystrophin expression at 10%-20% of that detected in normal muscle [Barton-Davis et al 1999], a level that provided some degree of functional protection against contraction-induced damage.

Aminoglycoside therapy has been suggested as an alternative to gene therapy; however, it is applicable only for individuals with premature stop codons.

In a preliminary study in which gentamicin (7.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to four individuals for two weeks, full-length dystrophin did not appear in the muscles of the treated individuals [Wagner et al 2001].

Some authors, unable to reproduce the results previously published for the mouse model of DMD, have called for more preclinical investigation of this potential therapy [Dunant et al 2003].

In an in vitro study dystrophin expression was detected in myotubes of males with DMD using gentamicin; however, the treatment was more effective in persons with the nonsense variant TGA than TAA or TAG [Kimura et al 2005].

In a clinical study of 12 people with DMD whose pathogenic variants resulted in premature stop codons, no statistically significant benefit on clinical outcome measures of efficacy was shown after weekly or biweekly gentamicin infusions for six months [Malik et al 2010].

Ataluren (PTC124) is a new, orally administered non-antibiotic drug that appears to promote ribosomal read-through of nonsense (stop) variants.

Preclinical efficacy studies in mdx mice have yielded encouraging results [Barton et al 2005, Welch et al 2007].

A Phase I multiple-dose safety trial is ongoing [Hirawat et al 2005].

In a Phase IIb, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 174 ambulatory males with DMD/BMD were given placebo or low- or high-dose ataluren for 48 weeks. The high-dose ataluren and placebo groups failed to show statistically significant change in the six-minute walk distance [Finkel et al 2010]. Patients treated with low-dose ataluren (10-10-20 mg/kg/day) had an approximately 29-meter change in the six-minute walk distance, close to the 30-meter change deemed clinically significant and higher than that for the placebo group.

Additional studies with low-dose ataluren (10 mg/kg in the morning, 10 mg/kg at noon, and 20 mg/kg in the evening) are currently in progress.

Morpholino antisense oligonucleotides mediate exon skipping [Aartsma-Rus et al 2006a] and have improved the mdx mouse model of DMD [Wilton & Fletcher 2005, Alter et al 2006, Wilton & Fletcher 2010].

In preliminary human studies, the intramuscular injection of antisense oligonucleotides that bind to exon 51 and induce its skipping during messenger RNA splicing proved to be safe and led to local dystrophin synthesis within the injected muscles [van Deutekom et al 2007, Kinali et al 2009].

Systemic weekly subcutaneous administration of an oligonucleotide targeting exon 51 (PRO051) induced dystrophin expression in ten of 12 patients with DMD. Furthermore, a 12-week extension study showed improvement in the six-minute walk test in eight of 12 patients [Goemans et al 2011].

In a double-blind randomized controlled trial of exon skipping using an oligonucleotide targeting exon 51 (eteplirsen), high and low dose treatment cohorts were compared to placebo for 24 weeks, after which all people with DMD were on treatment [Mendell et al 2013]. Boys who did not lose ambulation experienced a 67.3 meter benefit on a 6-minute walk test compared to affected individuals given placebo with subsequent delayed treatment. In addition to ambulation stability, eteplirsen restored dystrophin in the individuals treated with 30 mg/kg/day and 50 mg/kg/day, as well as in the affected people on placebo who were treated subsequently. A Phase III multicenter study is currently in progress.

Oxandrolone, an anabolic (androgenic) steroid with a powerful anabolic effect on skeletal muscle myosin synthesis [Balagopal et al 2006], was shown in a pilot study to have effects similar to prednisone, with fewer side effects [Fenichel et al 1997]. A randomized prospective controlled trial showed that oxandrolone did not produce a significant change in the average manual muscle strength score of males with DMD compared with placebo; however, the mean change in quantitative muscle strength was significant [Fenichel et al 2001]. The investigators conducting this study felt that oxandrolone may be useful before initiating therapy with corticosteroids because it is safe in the short term, accelerates linear growth, and may be beneficial in slowing the progression of weakness. However, the long-term effects of oxandrolone in the treatment of DMD have not been studied, thus its use has not been adapted widely.

Gene therapy. Experimental gene therapies are currently under investigation [Gregorevic & Chamberlain 2003, Tidball & Spencer 2003, van Deutekom & van Ommen 2003, Nowak & Davies 2004].

Gregorevic et al [2004] and Gregorevic et al [2006] reported systemic administration of rAAV6 vectors resulting in successful delivery of DMD to affected muscles of dystrophin-deficient mdx mice (a mouse model for DMD), which led to preservation of muscle function and extension of life span.

Despite progress in the field, cellular immunity issues may be an obstacle to successful dystrophin gene therapy for DMD. One study showed evidence of dystrophin-specific T cells in four of six treated patients, with two of them harboring immunity to dystrophin even before vector treatment [Mendell et al 2010]. It is plausible that truncated dystrophin protein from revertant dystrophin fibers primes the cellular immune system [Arechavala-Gomeza et al 2010, Moore & Flotte 2010].

Stem cell therapy is under investigation but remains experimental [Gussoni et al 1997, Gussoni et al 1999, Gussoni et al 2002, Skuk et al 2004]. Isolation and transplantation of muscle satellite cells yielded promising results in mouse experiments [Blau 2008, Cerletti et al 2008]. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy also seems promising for muscle regeneration in DMD [Markert et al 2009].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Immunosuppression with azathioprine is not beneficial.

Myoblast transfer has been inefficient.

Creatine monohydrate has been studied as potential treatment in muscular dystrophies and neuromuscular disorders [Tarnopolsky & Martin 1999, Walter et al 2000, Louis et al 2003]. In a randomized, controlled, cross-over trial, 30 boys with DMD were given creatine (~0.1 g/kg/day) for four months and placebo for four months [Tarnopolsky et al 2004]. Treatment with creatine resulted in improved grip strength of the dominant hand and increased fat-free mass when compared to placebo; however, no functional improvement was noted. In another controlled study, no statistically significant benefit over placebo was found in 50 boys randomized to receive either creatine 5 g/day, glutamine 0.6 g/kg per day, or placebo [Escolar et al 2005]. The primary outcome measure was the modified manual muscle testing score. Given the lack of significant benefit, treatment with creatine monohydrate cannot be recommended routinely for treatment of DMD. It should be noted that creatine was well tolerated in these studies with no evidence of renal dysfunction; despite that, good hydration is recommended in patients taking creatine.

Cyclosporin was reported to improve clinical function in children with DMD who received the medication for eight weeks. Nevertheless, because of the rare reports of cyclosporin-induced myopathy in individuals receiving the medication for other reasons, the use of cyclosporin in treating DMD remains controversial.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (trichostatin A, valproic acid, phenylbutyrate) have improved the mdx mouse by inducing the expression of the myostatin inhibitor follistatin [Minetti et al 2006]. Human trials are needed to determine the efficacy of these agents.

Myostatin inhibitors or blockers result in increased muscle mass and strength, decreased serum creatine kinase concentration, and improved muscle histology in the mdx mouse [Bogdanovich et al 2002]. However, a Phase I/II trial of MYO-029, an antibody against myostatin, in adults with muscular dystrophy failed to show any improvements in muscle strength or function [Wagner et al 2008]. The study was not powered to look for efficacy. Additional studies are in progress.