

Management

 Guidelines for the clinical management of individuals with LMNA-related DCM have been published [Hershberger et al 2009].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LMNA-related DCM, the following evaluations are recommended. 
            Comprehensive cardiovascular evaluation Evaluation for conduction system disease and arrhythmia: Personal and family history of presyncope, syncope, resuscitated sudden cardiac death, palpitations, and other symptoms of arrhythmia Follow up of abnormalities with additional testing as indicated (e.g., 24-hour monitoring or event monitors) Referral to a cardiologist or electrophysiologist for any indication of symptomatic disease Indicated in some patients: invasive electrophysiologic evaluation for conduction system disease Evaluation for left ventricular dysfunction and DCM: Family history for cardiomyopathy of any type, personal history of shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, chest pain Assessment of left ventricular function (most commonly by two-dimensional echocardiography) to determine left ventricular dimension and function. Alternatively, MRI provides similar data, and radionuclide ventriculography provides a measure of the ejection fraction. 
            Measurement of serum CK concentration to evaluate for skeletal myopathy In some affected individuals elevated serum CK concentrations with or without a skeletal muscle myopathy similar to Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy or limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is observed. If CK levels are elevated, an evaluation for skeletal muscle weakness, including neuromuscular evaluation, may be necessary. History and physical examination for signs and symptoms of skeletal myopathy. If there is evidence of myopathy, refer to a neuromuscular disease specialist for evaluation. 
            Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 For the general approach to managing DCM, see Dilated Cardiomyopathy Overview, Management. The Pasotti et al [2008] report (see Clinical Description) provides the most longitudinal data on LMNA-related DCM: 94 individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant were followed for a median of 57 months (range: 36-107 months). In the report of Brodt et al, the progression from first observed conduction system disease to the onset of ventricular dysfunction in a subset of 64 individuals with LMNA variants was a median of seven years [Brodt et al 2013]. Additional reports of large prospective longitudinal natural history studies of LMNA-related DCM are not yet available. The Heart Failure Society of America and Heart Rhythm Society (in conjunction with the European Heart Rhythm Association) have commissioned guideline documents for the management of genetic cardiomyopathies that included specific mention of LMNA-related DCM [Hershberger et al 2009, Ackerman et al 2011]. Elements of the guidelines include the following: Because of the complexity of treatment interventions in LMNA-related DCM in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, referral to centers with special expertise in cardiovascular genetic medicine should be considered. Consider therapy based on cardiac phenotype (i.e., DCM or arrhythmia). With an established arrhythmia or known risk of arrhythmia, consider ICD implantation before the ejection fraction falls below 35%. Note that this recommendation was developed in the Heart Failure Society guidelines in large part because of the risk for lethal arrhythmias in persons with an LMNA pathogenic variant who have systolic function well above a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%, the usual measure of systolic dysfunction below which ICDs are indicated in most US guidelines. The management of LMNA-related DCM is focused on treatment of conduction system disease, arrhythmia, and DCM. 
            Cardiac conduction system disease and arrhythmias Chronic atrial fibrillation unresponsive to cardioversion is treated with anticoagulants and agents for ventricular rate control. Other symptomatic supraventricular arrhythmias are treated with pharmacologic agents, and at times are augmented with electrophysiologic intervention (e.g., atrial or atrioventricular node ablations). Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias or asymptomatic but significant heart block is treated with an implantable electronic pacemaker. However, when a device is to be implanted, use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) rather than an electronic pacemaker has been advocated and should be strongly considered, as the risk of mortality from sudden cardiac death usually accompanies supraventricular arrhythmias and conduction system disease. Sudden cardiac death presumably results from lethal tachyarrhythmias despite the presence of a pacemaker to treat bradyarrhythmias [van Berlo et al 2005, Meune et al 2006], and for this reason use of an ICD has been advocated for LMNA-related cardiomyopathy with significant conduction system disease and/or arrhythmia regardless of the left ventricular ejection fraction [Hershberger et al 2009]. Symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and resuscitated sudden cardiac death are treated with an ICD and drug therapy as needed. When DCM is present and the left ventricular ejection fraction is less than 35%, an ICD should be implanted following the usual guidelines [Yancy et al 2013]. 
            LMNA-related DCM Treatment of symptomatic DCM, including heart failure, is pharmacologic with ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, diuretics, and other conventional approaches, as summarized in Yancy et al [2013] (full text). With progressive deterioration in left ventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction <30%) while still in sinus rhythm, some experts recommend full anticoagulation to prevent the development of left ventricular mural thrombus and embolic events including stroke. Cardiac transplantation or other advanced therapies should be considered with progressive DCM, advancing heart failure, and otherwise refractory disease in persons receiving comprehensive cardiovascular care from experts in the field [Yancy et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Whether conventional medical therapy (e.g., ACE inhibitors, beta blockers) is able to ameliorate or prevent DCM or heart failure in LMNA-related DCM has not been formally tested and is therefore unknown. Implantable cardiac defibrillators or pacemakers are highly effective in preventing sudden cardiac death.

Surveillance

 Screening and identification of DCM before the onset of symptoms enables the initiation of medical therapy that may delay disease progression. Individuals with an LMNA pathogenic variant who are found to have any ECG abnormality should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation for disease progression at least annually [Brodt et al 2013]. This should include, minimally, an ECG, 24- or 48-hour rhythm monitoring, and measurement of ventricular function. Asymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic LMNA variant should undergo cardiovascular evaluation (medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG) every one to two years and/or whenever new symptoms arise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Drugs (e.g., beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, others) that exacerbate heart block, if present, should be avoided in LMNA-related DCM unless an electronic pacemaker is in place.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 When the LMNA pathogenic variant has been identified in a family, molecular genetic testing can be offered to relatives at risk in order to facilitate prompt diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment in those in whom the LMNA pathogenic variant has been detected. If molecular genetic testing is not possible, the first-degree relatives of a proband with LMNA-related DCM should be evaluated annually by medical history, physical examination, echocardiogram, and ECG to determine if any have detectable DCM and/or conduction system disease. Note: Because the age of onset is variable and penetrance is reduced, a normal baseline echocardiogram and ECG in a first-degree relative who has not undergone molecular genetic testing does not rule out LMNA-related DCM in that individual, and the recommendations set forth in Surveillance should be followed. Any abnormal cardiovascular test results in a relative of a proband with a known LMNA pathogenic variant should be followed up with a full cardiovascular assessment to evaluate for any acquired causes of disease (e.g., coronary artery disease). Results on screening tests that do not meet criteria for DCM but do show some abnormality (e.g., left ventricular enlargement but normal function; decreased ejection fraction but normal-sized left ventricle) may reflect variable expression of LMNA-related DCM in that relative. Targeted genetic testing to clarify the diagnosis as well as close surveillance (e.g., cardiovascular testing every 1-2 years) for progression of cardiovascular disease is recommended for such individuals. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy is contraindicated in women with DCM because of the significantly increased mortality with pregnancy in DCM. Women with DCM who become pregnant should be followed by a high-risk obstetrician. At-risk women with unknown genetic status should undergo a cardiovascular evaluation and be offered genetic counseling prior to pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.