http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dcx

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the individual clinical manifestation of a DCX-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic/neuropediatric evaluation, including EEG and cerebral MRI Developmental assessment including assessment of motor skills, cognition, and speech Ophthalmologic evaluation Feeding and swallowing assessment in individuals lacking head control or the ability to sit without support

Treatment of Manifestations

 Epileptic seizures require antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Individual treatment strategies should be developed depending on the type and frequency of seizures, EEG results, and responsiveness. In addition, appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life for individuals with classic lissencephaly. Feeding problems in newborns may require special strategies including placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube to deal with weak or uncoordinated sucking. Physical therapy helps to maintain and promote mobility and prevent contractures. Special adaptive chairs or positioners may be required. Occupational therapy may help improve fine motor skills and oral motor control. A full range of educational training and enrichment programs should be available.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Adequate antiepileptic treatment is important to reduce the number of seizures, which may be associated with irreversible and life-threatening complications.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Monitoring of seizure activity by regular neurologic examination and EEG In the event of new neurologic findings or neurologic deterioration, evaluation for seizures Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference as well as assessment of psychomotor development as a part of regular health maintenance evaluations Monitoring of orthopedic complications including foot deformity and scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Episodically, callosotomy (surgical disconnection of the cerebral hemispheres by cutting through the corpus callosum) had been reported to improve drop attacks in persons with SBH [Landy et al 1993]. In contrast individuals with focal seizures appear not to benefit from focal resection of epileptogenic tissue [Bernasconi et al 2001].