http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ddon

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy (DDON) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: 
Affected males Neurologic evaluation for dystonia and ataxia Screening developmental assessment in children for early intervention and special educational planning Formal audiologic assessment Speech and language evaluation for assessment of speech therapy requirements Ophthalmologic evaluation, including ERG In adults, evaluation for dementia and/or psychiatric disturbance Clinical genetics consultation 
Carrier females Audiologic assessment Neurologic evaluation for focal dystonia Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Educational. Educational programs appropriate to the developmental and sensory deficits, including training in tactile sign language, should be provided. Audiologic. Hearing aids have been used in affected males with only variable success [Tranebjaerg et al 1995], probably because of the central location of the auditory damage. The use of cochlear implantation (CI), reported in one instance, had a dubious outcome in a four year-old boy with immunodeficiency and DDON syndrome caused by a de novo deletion of exon 1 of TIMM8A and deletion of exons 17-19 of BTK [Brookes et al 2008]. Dystonia. Dystonia and associated neck pain and spasticity improved over a two-year period in two individuals treated with GABA β-agonists [Kreisel et al 2004]. In contrast, symptoms did not seem to improve with treatment with levodopa, carbamazepine, or trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride [Ujike et al 2001]. Favorable short-term outcome as assessed by the Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale from pallidal deep brain stimulation has been reported in two cases of DDON. However, longer-term benefit in additional patients has not yet been reported [Romito et al 2011, Cif et al 2012]. Ophthalmologic. Spectacle correction is appropriate where indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Agammaglobulinemia (see X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia). Management focuses on prevention of bacterial infections with the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Long-term follow-up to monitor the highly variable rate of progression and degree of involvement of different organ systems Regular neurologic evaluations to follow the progression of dystonia and consider pharmacologic treatment Annual developmental and speech/language assessment in childhood, with appropriate adaptation of educational programming Annual audiologic assessment Regular assessment for dementia and/or psychiatric manifestations, with initiation of appropriate care or treatment

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Live viral vaccines should be avoided if agammaglobulinemia is present.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.