

Management



Treatment of Manifestations

 Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required. An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss. The ultimate goal in the evaluation and treatment of a child with hereditary hearing loss and deafness is mainstream schooling. Research shows that diagnosis by age three months and habilitation by six months makes this goal possible for children with mild-moderate hearing loss. Cochlear implantation in children with severe-to-profound deafness who are part of mainstream education leads to social functioning and educational attainment that is indistinguishable from normal-hearing peers [Loy et al 2010, Langereis & Vermeulen 2015]. Recent research has focused on cochlear implant performance based on the gene involved. Due to the genetic heterogeneity of deafness, large sample sizes are difficult to obtain for performance on a per-gene basis. However, the data are clear that individuals with GJB2-related hearing loss (see Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss and Deafness, DFNB1) have excellent cochlear implant outcomes that are significantly better than those of individuals with environmental causes of deafness [Yoshida et al 2013, Abdurehim et al 2017]. In adults, cochlear implant performance may be compromised when the genetic defect affects the auditory nerve itself; however, this hypothesis requires further research [Shearer et al 2017]. DFNX3 is characterized by a mixed conductive-sensorineural hearing loss, the conductive component of which is caused by stapedial fixation. In contrast to other types of conductive hearing loss, surgical correction of DFNX3-related hearing loss can compromise hearing. An abnormal communication between the cerebrospinal fluid and perilymph can lead to fluid leakage ("perilymphatic gusher") at surgery and complete loss of hearing upon fenestration or removal of the stapes footplate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Whenever a child presents with progressive sensorineural hearing loss and progressive ataxia, with or without neurologic or cutaneous symptoms, biotinidase deficiency should be considered, with initiation of treatment as early as possible to prevent irreversible sequelae.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae. Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies. In contrast, early auditory intervention is effective – whether through amplification, otologic surgery, or cochlear implantation [Smith et al 2005]. Although decreased cognitive skills and performance in mathematics and reading are associated with deafness, examination of persons with hereditary hearing loss has shown that these deficiencies are not intrinsically linked to the cause of the deafness. For example, assessment of cognitive skills in individuals with GJB2-related hearing loss reveals a normal Hiskey IQ and normal reading performance after cochlear implantation [Bauer et al 2003]. Thus, early identification and timely intervention is essential for optimal cognitive development in children with prelingual deafness.

Surveillance

 Sequential audiologic examinations are essential to: Document the stability or progression of the hearing loss; Identify and treat superimposed hearing losses, such as middle ear effusion. In a person with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss caused by pathogenic variants in SLC26A4, the hearing loss can progress and annual audiometric testing may be warranted. Additionally, thyroid function should be followed if the diagnosis is consistent with Pendred syndrome.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, persons with documented hearing loss should be counseled appropriately.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 At a minimum, all children at risk for hereditary deafness and hearing loss should receive screening audiometry. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.