http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/del16p11_2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion, the following are recommended: Routine clinical examination, including dysmorphology examination and broad review of all organ systems Measurement of height and weight Evaluate for hypertension and diabetes in patients who are overweight or obese Developmental assessment with cognitive and behavioral testing,including neuropsychological testing by a clinical psychologist Consultation with a neurologist (with possible EEG and MRI) if history suggests possible seizures Consideration of brain MRI for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, oropharyngeal dysfunction, or other manifestations of brain stem dysfunction Diagnostic radiograph of the spine to evaluate for vertebral anomalies/scoliosis Consideration of evaluation and echocardiogram by a cardiologist if a heart murmur is detected Audiologic testing Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Manifestations of the 16p11.2 recurrent microdeletion are variable, and treatment should be targeted to the specific findings identified. Early diagnosis and provision of therapies facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists (sue.g.,a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist) is recommended based on specific symptoms or signs. Neurodevelopmental disabilities including ASD. Interventions may include speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. Because of the high incidence of expressive language delays, speech therapy and augmentative and assistive means of communication should be considered early. Guidelines for management of individuals with ASD are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers et al 2007] (full text). Seizures. Choice of antiepileptic medication is guided by patient age, seizure type, EEG and imaging findings, side effect profiles, and response to treatment. No specific antiepileptic medications have been identified to be most effective. Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is responsive to low doses of carbamazepine and phenytoin. Obesity and overweight. It is important to initiate weight management and nutrition counseling in young children before excessive weight gain begins. Control food intake with normal portion sizes and limitation of food intake between meals. Maintain an active lifestyle. Increased calories are specifically ingested in the absence of hunger and suggest that close supervision of portion size and meal times can be beneficial. Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia. Brain and spine MRI are indicated for new or progressive symptoms suggestive of a Chiari I malformation or syringomyelia, including sleep apnea, dysarthria, dysphagia, gait disturbance, and scoliosis.

Surveillance

 Routine developmental surveillance and screening are recommended because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism. See the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines on surveillance and screening to identify patients with developmental disorders in general [Council on Children with Disabilities 2006] and autism in particular [Johnson et al 2007] and recommendations for management of children with ASD [Myers et al 2007] (Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). Surveillance should include the following: Monitoring of height, weight, and BMI Monitoring for abnormal movements, staring spells, or other events of concern for possible seizures Monitoring for headache (especially occipital), neck pain, and other symptoms of brain stem or spinal cord dysfunction that could indicate Chiari malformations/cerebellar ectopia, and neurologic consultation and brain MRI if indicated Clinical screening for scoliosis until the age of skeletal maturity Annual evaluation and monitoring of hearing in first three years of life Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations and facilitate long-term monitoring for emerging medical or mental health concerns

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Some medications used to treat behavioral problems (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine) may lead to excessive weight gain. When possible, use medications that are not associated with weight gain.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.