http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/del1p36

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 1p36 deletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Measurements of growth parameters and plotting on standard growth charts Note: No growth charts are available specifically for 1p36 deletion syndrome. Physical and neurologic examination Evaluation of cognitive, language, and motor development and social skills Examination of the heart (auscultation, electrocardiogram, echocardiography) in infancy Waking/sleeping video-EEG-polygraphic studies (mainly in infancy) to detect infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia Evaluation for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux with referral to a dysphagia team Ophthalmology consultation in infancy or at diagnosis even in the absence of overt anomalies Physical examination for skeletal anomalies (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry); if anomalies are present, referral for orthopedic and physical therapy evaluation Comprehensive otolaryngologic evaluation and audiologic screening (brain stem auditory evoked responses) as early as possible to allow appropriate interventions Renal function testing and renal ultrasonography in infancy to detect structural renal anomalies Periodic thyroid function screening Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Intellectual disability. Enrollment in a personalized rehabilitation program with attention to motor development, cognition, communication, and social skills is appropriate [Battaglia et al 2008]. Use of sign language enhances communication skills and does not inhibit the appearance of speech. Early intervention and, later, appropriate school placement are essential. Seizures. Up to 25% of persons with 1p36 deletion syndrome develop infantile spasms associated with a hypsarrhythmic EEG; the spasms are responsive to ACTH. In most individuals, all seizure types are well controlled by standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), provided that the first-choice drug is started as early as possible. Feeding difficulties. Feeding therapy with attention to oral motor skills is appropriate. Special feeding techniques or devices, e.g., the "Haberman feeder," can be used for feeding a hypotonic infant/child without a cleft palate or those with an unrepaired cleft palate. Gavage feeding is recommended for those with poorly coordinated swallow. Gastroesophageal reflux should be addressed in a standard manner. In one study, a few individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome were managed with gastrostomy [Heilstedt et al 2003b]. Congenital heart defects are usually not complex and are amenable to repair. "Non-compaction" cardiomyopathy responds well to the standard pharmacotherapy (e.g., furosemide, captopril, digoxin) [Battaglia et al 2008]. Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in the standard manner. Visual inattentiveness, reported in up to 64% of individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome, can be treated with an appropriate rehabilitation program [Bolognini et al 2005, Battaglia et al 2008]. Skeletal abnormalities (e.g., scoliosis, lower-limb asymmetry) need to be addressed on an individual basis. Early treatment (both physical therapy and surgery) is suggested. Hearing loss is treated with a trial of hearing aids. Other. Structural anomalies (e.g., gastrointestinal, renal) should be addressed in a standard manner. Hypothyroidism is treated in a standard manner.

Surveillance

 Systematic follow-up allows for adjustment of rehabilitation and treatment as skills improve or deteriorate and medical needs change [Battaglia et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.