

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete medical history to include evidence of any congenital malformations, seizure disorder, or behavioral problems Complete physical and dysmorphology examination Determination of head circumference, height, weight, and other anthropometric measurements Specialty evaluation of obesity or failure to thrive Multidisciplinary developmental and neurologic evaluation to assess motor and cognitive skills as well as autism, autism spectrum behaviors, and other behavioral issues Echocardiogram to evaluate for congenital cardiac anomaly Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for possible Wilms tumor, renal malformation, or other renal problems Ophthalmology evaluation for strabismus and/or refractive errors Audiologic assessment for possible hearing loss Brain imaging studies (MRI, CT scan) in individuals with abnormal neurologic findings EEG for evaluation of seizures and treatment monitoring X-ray to evaluate for the presence of scoliosis and skeletal anomalies examination. While the clinical implications of osteopenia have not been studied in the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, clinicians should be aware that this is a common finding. x-rays should be performed at diagnosis and should be repeated as warranted by clinical examination. The youngest individual with osteopenia in the authors' series is age three years. Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Depending on the age and presenting concerns of the individual with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome, care from specialists in the following areas is often necessary: medical genetics, speech pathology, occupational and physical therapy, child development, neurology, cardiology, gastroenterology, nutrition/feeding in cases of failure to thrive, ophthalmology, and audiology. Medical care may be coordinated by a medical geneticist or other health care professional skilled at managing patients with complex needs. Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program. Most school-age children benefit from an individualized educational program (IEP) with input from a multi-specialty group of physical, occupational, and speech therapists with pediatric assessment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 At this time, it is not known why many individuals with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome are obese. To the extent that it is feasible, the authors recommend an active lifestyle and good dietary habits to help avoid development of obesity.

Surveillance

 Jones et al [2011] suggested that individuals with 2q deletions sparing 2q37.1 likely have a less than 5% risk of developing Wilms tumor; therefore, they do not recommend surveillance for the development of Wilms tumor in these individuals. Wilms tumor screening can be considered for individuals with deletions including 2q37.1, although screening intervals are not delineated. Wilms tumor screening protocols in individuals with WAGR syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome include abdominal ultrasounds every three months until mid-childhood [Beckwith 1998]. The practitioner caring for an infant or young child with a 2q37 deletion is encouraged to monitor the literature for updates. When the 2q37 microdeletion is identified in early childhood, screening for the development of renal cysts at age four years and again at puberty is suggested [Falk & Casas 2007]. The following are also appropriate: Ongoing routine pediatric care Periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information about the syndrome Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric evaluation to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is reasonable to perform genetic testing of any young child at risk, so that Wilms tumor surveillance can be considered in those with a deletion that includes 2q37.1. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.