http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dent

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Dent disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of renal function (measured or estimated GFR; urine protein excretion) Assessment for nephrocalcinosis and kidney stones by imaging studies For those with evidence of renal stones or nephrocalcinosis: urine studies for kidney stone risk factors (including calcium and citrate excretion) Assessment of risk for bone disease (serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase) Note: Elevated alkaline phosphatase has been reported in all individuals with clinical rickets [Wrong et al 1994]. For those with evidence of bone disease and/or growth delay: more complete assessment of bone health (i.e., serum vitamin D concentration and parathyroid hormone [PTH] level; x-rays of long bones for evidence of osteomalacia) In children, evaluation of stature using standard growth charts Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No guidelines have been established for treatment of Dent disease. The primary goals of treatment are to decrease hypercalciuria, prevent kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis, and delay the progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Interventions aimed at decreasing hypercalciuria and preventing kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis have not been tested in randomized controlled trials. Thiazide diuretics in doses greater than 0.4 mg/kg/day have decreased urinary calcium excretion by more than 40% in boys with Dent disease [Raja et al 2002, Blanchard et al 2008]. However, frequent side effects included hypokalemia, volume depletion, and cramping. Careful dosing and close monitoring for these side effects are necessary. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) have been used in children with proteinuria to prevent or delay further loss of kidney function; however, their effectiveness has not been clear. Note: Treatment with ACE inhibitors or ARB may be somewhat beneficial, at least in those with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) on kidney biopsy, as angiotensin blockade is not thought to significantly affect LMW proteinuria. Although a high citrate diet has been shown to slow progression of CKD in clcn5 knockout mice [Cebotaru et al 2005] and has been used in the treatment of Dent disease, no human trials have proven its effectiveness. Note: Citrate is commonly used in Lowe syndrome to treat the metabolic acidosis resulting from renal tubular acidosis. If males with Dent disease progress to ESRD, renal replacement therapy becomes necessary. Hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and renal transplantation are appropriate options. Because Dent disease manifestations are largely localized in the kidney, the disease will not recur.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Bone disease has not been a prominent component of Dent disease in recent case series. When present it has been reported to respond to vitamin D supplementation and phosphorus repletion in those with elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels [Wrong et al 1994]. Limited reports suggest that growth failure can be successfully treated with human growth hormone without adversely affecting kidney function [Sheffer-Babila et al 2008].

Surveillance

Renal function measured as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) should be monitored at least annually together with the parameters used to stage chronic kidney disease (i.e., blood pressure, hematocrit/hemoglobin, urinary calcium excretion, and serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations). More frequent visits and monitoring for complications of chronic kidney disease (i.e., hypertension, anemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism) as well as consideration of intensified treatment of cardiovascular risk factors may be indicated if GFR falls below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD Stage 3B).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Exposure to potential renal toxins (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and intravenous contrast agents) should be avoided, especially if renal function is below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (CKD stage 3B).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate male relatives at risk for Dent disease 1 (caused by mutation of CLCN5) or Dent disease 2 (caused by mutation of OCRL) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, measurement of urinary excretion of low molecular-weight proteins (e.g., alpha 1 microglobulin, retinol binding protein) is a sensitive and specific test. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.