http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/df-lamm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital deafness with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia, and microdontia (LAMM syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended:

ENT evaluation with CT/MRI of the temporal bones to evaluate inner ear anomalies that may influence habilitation options (see Treatment of Manifestations)

Audiology evaluation

Dental evaluation

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for kidney anomalies, including unilateral stenosis of the uretero-pelvic junction

Ophthalmology evaluation for strabismus and hypermetropia

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Ideally, the team evaluating and treating a deaf individual should include an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf, a neurologist, and a pediatric ophthalmologist may also be required.

Enrollment in appropriate early intervention programs and educational programs for the hearing-impaired

An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, brain stem implants, and cochlear implantation:

Consideration of vibrotactile hearing devices or brain stem implants for individuals with complete labyrinth aplasia [Riazuddin et al 2011]

Evaluation for cochlear implantation in those individuals with a cochleovestibular nerve and a cochlear remnant. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children over age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss.

Routine ophthalmologic management of strabismus, if present

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Regardless of its etiology, uncorrected hearing loss has consistent sequelae: Auditory deprivation through age two years is associated with poor reading performance, poor communication skills, and poor speech production. Educational intervention is insufficient to completely remediate these deficiencies.

In contrast, early auditory intervention (whether through amplification or cochlear implantation) is effective (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). However, the presence of severe inner ear anomalies and Michel aplasia in individuals with LAMM syndrome limits auditory habilitation options.

Delayed gross development (presumably the result of impaired balance and profound deafness) increases the risk for accidents and trauma.

The risk for accidents can be addressed in part by use of visual or vibrotactile alarm systems in homes and schools.

The risk for pedestrian injury can be reduced by choosing routes with visual displays of crosswalks.

Anticipatory education of parents, health providers, and educational programs about hazards can help address the risk for falls [Gaebler-Spira & Thornton 2002, Chakravarthy et al 2007].

Surveillance



Yearly evaluations by the multi-disciplinary team mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Noise exposure is a well-recognized environmental cause of hearing loss. Since this risk can be minimized by avoidance, individuals with LAMM syndrome and a residual cochlea should be counseled appropriately.

Because of the high risk for disorientation when submerged in water, swimming needs to be undertaken with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Since some individuals with LAMM syndrome can have normal-appearing ears, an audiology evaluation is recommended for sibs at 25% risk to allow early diagnosis and treatment of hearing impairment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.