

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of hearing loss and needs in an individual diagnosed with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss, the following are recommended: Audiometry, including bone conduction testing Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 When hearing loss is mild to moderate, fitting of hearing aids to provide improved amplification is warranted. When the hearing loss becomes severe to profound, cochlear implants (CIs) can be considered. In individuals with preserved or relatively good low-frequency hearing and severe-to-profound high-frequency loss, a short electrode may be considered. Short electrodes boost the high frequencies while preserving residual low-frequency hearing. For school-age children or adolescents, special assistance for the hearing impaired may be warranted and, where available, should be offered.

Surveillance

 Audiograms should be obtained on an annual basis to follow progression of hearing loss.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The rate of progression of high-frequency hearing loss can be reduced by encouraging individuals with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss to avoid exposure to loud noise in the workplace and during recreation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Determining in infancy or early childhood whether a relative of a person with DFNA2 nonsyndromic hearing loss has inherited the KCNQ4 deafness-related variant allows for early support and management of the child and the family. Evaluations may include: Molecular genetic testing if the deafness-related KCNQ4 variant in the family is known. Audiometry and sequence analysis of KCNQ4, or a multi-gene panel [Kothiyal et al 2010, Shearer et al 2010, Shearer & Smith 2015] that includes KCNQ4 if the deafness-related variant in the family is not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.