

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of involvement in an individual diagnosed with OTOF-related deafness, the following evaluations are recommended (see Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview): Assessment of auditory acuity (ABR emission testing, pure tone audiometry) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 See Hereditary Deafness and Hearing Loss Overview for details. Hearing habilitation
for those with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss Hearing aids should be fitted as soon as possible. Cochlear implantation (CI) should be considered as soon as possible. Case reports have shown good outcomes of CI in individuals with OTOF-related deafness [Rouillon et al 2006, Wu et al 2011] and reviewed in Eppsteiner et al [2012]. Note: In the first one or two years of life, OTOF-related deafness can appear to be an auditory neuropathy based on electrophysiologic testing; however, with time electrophysiologic testing becomes more consistent with a cochlear defect. Distinguishing between an auditory neuropathy and a cochlear defect is important as cochlear implants may be of marginal value in persons with auditory neuropathy such as that observed in deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy (DDON) [Brookes et al 2008] as well as individuals with deafness caused by pathogenic variants in spiral ganglion-expressed genes [Eppsteiner et al 2012]. Educational programs designed for individuals with hearing impairment are appropriate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 For individuals with TS-NSAN: Prevent febrile episodes. Avoid the level of exercise and/or ambient conditions that would cause body temperature to rise. Treat febrile episodes as quickly as possible to return body temperature to normal. Educate individuals and their caregivers that the onset of hearing loss may be the first sign of a pyretic/infectious event requiring treatment [Starr et al 1998]. Appropriate precautions including avoidance of potentially dangerous or noisy situations should be encouraged.

Surveillance

 For individuals with nonsyndromic bilateral congenital hearing loss: Examine semiannually or annually by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment. Repeat audiometry initially every three to six months to determine whether hearing loss is progressive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with TS-NSAN. Avoid excessive body temperatures when possible. Follow-up studies have not demonstrated the success of preventative measures as an effective long-term treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband shortly after birth by molecular genetic testing of the OTOF deafness-related variants found in the proband so that appropriate early support and management can be provided to the child and family. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this condition.