

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DGUOK deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended. 
            For both neonatal multisystem diseases and isolated hepatic disease
           Evaluation of hepatic status by a physician familiar with the care of children with liver failure. Initial testing should include measurement of serum concentrations of ALT, AST, GGT, bilirubin, albumin, and coagulation profile. Hepatic sonography and AFP to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma. AFP is a sensitive, but not specific, marker used to differentiate hepatocellular carcinoma from nonmalignant liver disease. Although the value of a highly elevated serum concentration of AFP in the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma in DGUOK deficiency is not known, the possibility of hepatocellular carcinoma should be considered in individuals with a solid tumor detected by abdominal ultrasound examination and a highly increased serum AFP concentration [Freisinger et al 2006]. Nutritional assessment by a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic failure Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor 
            Additional evaluation for neonatal multisystem diseases
           Measurement of plasma lactate and fasting blood sugar Comprehensive neurologic examination and developmental/cognitive assessment. Neuroimaging may be considered. Additional evaluation for isolated hepatic disease. Urine analysis and evaluation for urine amino acids to evaluate for renal involvement

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management requires a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, child development, nutrition, and clinical genetics.

Management of Neurologic Manifestations in Neonatal Multisystem Disease

 Hypotonia may be significant. Therefore, ongoing monitoring of gross motor development and skills with the intervention of appropriate therapies is appropriate in these children.

Management of Liver Involvement in both Neonatal Multisystem Disease and Isolated Hepatic Disease

 Management of liver disease should be guided by the results of initial evaluation in consultation with a hepatologist. Children with cholestatic liver disease or renal disease are at significant risk of nutritional insufficiency; therefore, a dietician with experience in managing children with hepatic and renal dysfunctions should be involved in their care: Formulas with an enriched medium-chain-triglyceride content may provide better nutritional support for infants with cholestasis than formulas with predominantly long-chain triglycerides [Feranchak & Sokol 2007]. Cornstarch may reduce symptomatic hypoglycemia in individuals with isolated hepatic disease. Fractional meals and enteral nutrition during the night can result in good nutritional control [Dimmock et al 2008b]. Affected individuals often develop life-threatening liver failure, but the benefits of liver transplantation are disputable because of the frequent severe neurologic involvement due to the underlying mitochondrial disease. A total of 14 individuals with DGUOK deficiency were reported to have undergone liver transplantation. The one-year survival rate was 64%. Five of the 14 survived longer than five years. Eight of the 14 died within two years of transplantation from severe pulmonary hypertension (3/8), neurologic degeneration (2/8), procedure-related complications (2/8), and early postoperative multi-organ failure (1/8). Although survival after liver transplantation for DGUOK deficiency is lower than survival after liver transplantation for other indications, a significant proportion of affected individuals survived more than five years despite initial neurologic abnormalities. Nevertheless, a decision to perform liver transplantation for individuals with DGUOK deficiency remains difficult because neurologic manifestations may occur and/or worsen after liver transplantation despite their absence before transplantation [Grabhorn et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Nutritional deficiencies such as essential fatty acid deficiency and fat-soluble vitamin deficiency need to be prevented. Specific management requires a dietician experienced in the management of individuals with liver disease. Affected individuals need to be supplemented with fat-soluble vitamins and essential fatty acids [Feranchak & Sokol 2007]. Because they have not been associated with clinical decompensation in persons with DGUOK deficiency, routine immunizations (including influenza vaccine) are recommended at this time for all individuals with DGUOK deficiency and their household contacts.

Surveillance

 No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition. Neonatal multisystem disease: Hepatic function Nutritional status Developmental and neurologic assessment AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma. Isolated hepatic disease Hepatic function Nutritional status Evidence of renal disease (proteinuria and aminoaciduria) AFP and hepatic sonography to monitor for hepatocellular carcinoma

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.