http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/diamond-b

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), the following are recommended: Evaluation by a hematologist Evaluation by a clinical geneticist for congenital malformations and to obtain a detailed family history Ophthalmology evaluation for glaucoma and cataract for individuals on steroid therapy Orthopedic evaluation for individuals with clinical findings suggestive of Klippel-Feil anomaly or Sprengel deformity Orthopedic evaluation for individuals with upper limb and/or thumb anomalies Ultrasound examination of the kidney and urinary tract Evaluation by a nephrologist and a urologist, as appropriate Evaluation by a cardiologist including echocardiography Developmental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

 Eventually, 40% of individuals are steroid dependent, 40% are transfusion dependent, and 20% go into remission [Chen et al 2005, Vlachos et al 2008]. Corticosteroid administration. Corticosteroids can initially improve the red blood count in approximately 80% of affected individuals. The recommended corticosteroid is prednisone with a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day given orally once a day in the morning, beginning after age twelve months. An increase in hemoglobin concentration is usually seen in two to four weeks. Corticosteroids may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose. Monitoring of blood counts is needed to ensure that the red cell hemoglobin concentration remains at 80-100 g/L, the minimum required for transfusion independence. The corticosteroid maintenance dose varies and can be extremely low in some individuals. The recommended maximum maintenance dose is ≤0.5 mg/kg/day or ≤1 mg/kg every other day. If after approximately one month the recommended steroid dose does not sustain the red cell hemoglobin concentration in an acceptable range, the corticosteroids should be tapered and discontinued. Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006]. Red blood cell transfusion. If the individual is resistant to corticosteroid therapy, chronic transfusion with packed red blood cells is necessary. The goal of transfusion therapy is a red cell hemoglobin concentration of 80-100 g/L, which is usually adequate for maintaining growth and development [Vlachos et al 2008, Vlachos & Muir 2010]. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for DBA. Persons with DBA who are transfusion dependent or develop other cytopenias are often treated with HSCT. In one study of 61 persons with DBA who underwent bone marrow transplantation (BMT), the majority (67%) received their bone marrow grafts from an HLA-matched related donor. The three-year probability of overall survival was 64% (range 50%-74%). Transplantation from an HLA-identical sib donor was associated with better survival [Roy et al 2005]. The Diamond-Blackfan Anemia Registry of North America describes 36 individuals who underwent HSCT: 21 HLA-matched sib stem cell transplants and 15 alternative donor stem cell transplants. Survival greater than five years from SCT for allogeneic sib transplants was 72.7% ±10.7% versus survival greater than five years from alternative donor transplants of 17.1% ±11.9% [Lipton et al 2006, Vlachos et al 2008]. Survival was the best (92.3%) for children younger than age ten years transplanted using an HLA-matched sib. Note: (1) It is recommended that the affected individual, sibs, and parents undergo HLA typing at the time of diagnosis of DBA to identify the most suitable bone marrow donor in the event that HSCT would be required. (2) Because penetrance of DBA is incomplete, it is possible that a relative considered as a bone marrow donor could have a pathogenic variant but not manifest findings of DBA. (3) Relatives with a pathogenic variant, regardless of their clinical status, are not suitable bone marrow donors, because their donated bone marrow may fail or not engraft in the recipient. Cancer treatment. Treatment of malignancies should be coordinated by an oncologist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Transfusion iron overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals. The following methods are used both to assess for evidence of transfusion iron overload and to evaluate the effectiveness of iron chelation therapy: Measurement of iron concentration in a liver biopsy specimen, which accurately determines total body iron accumulation MRI for assessing iron loading in the liver and heart Magnetic biosusceptometry (SQUID), which gives a measurement of hepatic iron concentration Note: (1) Although the latter two methods of total iron measurement are noninvasive, they are available at only a limited number of centers and should be correlated with the “gold standard” liver biopsy [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. (2) Routine measurement of serum ferritin concentration is not reliable in detecting iron overload because the serum ferritin concentration does not always correlate with total body iron accumulation. Iron chelation therapy is usually started after ten to 12 transfusions (170-200 mL/kg of packed red blood cells), when serum ferritin concentration reaches 1000-1500 µg/L, or when hepatic iron concentration reaches 6-7 mg/g of dry weight liver tissue. Deferasirox is recommended in individuals age two years or older. It is administered once daily in an oral dose of 20-30 mg/kg/day. Side effects are usually mild and include rash, nausea, creatinine elevation, and rarely proteinuria and transaminase elevation. Patient satisfaction with deferasirox is greater than with desferrioxamine, mostly because of ease of administration [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Porter et al 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. Desferrioxamine is administered four to seven nights a week in an eight- to 12-hour subcutaneous infusion via a portable pump. The recommended initial dose is 40 mg/kg/day; the maximum dose is 50-60 mg/kg/day. The dose and frequency of infusion may be modified using the serum ferritin concentration or the hepatic iron concentration as a guide [Cappellini & Piga 2008, Vlachos et al 2008]. Side effects include ocular and auditory toxicity and growth retardation. Compliance rate is hampered by the demanding administration route and schedule. Note: Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in individuals with DBA [Vlachos et al 2008] because its side effects include neutropenia [Henter & Karlen 2007]. Side effects of corticosteroids include osteoporosis, weight gain, cushingoid appearance, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, growth retardation, pathologic bone fractures, gastric ulcers, cataracts, glaucoma, and increased susceptibility to infection [Alter & Young 1998, Willig et al 1999, Lipton et al 2006]. One of the critical side effects of corticosteroids is growth retardation. If growth is severely impaired, corticosteroids should be stopped and replaced by a short-term red blood cell transfusion regimen [Vlachos et al 2008].

Surveillance

 The following are indicated: Complete blood counts several times a year Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity periodically and if evidence of another cytopenia or failure of current treatment is noted Monitoring of blood pressure in individuals who are steroid dependent Monitoring of growth individuals who are steroid dependent and in those at risk for transfusion iron overload Evaluation by an endocrinologist; recommended for individuals who are steroid dependent and those at risk for transfusion iron overload Cancer surveillance includes the following: In individuals with DBA who are otherwise healthy, every four to six months: an interim history, physical examination, and measurement of blood count If red blood-cell, white blood-cell, or platelet counts fall rapidly, bone marrow aspirate with biopsy and cytogenetic studies (including karyotype and FISH analysis) to look for acquired abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7, and 8 that are associated with certain cancers [Vlachos et al 2008]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Deferiprone is not recommended in the treatment of iron overload in persons with DBA because its side effects include neutropenia [Vlachos et al 2008]. Individuals with DBA, especially those on corticosteroid treatment, should take reasonable precautions to avoid infections, as steroid-dependent individuals are more prone to complications resulting from immune system dysfunction.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual to allow early diagnosis and appropriate monitoring for bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, and related cancers. Evaluations include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; Consideration of other testing (e.g., mean corpuscular volume, eADA, and/or fetal hemoglobin concentration) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known – especially of relatives being considered as bone marrow donors [Vlachos et al 2008]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Management of pregnancy in marrow failure disorders requires obstetricians with expertise in high-risk pregnancies and hematologists with experience with marrow failure syndromes [Alter et al 1999]. During pregnancy the maternal hemoglobin level must be monitored. Use of low-dose aspirin up to 37 weeks’ gestation may help prevent vasculo-placental complications in women with a history of a previous problematic pregnancy [Faivre et al 2006]. A study that surveyed 64 pregnancies in women with DBA found a high incidence of complications in both mothers and children. Risks include the following [Faivre et al 2006]: Intrauterine growth retardation Preeclampsia Retroplacental hematoma In utero fetal death Preterm delivery

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.