

Management

 
          Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis
         To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with diastrophic dysplasia (DTD), the following evaluations are recommended: Cervical films (antero-posterior, lateral, and in flexion-extension) Complete skeletal survey Orthopedic referral Physical therapy consultation Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 In children, the principle is to maintain joint positioning and mobility as much as possible by physical means (physiotherapy and casting, e.g., for clubfeet); however, tightness of joint capsules and ligaments in diastrophic dysplasia makes correction by casting or other physical means difficult. Surgical correction of clubfoot is indicated when the foot deformity makes ambulation impossible; however, surgery needs to be undertaken with caution as deformities tend to recur. Simple tenotomy does not suffice, and more extensive plasty of tarsal bones may be needed [Weiner et al 2008]. The rate of spontaneous correction of cervical kyphosis is rather high, and cervical spine surgery in infancy may be restricted to individuals with clinical or neurophysiologic evidence of spinal cord impingement. Indications for surgical correction of scoliosis have not been established nor have criteria to define a successful surgical outcome [Matsuyama et al 1999, Remes et al 2001]. It should be noted that surgical series are inevitably biased toward more severely affected individuals. Although surgery before puberty may be helpful for those who have developed severe spinal deformity with respiratory compromise or neurologic signs, surgical correction of scoliosis is best postponed until after puberty in the majority of individuals with diastrophic dysplasia [Jalanko et al 2009]. The key issue seems to be the early identification of those individuals at risk for rapid increase in scoliotic curvature. Total arthroplasty of hips and knees decreased pain and increased mobility in a group of adult Finnish individuals with premature degenerative arthrosis [Helenius et al 2003a, Helenius et al 2003b]. The authors concluded that arthroplasty is indicated in "relatively young adults" with DTD. A conservative approach to the treatment of cystic ear swelling is recommended [Cushing et al 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Physical therapy may prevent early joint contractures.

Surveillance

 Annual monitoring of spinal curvature to prevent neurologic complications and joint contractures is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Obesity places an excessive load on the large weight-bearing joints and thus should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Although not specific to DTD, women with severe kyphoscoliosis may experience complications related to thoracic compression in later stages of pregnancy and need to be monitored closely. Kyphoscoliosis can also complicate the use of spinal anaesthetics and consultation with an anaesthesiologist prior to delivery would be advisable.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.