

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dyskeratosis congenita (DC), it is important to note that the clinical spectrum of DC is broad and signs and symptoms develop at various ages and rates. Suggested studies to consider include: Dermatologic. Thorough skin and nail examination Growth and development evaluation Ophthalmic. Thorough examination for complications related to lacrimal duct stenosis, abnormal eyelash growth, and retinal disorders including exudative retinopathy Dental. Baseline evaluation for oral hygiene, leukoplakia, and oral squamous cell cancer Otolaryngology. Baseline evaluation for leukoplakia and squamous cell head/neck cancer Gastrointestinal and hepatic. History of potential swallowing difficulties and/or enteropathy; baseline liver function tests Genitourinary. For males, assessment for urethral stenosis Musculoskeletal. Consideration of baseline bone mineral density scan; history of any joint problems Neurologic. If early-onset neurologic findings (e.g., ataxia) or many of the complications listed above are present, consideration of brain MRI to evaluate for cerebellar hypoplasia or intracranial calcifications 
                Hematologic
               Evaluation by a hematologist to determine if signs of bone marrow failure are present. Evaluation may include complete blood count and bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Consideration of HLA typing of the affected individual, unaffected sibs, and parents in anticipation of possible need for hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) 
                Pulmonary
               Baseline pulmonary function tests (PFTs) including carbon monoxide diffusion capacity Consideration of bubble echocardiography to evaluate for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations Evaluation by a pulmonologist if the individual is symptomatic or PFTs are abnormal 
                Increased risk of cancer
               Evaluation by an otolaryngologist and dentist as soon as the individual is able to cooperate with the examination Gynecologic examination for females starting by age 16 years or when sexually active Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 The specific treatment for DC-related complications must be tailored to the individual. The recommendations in this section were first discussed at a DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and subsequently at a meeting of experts convened to review the publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015] Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials. Affected individuals may have few or many of the complications associated with DC. Comprehensive coordinated care among specialties is required. Bone marrow failure (BMF). Following the model of the Fanconi anemia consensus guidelines [Eiler et al 2008] and updated on the DC treatment guidelines [Savage & Cook 2015], treatment of BMF is recommended if the hemoglobin is consistently below 8 g/dL, platelets lower than 30,000/mm3, and neutrophils below 1000/mm3. If a matched-related donor is available, hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) should be the first consideration for treatment for hematologic problems such as BMF or leukemia regardless of age. HCT from an unrelated donor can be considered, although a trial of androgen therapy (e.g., oxymetholone or danazol) may be considered first [Khincha et al 2014]. Persons with DC may be more sensitive to androgens than individuals with Fanconi anemia, and the dose must be adjusted to reduce side effects such as impaired liver function, virilization, or behavioral problems (e.g., aggression, mood swings). The suggested starting dose of oxymetholone is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day, half the dose used in Fanconi anemia. It may take two to three months at a constant dose to see a hematologic response. Side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, need to be monitored carefully. Baseline and follow-up liver ultrasound examinations should be performed for individuals receiving androgen therapy because of the possibility of liver adenomas and carcinomas, which have been reported in Fanconi anemia and in persons using androgens for benign hematologic diseases or for non-hematologic disorders [Velazquez & Alter 2004]. Hematopoietic growth factors may be useful in BMF. However, splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and splenic rupture have been reported in two individuals with DC receiving androgens and G-CSF [Giri et al 2007]. G-CSF with erythropoietin has occasionally been useful but perhaps should also not be used in combination with androgens [Khincha et al 2014]. HCT is the only curative treatment for severe BMF or leukemia in DC. It should be performed at centers experienced in treating DC. Reported problems include graft failure, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), sepsis, pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, and veno-occlusive disease [Berthou et al 1991, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007] that is caused in part by underlying pulmonary and liver disease [Yabe et al 1997, Dror et al 2003, Brazzola et al 2005, de la Fuente & Dokal 2007, Ostronoff et al 2007]. As a result, long-term survival of persons with DC following HCT has been poor. Reduced-intensity preparative regimens being studied in a few institutions may improve long-term outcomes [Dietz et al 2011, Nishio et al 2011, Vuong et al 2010, Gadalla et al 2013, Algeri et al 2015]. The range of clinical phenotypes seen in DC and the possibility of non-manifesting or very mildly affected heterozygotes within families may complicate the selection of related HCT donors [Fogarty et al 2003, Denny et al 2008]. Potential related HCT donors should be tested either for the pathogenic variant present in the proband or, if the pathogenic variant is not known, for telomere length. Cancer. Specific treatment should be tailored to the type of cancer. Affected individuals undergoing chemotherapy for cancer may be at increased risk for prolonged cytopenias as a result of underlying BMF. This risk has not been quantitated; studies are ongoing. Individuals with DC may be at increased risk for therapy-related pulmonary and hepatic toxicity. Pulmonary function tests and liver function should be monitored carefully. Long-term data on the effects of cancer radiotherapy in DC are not available. Affected individuals may be at increased risk for radiotherapy-related complications based on observations in persons undergoing radiotherapy in HCT [Author, personal observation]. Although the risk of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is high in DC, many persons have abnormal cytogenetic clones and/or morphologic changes consistent with abnormal myelopoiesis but may not have severe cytopenias. Pulmonary fibrosis. The options for therapy in persons with DC and pulmonary fibrosis are primarily supportive care. Lung transplantation may be considered in severe cases, although long-term outcomes have not been studied (see Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with DC should not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.

Surveillance

 The recommendations in this section were discussed at the first DC clinical research workshop in 2008 and updated in 2014 at a consensus conference that led to publication of the first edition of the Dyskeratosis Congenita and Telomere Biology Disorders: Diagnosis and Management Guidelines [Savage et al 2009, Savage & Cook 2015]. Because of the rarity of DC, the recommendations are not based on large-scale clinical trials. 
            Bone marrow failure
           Consider repeating a complete blood count (CBC) once a year if CBCs are normal. CBCs should be obtained more frequently at the discretion of the treating hematologist. Consider annual bone marrow aspirate and biopsy that includes morphologic examination and cytogenetic studies. 
            Individuals on androgen therapy for bone marrow failure
           Check liver function tests prior to starting and then every three months. Perform liver ultrasound examination semiannually for adenomas. Check cholesterol and triglycerides prior to starting and every six months. Cancer surveillance. Most solid tumors develop after the first decade (median age of onset: 28 years). Monthly self-examination for oral, head, and neck cancer Annual cancer screening by an otolaryngologist Annual gynecologic examination Annual skin cancer screening by a dermatologist Pulmonary fibrosis. Perform annual pulmonary function tests starting either at diagnosis or at an age when the individual is able to appropriately perform the test (typically age ~8 years). 
            Oral and dental surveillance
           Schedule routine screening and dental hygiene visits every six months. Maintain good oral hygiene. The individual’s dentist should be made aware of the increased risk of head and neck squamous cell cancers and perform a thorough examination at each visit. Oral leukoplakia should be monitored carefully and suspicious lesions should be biopsied.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 
            Blood transfusions
           Transfusions of red cells or platelets should be avoided or minimized for those who are candidates for HCT. To minimize the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors if HCT is being considered. All blood products should be leukodepleted and irradiated. Radiation. It is prudent to minimize exposure to therapeutic radiation since data on radiation side effects are limited. Androgens and growth factors. The combination of androgens and G-CSF was associated with splenic peliosis (“blood lakes”) and rupture in two individuals; thus, the combination should be avoided [Giri et al 2007]. Cancer prevention. Given the increased susceptibility of individuals with DC to developing leukemias and other malignancies, individuals with DC are advised to avoid toxic agents that have been implicated in tumorigenesis, including smoking.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Telomere length testing; Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Individuals with DC who become pregnant may develop pancytopenia or existing cytopenias may worsen. They should be followed closely by a perinatologist.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Studies of the effectiveness of danazol, a modified testosterone, are underway in DC and the related telomere biology disorders. Danazol may have fewer side effects than oxymetholone. The response and optimal dosing in DC is not yet defined. Studies to improve the clinical and molecular characterization of DC are underway at the National Cancer Institute (marrowfailure.cancer.gov). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.