http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dld-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: In the acute setting, measurement/evaluation of: Blood acid-base status Plasma/serum concentration of lactate, glucose, and ammonia Plasma amino acids Plasma total and free carnitine Urine organic acids Liver function and transaminases (ALT/AST) Liver size via physical examination and/or ultrasonography Cardiac size via echocardiography Clinical genetics consultation After metabolic stability has been achieved: Clinical assessment of physical growth and development status Formal ophthalmologic evaluation if concern for vision loss Brain MRI if clinical concern for Leigh-like syndrome or other structural brain damage Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Consensus recommendations for the management of DLD deficiency do not currently exist. Theoretical difficulties exist for the management of these patients based on the various metabolic pathways affected by the three affected enzyme complexes. In practice, these difficulties have been experienced and make empiric treatment recommendations challenging. DLD pathogenic variants cause variable deficiency in three enzymatic pathways. The treatment for individual enzyme complex deficiencies warrants consideration: Branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex. Management consists primarily of dietary leucine restriction, BCAA-free medical foods, judicious supplementation with isoleucine and valine, and frequent clinical and biochemical monitoring (see MSUD). α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (αKGDH) complex. Due to the rarity of this isolated deficiency, limited information is available for the management of these patients. Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex. Due to defective carbohydrate oxidation, ketogenic diets have become part of regular management in these patients. Additionally, dichloroacetate (DCA) and thiamine supplementation are frequently tried [Patel et al 2012].

Early-Onset Neurologic Presentation

 Review of treatment strategies. The multiple strategies that have been attempted in children with an early-onset neurologic presentation do not appear to significantly alter the natural history of disease. Even with treatment, children often die in the neonatal/infantile period or experience various degrees of chronic neurologic impairment if they survive the initial episode. The individual treatment strategies typically address deficiency of one abnormal enzymatic complex. Protein/BCAA-restriction. Based on decreased BCKDH activity, restriction of protein to recommended dietary allowances (RDA) has been attempted with questionable results. Three of the six reported patients experienced laboratory and/or clinical improvement with the use of protein restriction alone or in combination with medication therapy [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Grafakou et al 2003]. Ketogenic/high-fat diet. Ketogenic/high-fat diets are frequently employed in PDH deficiency [Patel et al 2012] and as a result have been attempted in DLD deficiency. A total of seven patients reported to date have been tried on a ketogenic/high-fat diet: Five had no clinical or biochemical benefit. Of note, two of the five experienced clinical worsening with an increase in acidosis and hypoglycemia [Robinson et al 1981, Craigen 1996]. Two improved clinically. One was treated with lipid infusions (instead of high-dextrose infusions) during acute episodes [Hong et al 1997, Cerna et al 2001]. Carbohydrate tolerance. Patients with PDH deficiency classically present with lactate elevations due to defective carbohydrate oxidation. Although dextrose infusions may theoretically cause further lactate elevations during acute episodes, provision of dextrose-containing IV fluids is essential for the majority of acutely decompensated patients. Only one patient experienced worsening acidosis with increased dextrose concentrations in the TPN [Cerna et al 2001]. Not surprisingly, this patient is one of the two who benefitted from a ketogenic/high-fat diet. Dichloroacetate (DCA). Through its ability to stimulate PDH activity by inhibiting PDH kinase, DCA has long been used to safely treat patients with congenital lactic acidosis, mitochondrial disorders, and PDH deficiency [Stacpoole et al 2008, Patel et al 2012]. A total of five patients have been tried on DCA with four experiencing at least transient decreases in lactic acid elevations [Craigen 1996, Elpeleg et al 1997b, Cerna et al 2001]. Additional therapies used with limited success include: Thiamine Coenzyme Q10 Lipoic acid Riboflavin Biotin Empiric recommendations
for acute management (based on the above review) Goals of therapy should be the correction of metabolic acidosis, promotion of an anabolic/metabolically stable state, maintenance of normoglycemia, and treatment of precipitating factors that may be present. This is typically achieved by the following: Metabolic acidosis should be treated with sodium bicarbonate if bicarbonate is ≤14 mEq/L and/or blood pH <7.2. Promotion of an anabolic state: Maintain serum glucose concentration in the normal range. D10 (half or full-normal saline) with age-appropriate electrolytes should be started at maintenance rate and adjusted based on the presence or absence of increased intracranial pressure or hypoglycemia. Elevation of plasma leucine and increased intracranial pressure are a potential complication of DLD deficiency. Similar to the management of classic MSUD link, overhydration and quickly infused boluses of fluids should be avoided if possible. If provision of dextrose-containing fluids worsens metabolic acidosis, consider decreasing the infusion rate and providing the majority of calories in the form of intralipid. Intralipids can be added to provide additional calories with cautious monitoring for acidemia. Protein should initially be withheld for a maximum of 24 hours to avoid worsening of catabolism. Protein should then be reintroduced gradually. Branched-chain amino acids should be introduced slowly and followed closely with frequent plasma amino acid evaluations. Goal levels/ratios should be similar to those listed in MSUD. Levocarnitine (IV or PO) 50 - 100 mg/kg/d divided three times per day should be given during the acute period. Dichloroacetate (DCA) can be considered and continued if lactate decreases with its introduction. Any precipitating factors (infection, fasting, medications) should be treated/discontinued as soon as possible. If lactic acidosis/encephalopathy persists, dialysis can be considered as it has been successful in DLD deficiency and classic MSUD [Schaefer et al 1999, Quinonez et al 2013].

Hepatic Presentation

 Management of patients with the primarily hepatic presentation typically involves supportive therapy during times of acute liver injury or failure, including the following: Nutritional support in the form of dextrose-containing IV fluids (6-8 mg/kg/min) with age-appropriate electrolytes and/or frequent feedings [Elpeleg et al 1990, Shaag et al 1999, Brassier et al 2013] Correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate Correction of any coagulopathy with fresh frozen plasma Consideration of DCA treatment for lactic acidosis during acute episodes and for chronic management [Aptowitzer et al 1997, Shaag et al 1999] Use of dialysis to treat persistent lactic acidosis and encephalopathy (successfully in one patient) [Elpeleg et al 1990] Avoidance of liver-toxic medications Episodes of catabolic stress (e.g., intercurrent illness, surgical procedures, pregnancy) require the assistance/care of a biochemical geneticist. Limited data exist for chronic management of individuals with the primarily hepatic presentation. Between episodes, patients typically return to baseline and do not require treatment beyond the avoidance of fasting, catabolic stressors, and liver-toxic medications.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 No compelling evidence exists for the prevention of acute episodes, despite multiple attempted dietary strategies and medications. The frequency of acute episodes decreases with age in most patients with DLD deficiency. Although no specific therapy exists to prevent the neurologic dysfunction and/or the hepatic manifestations of DLD deficiency, avoidance of precipitating factors is recommended. As such, empiric recommendations include the following: Provide protein intake at or around RDA and titrate based on growth and plasma amino acid values. See MSUD for the recommended intake and target levels of leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Supplement with levocarnitine if deficient. Avoid fasting, catabolic states, and extremes of dietary intake until dietary tolerance/stressors are identified. Avoid liver-toxic medications.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Age-appropriate immunizations including the influenza vaccine should be provided. Dichloroacetate (DCA) has been associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy; thus, patients receiving this medication require close monitoring [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].

Surveillance

 A patient’s primary care physician and biochemical geneticist should follow growth and development regularly. Developmental delays should be identified and treated as early as possible. Plasma amino acid levels should be regularly followed to guide dietary management by the biochemical geneticist in conjunction with a qualified metabolic nutritionist. Complications of DLD deficiency including hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, and CNS changes require regular surveillance if present. Patients receiving dichloroacetate (DCA) need to be monitored for the development of peripheral neuropathy [Shaag et al 1999, Stacpoole et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Fasting Catabolic stressors Liver-toxic medications

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the DLD pathogenic variants in an affected relative are known, at-risk sibs should undergo molecular genetic testing as soon as possible after birth so that those who have inherited both pathogenic variants can receive appropriate treatment and avoid risk factors that may precipitate an acute event. In some instances, families choose to perform prenatal testing so that treatment can begin shortly after birth for those who have inherited both pathogenic variants. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.