http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dmn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with neonatal diabetes mellitus as a result of pathogenic variants in ABCC8 or KCNJ11, a complete neurologic evaluation should be performed. To establish the extent of disease in an individual with suspected or confirmed pathogenic variants in PDX1, imaging of the pancreas and evaluation of pancreatic exocrine function (stool elastase, serum concentrations of fat-soluble vitamins) should be performed. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor should be obtained early in the evaluation of PNDM.

Treatment of Manifestations

Initial treatment. Rehydration and intravenous insulin infusion should be started promptly after diagnosis, particularly in infants with ketoacidosis. Long-term medical management. An appropriate regimen of subcutaneous insulin administration should be established when the infant is stable and tolerating oral feedings. Few data on the most appropriate insulin preparations for young infants are available. Intermediate-acting insulin preparations (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH]) tend to have a shorter duration of action in infants, possibly because of smaller dose size or higher subcutaneous blood flow. The longer-acting preparations with no significant peak-of-action effect such as Lantus® (glargine) or Levemir® (detemir) may work better in small infants. In individuals with very low insulin requirements, diluted insulin (5 or 10 U/mL) may be more appropriate if used with caution. Some centers recommend the use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for young infants [Polak & Cave 2007] as a safer, more physiologic, and more accurate way of administering insulin. Caution: In general, rapid-acting (lispro and aspart) and short-acting (regular) preparations (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) should be avoided as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events. Extreme caution should be observed when using a diluted insulin preparation in order to avoid dose errors. Identification of a KCNJ11 or ABCC8 pathogenic variant is important for clinical management since most individuals with these pathogenic variants can be treated with oral sulfonylureas. Children with pathogenic variants in KCNJ11 or ABCC8 can be transitioned to therapy with oral sulfonylureas; high doses are usually required (0.4-1.0 mg/kg/day of glibenclamide). Transfer protocols are available at www.diabetesgenes.org. Treatment with sulfonylureas is associated with improved glycemic control [Hattersley & Ashcroft 2005, Pearson et al 2006, Thurber et al 2015, Babiker et al 2016]. Long-term insulin therapy is required for all other causes of PNDM, although mild beneficial effect of oral sulfonylureas in persons with GCK pathogenic variants has been reported [Turkkahraman et al 2008, Hussain 2010]. High caloric intake should be maintained to achieve weight gain. Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is required in persons with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Aggressive treatment and frequent monitoring of blood glucose concentrations is essential to avoid acute complications such as diabetic ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia. Long-term complications of diabetes mellitus can be significantly reduced by maintaining blood glucose concentrations in the appropriate range. The American Diabetes Association recommends the following glycemic goals across all pediatric age-groups [American Diabetes Association 2016a]: Glycemic targets for children younger than age six years: 90-130 mg/dL before meals 90-150 mg/dL at bedtime/overnight Hemoglobin A1c value < 7.5%

Surveillance

Lifelong monitoring (≥4x/day) of blood glucose concentrations is indicated to achieve the goals of therapy. Children with PNDM, particularly those with a pathogenic variant in KCNJ11 or ABCC8, should undergo periodic developmental evaluations. Yearly screening for chronic complications associated with diabetes mellitus should be started after age ten years and should include the following: Urinalysis for microalbuminuria Ophthalmologic examination to screen for retinopathy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In general, rapid-acting insulin preparations (lispro and aspart) as well as short-acting (regular) insulin preparations should be avoided (except when used as a continuous intravenous or subcutaneous infusion) as they may cause severe hypoglycemic events in young children.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

The management of pregnant women with PNDM should conform to the guidelines for treatment of other forms of diabetes during gestation [American Diabetes Association 2016b]. Glycemic control during gestation is not only important to prevent complications in the mother, but also to prevent fetal overgrowth (due to fetal hyperinsulinemia triggered by the excess of maternal glucose crossing the placenta) and associated complications. Referral to a maternal-fetal medicine specialist should be considered. In addition, high resolution ultrasonography and fetal echocardiography should be offered during pregnancy to screen for congenital anomalies in the fetus. Until recently, insulin was the mainstay of therapy of diabetes during pregnancy; however, emerging data support the safety and efficacy of glyburide in the treatment of diabetes during pregnancy [Moretti et al 2008]. Thus, in women with PNDM treated with glyburide before pregnancy, it is reasonable to continue this treatment if appropriate glycemic control can be achieved.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.