

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 6q24-related transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (6q24-TNDM), the following evaluations are recommended: Birth weight, length, and head circumference and any subsequent growth parameters General dysmorphology examination, preferably by a clinical geneticist including evaluation of tongue size and umbilicus Neurologic examination and developmental assessment Investigation of the anatomy of the pancreas by ultrasound examination or MRI Echocardiogram and ultrasound examination of the liver and kidneys to help identify those infants likely to have 6q24-TNDM caused by mutation of ZFP57 Brain MRI scan if evidence of developmental delay or hypotonia Serum glucose concentration C peptide measurement Pancreatic beta cell autoantibody measurements Liver function and thyroid function tests A pediatric endocrinology consultation for follow up of diabetes Clinical genetics consultation Patients with hypomethylation at imprinted loci (HIL) should be evaluated for hypotonia and other neurologic features including epilepsy, congenital heart disease, deafness, renal malformations, and pseudohypoparathyroidism with measurement of serum concentrations of calcium and phosphate and parathyroid hormone testing.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Rehydration and IV insulin on a sliding scale are usually required. Some infants produce some insulin and can be treated by rehydration alone. Subcutaneous injection of insulin is introduced as soon as possible, often within two weeks. Continuous insulin pump therapy (as opposed to intermittent insulin injections) has been used successfully in a number of cases in the UK and France [JP Shield, personal communication]. Successful treatment with subcutaneous insulin glargine has also been reported [Barone et al 2011]. Blood glucose concentration should be monitored and insulin doses changed accordingly as in the standard treatment for diabetes mellitus. Insulin can be discontinued when blood glucose concentrations stabilize. Once diabetes mellitus is in remission, parents need to be alerted to the possibility of recurrence of the diabetes mellitus, particularly during periods of illness. Symptoms such as excessive thirst, polyuria, and repeated bacterial infections should prompt measurement of blood glucose concentration. If diabetes mellitus recurs, treatment may require diet alone, oral agents, or insulin, although the doses of insulin needed tend to be less than those required in type 1 diabetes mellitus (i.e., some residual endogenous insulin remains). It should be noted that patients do not always require treatment with insulin even in the neonatal period. In several patients at relapse, sulphonylureas or diet alone is adequate [Valerio et al 2004]. Note: Macroglossia could potentially cause airway obstruction; macroglossia severe enough to require treatment has not been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The main concerns are related to failure to make the diagnosis soon enough. Dehydration secondary to hyperglycemia can cause serious long-term sequelae if not treated promptly. Therefore, rehydration is most important in the early stages of the disease.

Surveillance

 Periodic glucose tolerance tests can be used to assess insulin secretion. Most children with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus in remission have no evidence of beta cell dysfunction or insulin resistance in the fasting state. Insulin response to intravenous glucose loading is often normal but suggests future recurrence if abnormal [Shield et al 2004]. Measure growth (height, weight, head circumference) at regular intervals (i.e., at least every six months) Developmental assessment to identify any special educational needs is appropriate. Children with HIL need to be monitored for developmental delay and special educational needs.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 General factors that predispose to late-onset diabetes (e.g., excessive weight gain) or risk factors for cardiovascular disorders should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Recommendations vary by underlying genetic mechanism: When the proband is identified as having TNDM caused by an inherited paternal 6q24 duplication, the sibs and offspring of the proband are at increased risk of inheriting the duplication. Screening for diabetes mellitus is appropriate for those infants who have inherited the paternal 6q24 duplication. For 6q24-TNDM caused by ZFP57 pathogenic variants, sibs are at a 25% risk for the same condition, although the clinical findings can be variable. Although individuals reported to have 6q24-TNDM as the result of an imprinting center epimutation have been simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family), it is not clear if all cases are de novo (see also Genetic Counseling). Screening the mother and sibs of these individuals for diabetes mellitus may be appropriate. Offspring of female probands with 6q24-TNDM caused by a hypomethylation of the maternal PLAGL1/HYMAI differentially methylated region (DMR) may be at risk of having 6q24-TNDM or of developing diabetes mellitus later in life and should be offered testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 There are no specific guidelines on pregnancy management for women with a history of 6q24-TNDM. However, it is important to inform health professionals during the pregnancy of a susceptibility to diabetes. Rarely some affected women with classic 6q24-TNDM genetic aberrations (e.g., duplication of 6q24, paternal UPD 6, methylation mutations) will develop gestational diabetes; therefore, pregnancy is thought to be a risk factor for recurrence of diabetes. If prenatal diagnosis identifies an affected fetus, fetal growth is anticipated to lag during the third trimester.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.