http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dnmt1-ddsn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with DNMT1-related dementia, deafness, and sensory neuropathy (HSAN IE), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination to determine the extent of sensory involvement, including sensory testing and observation for skin ulceration Past medical history to determine extent of autonomic involvement Evaluation of central nervous system involvement, using tests of cognitive function and brain imaging Audiologic examination to determine if hearing loss is present and, if present, its type and severity Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Currently no effective treatment exists for any type of HSAN. The emphasis of management is to help parents and affected individuals understand the sudomotor defect and injury prevention when sensory impairment is significant. Because hearing loss may be severe, initial use of hearing aids and/or assistive communication methods may be needed. Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations associated with dementia. Because behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers, information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers are essential.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 To prevent injury to extremities with decreased sensation, protect the skin with appropriate socks and shoes and avoid exposure of feet to hot water.

Surveillance

 Sensory impairment. Examine feet on a daily basis to screen for skin injury. Dementia. Perform annual routine clinical testing for dementia: Observation of behavior Use of tools such as the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) Hearing loss. Perform annual audiogram.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid sharp objects and hot water, which may damage skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials,gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.