http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/donnai

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Donnai-Barrow syndrome (DBS), the following studies are recommended: Neuroimaging (preferably MRI scan) Detailed ophthalmologic examination including glaucoma screening Audiologic evaluation Quantitative urine protein determination Serum tests of renal function including blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations Determination of circulating levels of vitamin A, vitamin D, and other regulators of calcium status EEG if symptoms suggest a seizure disorder Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate: Surgical repair of diaphragmatic hernia and postoperative assessment of respiratory function to determine if the risk for long-term respiratory problems is increased Surgical repair of omphaloceleNote: Surgical repair of omphalocele and/or diaphragmatic hernia seems to pose no greater risk than repair of these defects in children with other genetic syndromes. Provision of corrective lenses for myopia; treatment of retinal detachments or glaucoma Provision of appropriate hearing aids and/or cochlear implants (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for more details) Education tailored to degree of intellectual, visual, and hearing disabilities Antiepileptic drugs for seizures

Surveillance

Formal ophthalmic examination should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Frequent and serial monitoring is needed; the schedule should be determined by the findings present. Treatments (e.g., peripheral laser photocoagulation) may minimize the risk of retinal detachment resulting from high myopia. Hearing evaluations should be performed as soon as the diagnosis of DBS is considered. Data on the natural history and possible progression of hearing loss are not currently available and thus no timetable for monitoring has been established. Periodic monitoring of renal function seems prudent, based on the report of Shaheen et al [2010]. However the frequency of DBS-associated renal dysfunction is not currently known.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.