http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/drd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD), the following are recommended: Neurologic examination to assess the severity of motor disturbances Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations


Levodopa Children. Although an initial dose of 25 mg levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI) two to three times a day was recommended by Nygaard et al [1991], an initial dose of 25 mg or less of levodopa/DCI once a day is currently suggested [Furukawa et al 2005] because some children with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (GTPCH1-deficient DRD) demonstrated a remarkable response to smaller doses and a child with the dystonia with motor delay phenotype manifested very severe dyskinesia (lasting 4 days) after receiving a single 50-mg dose of levodopa/DCI. Changing the dose slowly and by small increments is recommended. Adults. An initial dose of 50 mg levodopa/DCI once or twice a day is suggested [Furukawa et al 2005]. Gradual increase to higher doses is recommended. Motor benefit can be recognized immediately or within a few days of starting levodopa therapy; full benefit occurs within several days to a few months. Maximum benefit (complete or near-complete responsiveness of symptoms) is usually achieved by less than 300-400 mg/day of levodopa/DCI or by less than 20-30 mg/kg/day of levodopa without a DCI [Nygaard et al 1993a, Segawa & Nomura 1993, Steinberger et al 2000, Grimes et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2005]. According to Nygaard & Duvoisin [1999], no dose of levodopa/DCI greater than 400 mg/day has been necessary for individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD. At the initiation of levodopa treatment, some individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD develop dyskinesias. However, these dyskinesias subside following dose reduction and do not reappear with later gradual increment in dose. It is important to note that such transient dyskinesias are different from those observed in early-onset parkinsonism and idiopathic Parkinson disease during chronic levodopa therapy. A continued stable response to levodopa therapy and no motor-adverse effects (motor response fluctuations and dopa-induced dyskinesias) for more than 30 years have been confirmed in GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of GTPCH1-deficient DRD; levodopa therapy from infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early diagnosis and therapy (with low doses of levodopa) may prevent transient dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa treatment.

Surveillance

Examination by a movement disorder specialist at least several times yearly is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Discontinuation of levodopa treatment usually results in return of symptoms. Exacerbation of symptoms after taking oral contraceptives has been reported in some women with GTPCH1-deficient DRD [Furukawa et al 1998a, Postuma et al 2003, Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives; however, molecular genetic testing cannot predict the occurrence of symptoms, or if they do occur, the age of onset, severity and type of symptoms, or rate of disease progression. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In 20 pregnancies reported in 12 affected individuals, levodopa was continued without adverse effect in most. Two woman experienced remission resulting in a reduction or cessation of therapy. Two women reported mild deterioration of dystonia; an increase in dose was required in one. No fetal abnormalities were identified [Trender-Gerhard et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Although individuals with GTPCH1-deficient DRD may respond to trihexyphenidyl and bromocriptine, levodopa is more effective in the treatment of this disorder [Nygaard et al 1991, Segawa & Nomura 1993]. Acute BH4 administration appears to be much less effective in GTPCH1-deficient DRD than levodopa therapy [Furukawa et al 2005]; the reduction of striatal TH protein observed at autopsy in GTPCH1-deficient DRD can be expected to limit a stimulatory effect of acute BH4 administration on dopamine biosynthesis in this disorder [Furukawa et al 1999].