http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/drrs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SALL4-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

Eyes. A complete eye examination by an ophthalmologist with special attention to extraocular movements and structural eye defects

Heart. Baseline evaluation by a cardiologist including an echocardiogram and an ECG. If suspected, more extensive evaluation for cardiac conduction defects may be needed especially when structural heart defects are present.

Kidneys. Renal ultrasound examination and routine laboratory tests for renal function

Hearing. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview.

Endocrine. If growth retardation is present, consideration of evaluation for growth hormone deficiency

Blood. Baseline CBC to evaluate for thrombocytopenia and/or leukocytosis.


Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Duane anomaly. Severe strabismus may require eye surgery.

Radial ray malformations. Severe malformations of the forearms may require surgery, e.g., surgery to correct aplasia of the thumb by constructing a functional thumb (pollicization).

Heart defects. Cardiac surgery, if required for a congenital heart defect, is standard. A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation.

Hearing deficits. Hearing aids may be required.

Growth retardation. Growth hormone therapy should be considered for treating affected children.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance



In those with cardiac malformations or conduction defects:

ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect.

ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression.

Depending on the nature and significance of a known cardiac malformation, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

In those with renal anomalies:

Renal function should be monitored by routine laboratory parameters for renal function (ie, serum creatinine), even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination. In the first years of life, renal function should be performed every six months or once per year. If renal function remains normal, the screening intervals may be extended.

Renal ultrasound should be repeated if renal position anomalies could cause obstruction. The frequency depends on the clinical situation.

In those affected individuals with thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis, blood counts should be monitored at least yearly. However, data are sparse on the natural history of thrombocytopenia in individuals with SALL4 pathogenic variants and so it is unknown at present if more severe complications may occur.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Drugs affecting renal clearance or the inner ear should be avoided in individuals with impaired renal function and/or hearing impairment.

Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Although reduced penetrance does not appear to be associated with most SALL4 pathogenic variants, unaffected persons may consider molecular genetic testing prior to family planning. Children of affected persons who are themselves not obviously affected may be tested for the pathogenic variant present in the family because individuals with the pathogenic variant should undergo clinical evaluation for hearing problems, renal disease, eye disease, and heart defects.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.