

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Duane syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Family history Ophthalmologic examination Determination of primary gaze position, head position with eyes in primary position, and horizontal and vertical gaze restrictions Evaluation for aberrant movements. Globe retraction with narrowing of the palpebral fissure in adduction is the sine qua non of Duane syndrome. Other features sometimes observed include up- and downshoot on attempted adduction and Marcus Gunn jaw wink. Optional forced duction testing and/or force generation testing in cooperative individuals Photographic documentation to identify changes in the condition and for future review If surgery is planned, consideration of brain and orbital MRI to determine brain stem and orbital anatomy (muscles and nerves) General physical examination. Because of association with systemic anomalies, affected children should have a complete physical examination. If surgery is performed, forced duction testing to confirm tightness of the horizontal rectus muscles The following may be considered: Hearing evaluation Clinical genetics consultation if there is a family history of Duane syndrome, dysmorphic features and/or congenital anomalies in the proband, or if a pathogenic variant is found in CHN1

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Nonsurgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings Refractive errors may be managed with spectacles or contact lenses. Specialist examination is required to detect refractive errors early in life, when affected individuals may be asymptomatic, to prevent amblyopia and avoid compounding the motility problem with a focusing problem. Amblyopia can be treated effectively with occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye. Early detection (in the first years of life) maximizes the likelihood of a good response to treatment. Prism glasses may improve the compensatory head position in mild cases. They are more likely to be tolerated by older persons. Correction of hypermetropic refractive error in children may reduce the angle of strabismus and thus decrease the angle of head turn. 
            Surgical treatment of ophthalmologic findings (extraocular muscle surgery) To correct or improve compensatory head posture To improve alignment in primary gaze position To improve upshoot or downshoot Note: Surgery does not generally improve abduction of the affected eye, though transposition procedures may provide partial improvement in some cases. 
            Principles of surgical approach as reviewed in 
            
              Kekunnaya et al [2015] Type 1 and type 3. If head turn is present, consider recession of the medial rectus muscle or horizontal transposition of the vertical rectus muscles. Vertical rectus muscle transposition may be augmented, either with posterior augmentation sutures on the transposed muscles, or with botulinum toxin injections into the medial rectus muscle. Both the superior and inferior rectus muscles may be transposed, or alternatively the superior rectus muscle alone may be transposed in combination with a medial rectus muscle recession. If up- and/or downshoot occurs in adduction, or if globe retraction is severe and creates a deformity, consider recession of both the medial and lateral rectus muscles. Y-splitting of the lateral rectus muscle may decrease the amount of recession required. Type 2. If head turn is present, consider recession of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle if the affected individual fixates with the uninvolved eye, and the contralateral lateral rectus if the affected individual fixates with the involved eye. If upshoot or downshoot occurs in adduction, consider recession of the lateral rectus muscle, possibly with Y-splitting.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following are appropriate: Amblyopia therapy to prevent vision loss in the less preferred eye Surgery to prevent loss of binocular vision in individuals who abandon the compensatory head posture and allow strabismus to become manifest

Surveillance

 Surveillance is important for prevention of amblyopia, and to treat amblyopia if it occurs. Routine ophthalmologic visits every three to six months during the first years of life Annual or biannual examinations in affected individuals older than age seven to 12 years who have good binocular vision and thus are no longer at risk for amblyopia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Ophthalmologic examination within the first year of life is appropriate in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the CHN1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.