http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/duarte-gal

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an infant diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia, a clinical genetics consultation is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

There is currently no uniform standard of care for patients with Duarte variant galactosemia. Agreement has not been reached as to whether individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia with residual erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity in the range of 14%-25% of controls should be restricted from galactose intake during infancy and early childhood. Until a sufficiently sensitive and statistically powerful study is conducted to determine whether galactose exposure negatively affects long-term developmental outcomes in children with Duarte variant galactosemia, the controversy concerning intervention and outcomes is likely to persist. Because it is unclear if acute or long-term manifestations can result from Duarte variant galactosemia, and if so, whether dietary galactose restriction would prevent or resolve the issues that have been reported [Powell et al 2009, Lynch et al, in press], any developmental or psychosocial problems experienced by a child with Duarte variant galactosemia should be treated symptomatically and the possibility of other causes should be explored. Approach for non-treatment. Healthcare providers who choose not to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider Duarte variant galactosemia to be of no clinical significance. These healthcare providers argue against the interruption of breastfeeding when there is no clear evidence to justify it [Fernhoff 2010]. Of note, continued galactose-1-phosphate accumulation may be seen with lactose ingestion but is usually without overt sequelae. If the infant has not been placed on a galactose-restricted diet, or if feedings are alternating between breast milk and low galactose formula, it is reasonable to check the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level by age 12 months (or sooner if an earlier erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level was particularly high) to ensure that the level is approaching control range by age 12 months. Approach for treatment. Healthcare providers who choose to treat infants with Duarte variant galactosemia by dietary restriction of galactose in the first year of life generally consider the intervention to be potentially preventive rather than responsive to current disease manifestations. Options for dietary intervention [Fernhoff 2010, Pyhtila et al 2015] include: Full dietary restriction of galactose for all infants, through age one year, at which time a galactose challenge is performed; Following the recommendations for clinical variant galactosemia: immediate dietary galactose restriction for infants with erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate >10 mg/dL; A compromise approach in which parents either alternate feeding breast milk with low galactose formula, or non-breastfeeding parents use low galactose formula rather than a milk-based formula. The galactose challenge. If treatment is the chosen approach, conducting a galactose challenge at some point should be considered. For example: Obtain a baseline erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level at diagnosis and again around age six months (i.e., after the introduction of solid foods). At age 12 months, gradually liberalize the dietary intake of galactose, and obtain an erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level one month later. If the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is within the normal range (<1.0 mg/dL) despite milk ingestion, dietary restriction of galactose is not resumed.

Surveillance

Most individuals diagnosed with Duarte variant galactosemia as infants who are followed by a genetics or metabolic specialist are discharged from follow up after a successful galactose challenge at age one year (see Treatment of Manifestations). Among children with Duarte variant galactosemia who have been restricted for dietary galactose as infants, if the erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level is >1.0 mg/dL following a galactose challenge at age one year, galactose restriction may be resumed, and the galactose challenge and measurement of erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate level repeated every four to six months until the level can be stabilized at <1.0 mg/dL.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

It is unclear if there are any agents or circumstances that individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia should avoid. Some healthcare providers recommend avoiding all sources of milk and dairy products until age one year as a precaution against possible galactose toxicity; other healthcare providers argue that this precaution is not warranted. See Treatment of Manifestations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Some families with one child with Duarte variant galactosemia wish to evaluate their other children for Duarte variant galactosemia; however, it has not been established that avoidance of all sources of milk and dairy products is warranted in any siblings who test positive for Duarte variant galactosemia. If the GALT genotype of the proband is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs: sibs can be tested for the presence of the D2 allele and the specific GALT pathogenic variant identified in the proband. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no known additional risks associated with pregnancy for a woman with Duarte variant galactosemia or for a fetus with Duarte variant galactosemia.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.