http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dup15q

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with 15q duplication syndrome or related disorders (dup15q), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete review of systems Physical examination Assessment of possible feeding difficulties associated with hypotonia Neurologic examination including assessment for seizure activity and baseline EEG Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 A multidisciplinary team evaluation is recommended beginning in early infancy to evaluate motor and speech development and later to assist in referrals for appropriate educational programs. Supportive care may include the following: Occupational and physical therapy Alternative and augmentative communication Behavioral therapy (e.g., applied behavioral analysis therapy) Psychotropic medications for behavioral manifestations Standard management for seizures including medications, vagus nerve stimulators, and/or ketogenic diets [Conant et al 2014]. Effectiveness of antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment varies by seizure type and severity. No prospective or randomized-controlled data on AED therapy in dup15q have been published. See Conant et al [2014] for parent-reported effectiveness of various medications and treatments. Seizure management is important in preventing secondary complications, including (in the most severe cases) brain damage, developmental regression, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) [Devinsky 2011]. Approximately half of seizure-related deaths are not due to SUDEP, but to other causes including status epilepticus, drowning, falls, and accidents. Many of these are preventable. For example, status epilepticus may be prevented with the use of rescue medications such as rectal diazepam or nasal midazolam. Some evidence suggests that prompt identification of a seizure and basic care (e.g., repositioning a person on the side instead of face down) after a seizure may help prevent SUDEP [Ryvlin et al 2013]. However, the only known preventive therapy is the best possible seizure control [Ryvlin et al 2011]. Although a variety of monitors can help detect SUDEP (e.g., wrist and mattress accelerometers), none can prevent it [Devinsky 2011]. Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit (pdf).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations is indicated.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Periodic neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral assessments Periodic monitoring for evidence of seizures and/or change in seizure type

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Seizure triggers (e.g., sleep deprivation, stress, and failure to follow medication regimen) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Consider genetic testing of sibs of a proband who is known to have an inherited maternal interstitial 15q11.2-q13.1 duplication in order to refer sibs with an interstitial duplication promptly for developmental evaluation and early intervention services See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Currently, no clinical trials for dup15q exist. However, ongoing work regarding treatment in Angelman syndrome and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may inform future treatments in dup15q. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.