http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ea2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination for signs of interictal ataxia and nystagmus

Neuroimaging of the head (if not performed already), preferably MRI, to evaluate for structural lesions and to look for evidence of atrophy

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Acetazolamide is effective in controlling or reducing the frequency and severity of attacks in two thirds of individuals with EA2 [Mantuano et al 2010, Ilg et al 2014]. The typical starting dose is 125 mg/day given orally, but doses as high as 500 mg/2x/day may be required. This medication is generally well tolerated; the most common side effects are paresthesias of the extremities, rash, and renal calculi.

4-aminopyridine, a potassium channel blocker, also reduces attack frequency and duration at doses of 5-10 mg/3x/day [Mantuano et al 2010, Strupp et al 2011].

Generally acetazolomide is used as the firstline therapy, although there are no specific recommendations regarding which medication should be trialed first [Ilg et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Treatment with acetazolamide does not appear to prevent the progression of interictal symptoms [Baloh & Winder 1991]. It is not clear how acetazolamide prevents attacks of EA2, although Yue et al [1997] speculated that the mechanism involves a decrease in pH, thus inhibiting ion permeation through open calcium channels. Acetazolamide could stabilize channels that fail to properly inactivate. Acetazolamide may not work in some individuals, particularly if the pathogenic variant distorts the pore region of the channel, altering the stabilizing effect of H+ ions.

To date no data regarding whether 4-aminopyridine can prevent the progression of interictal symptoms are available.

Surveillance



Surveillance should include annual neurologic examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Phenytoin has been reported to exacerbate symptoms.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



There is limited published literature addressing the management of the pregnancy of an affected woman or the effect of maternal EA2 on a fetus. However, because physical exertion can trigger attacks, it would be prudent for a pregnant woman to be followed closely by her obstetrician and at term to undergo a trial of labor with the intent to proceed to delivery by C-section should the labor trigger an EA2 attack [Spacey 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation



Scoggan et al [2006] reported an individual who responded to a combination of acetazolamide and valproic acid.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.