

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia (EB-PA), the following evaluations are recommended, if they were not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis: Evaluation of the sites of blister formation including skin and oral mucosa Tests of renal function including BUN, creatinine, and urinalysis Renal ultrasound Delineation of involvement of the whole esophagus (with concentration on the upper cervical portion) by barium swallow as needed. Endoscopy can be traumatic and should be avoided if possible. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers: A primary nonadherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following: Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®) Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®) Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®) Addition of a topical antibiotic or antiseptic such as bacitracin, mupirocin, silver, or honey A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix® or Conform®) are commonly used. A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net® or Tubifast®). 
            Gastrointestinal Surgical intervention is required to correct pyloric atresia. Many children need medical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007]. Consultation with a dietitian or nutritionist can be helpful, especially if there is significant mucosal blistering in the mouth preventing adequate oral intake. Renal. The following are appropriate: Referral to an urologist if there are symptoms of difficulty or discomfort with voiding Referral to a nephrologist if renal function studies and/or urinalysis are abnormal 
            Other A hoarse cry in an infant should alert the clinician to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue [Ida et al 2012]. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007]. Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation. Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 New blister formation can be minimized by wrapping and padding of extremities; use of soft and properly fitted clothing and footwear; and avoidance of: contact with adhesives, contact sports, and other activities that create friction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), multidrug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Group A beta-hemolytic Streptococci. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed. Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management. Dilated cardiomyopathy can occur in individuals who survive the neonatal period. The development of dilated cardiomyopathy was associated with nutritional deficiency of carnitine in one study, and it has been postulated that nutritional deficiency of selenium may also contribute [Sidwell et al 2000]. In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified: Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007] Selenium and carnitine replacement for possible prevention of dilated cardiomyopathy Iron deficiency anemia, a chronic problem, can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions.

Surveillance

 Perform annual screening for iron deficiency anemia with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary. Screen annually for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration to provide zinc supplementation when necessary for enhanced wound healing. Periodic echocardiographic screening to evaluate for the development of dilated cardiomyopathy is appropriate. Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/ or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Most persons with EB-PA cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®. Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma. In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Cesarean section is recommended by some obstetricians to reduce trauma to the skin of an affected fetus during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

 See Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa: Management, Therapies Under Investigation. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.