

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), evaluation of the sites of blister formation including oral and esophageal blisters and erosions is recommended. Clinical genetics consultation may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Skin. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure [Pope et al 2012]. Families must decide which of the many correct and effective methods of bandaging works best for them. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers: A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers may include any the following: Ordinary Band-Aids® Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®) Non-stick products (e.g., Telfa® or N-terface®) Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®) A secondary layer providing stability for the primary layer and adding padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Conform®, Kerlix®,) are commonly used. A tertiary layer (usually with some elastic properties) that ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Tubifast®, Coban® or elasticized tube-gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®) Various lubricants and antimicrobial agents such as topical antibiotics, silver, or honey are often added to the contact layer to prevent and treat infection and promote healing. In infants and children with RDEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes et al 1996, Stehr et al 2008]. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Castillo et al 2002, Kay & Wyllie 2002, Azizkhan et al 2006]. Other. Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management. Anemia is a chronic problem with RDEB and can be treated with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions. Other nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed: Calcium and vitamin D supplementation for osteopenia and osteoporosis Selenium and carnitine replacement to help prevent dilated cardiomyopathy Zinc replacement to enhance wound healing Good prophylactic dental care is essential to insure the ability to eat and to allow for adequate caloric intake [Harris et al 2001]. Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation. Occupational therapy may be helpful in preventing progressive hand contractures. Splinting of the hands can be problematic because of skin fragility. Surgical release of fingers by several methods has been described; it often needs to be performed repeatedly [Marín-Bertolín et al 1999, Glicenstein et al 2000]. Psychosocial support including social services and psychological counseling is essential.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Age-appropriate play involving activities that cause minimal trauma to the skin is encouraged. Dressings and padding are needed to protect bony prominences from blister-inducing impact. If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of DEB, cesarean delivery may reduce trauma to the skin during delivery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed.

Surveillance

 Because the lifetime risk of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma is greater than 90% in individuals with RDEB, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions may be necessary followed by local excision. Screening for anemia should be routine with complete blood counts and possibly measurement of serum iron concentration in order to provide iron supplementation when necessary. Screening for zinc deficiency by measurement of serum zinc concentration should be routine in order to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing. Screening for predisposition to dilated cardiomyopathy secondary to selenium deficiency and carnitine deficiency is possible by measurement of serum concentrations of selenium and carnitine. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy by transthoracic echocardiogram is also useful [Sidwell et al 2000]. No guidelines regarding the age at which such screening should begin have been established. Screening with bone mineral density scanning may pick up early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should begin.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma. In general, activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are committed to participation in such activities should be encouraged to devise ways of protecting the skin. Most persons with DEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Evaluating an at-risk newborn for evidence of blistering is appropriate so that trauma to the skin can be avoided as much as possible. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Cesarean section is often recommended to avoid vaginal delivery in a fetus at risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The use of mouse models for EB has enhanced molecular therapies for the treatment of EB by mimicking the EB phenotypes and facilitating testing of a number of therapeutic approaches including the following: Gene replacement therapy [Ito et al 2009], including inducible expression of the target gene under the control of a keratinocyte specific promoter [Adair-Kirk et al 2012] Stem cell replacement therapy [Chino et al 2008, Tolar et al 2009, Fujita et al 2010] Generation of three-dimensional skin replacement using pluripotent stem cells [Itoh et al 2013] Allogenic transplantation of fibroblasts [Fritsch et al 2008] Infusions of type VII collagen protein [Remington et al 2009, Hovnanian 2013, Woodley et al 2013] Topical treatment with recombinant collagen VII [Wang et al 2013] In addition, older approaches involving the use of viral vectors to transfer functional genes to cultured cells for transplant into humans are still being explored [Siprashvili et al 2010, Titeux et al 2010, Melo et al 2014]. A new approach using engineered transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALEN) for precise genome editing results in integration of the desired sequence in the targeted gene and in non-coding regions, reducing the risk of integration mutagenesis. TALENs were able to induce site-specific double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) leading to homology-directed repair (HDR) from an exogenous normal COL7A1 donor template. This resulted in mutation correction in COL7A1 in primary fibroblasts that were subsequently reprogrammed into inducible pluripotent stem cells and showed normal protein expression and deposition in an in vivo skin model [Osborn et al 2013]. Human trials for the treatment of EB that have just begun include the following: Use of naturally occurring gene revertant pluropotent cells transplanted into individuals with RDEB [Tolar et al 2014] Local grafting of skin cells in which the genetic pathogenic variants have been corrected for treatment of human JEB [De Luca et al 2009, De Rosa et al 2013] Local grafting of revertant skin in the treatment of JEB [Gostyński et al 2014] Cell transfer-based treatment for DEB [Ortiz-Urda et al 2003; A Lane, Stanford University, personal communication]. One person with JEB has had cell transfer treatment on the legs. A large Stanford University trial for DEB has begun and one one affected individual is reported to be doing well six months after grafting [Siprashvili et al 2014] (see ClinicalTrials.gov). Intradermal injections of large quantities of recombinant collagen 7 protein grown in vitro has shown efficacy in a murine model [Remington et al 2009
Woodley et al 2013]. Human clinical trials are likely to be under way in the near future. Intradermal injections of allogenic fibroblasts have reconstituted collagen 7 protein in the basement membrane. Although it appears that this “new” collagen 7 protein is identical to the mutated protein of the host, the increased quantities of collagen 7 seem to be clinically beneficial [Wong et al 2008]. A recent trial in Australia showed that both fibroblasts and a non-fibroblast-containing vehicle improved healing in RDEB [Venugopal et al 2013]. Bone marrow transplantation: Systemic use of allogenic stem cells has been shown in a murine model to have a clinically beneficial effect on blistering [Tolar et al 2009]. Currently trials of bone marrow and/or umbilical-cord stem cell transplants, using either conventional myeloablative or reduced intensity conditioning, are underway in two centers in the USA. See Wagner et al [2010] and search ClinicalTrials.gov for details of the two EB trials at the University of Minnesota and Columbia University [Tolar & Wagner 2013, Liao et al 2014]. Replacement of missing collagen 7 protein in RDEB has been accomplished using local injections of bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. The clinical effect of healing of chronic wounds was noted in two patients; however, it lasted only four months [Conget et al 2010]. Medical treatment of lesions suspicious for squamous cell carcinoma with agents such as topical imiquimod needs to be studied further. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.