http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ebj

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB), the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation of the sites of blister formation, including mouth, esophagus, and airway in a child with progressive hoarseness or stridor Direct examination of the airway by an experienced otolaryngologist with appropriately small and lubricated instruments to determine the extent of airway compromise so that decisions regarding tracheostomy can be discussed with the family Evaluation for gastroesophageal reflux disease which may cause additional trauma to the upper airway [Ida et al 2012] Evaluation for existing osteopenia through skeletal radiographs or DEXA scan Evaluation for cardiomyopathy by clinical evaluation and/or echocardiogram [Fine et all 2008] Measurements of hemoglobin and electrolytes to evaluate for anemia and electrolyte imbalance Skin bacterial cultures and blood cultures in clinically ill infants to decide appropriate antibiotic treatment Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Skin. The skin needs to be protected from shearing forces and caretakers need to learn how to handle the child with EB [Denyer 2010, Pope et al 2012]. New blisters should be lanced and drained to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. In most cases, dressings for blisters involve three layers: A primary non-adherent dressing that does not strip the top layers of the epidermis. Tolerance to different primary layers varies. Primary layers include the following: OrdinaryBand-Aids® Dressings impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform®) Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa®, N-terface®) Silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel®, Mepilex®) A secondary layer that provides stability for the primary layer and adds padding to allow more activity. Rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used. A tertiary layer that usually has some elastic properties and ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban® or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters such as Band Net®) Other. The most common secondary complication is infection. In addition to wound care, treatment of chronic infection of wounds is a challenge. Many affected individuals become infected with resistant bacteria, most often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both antibiotics and antiseptics need to be employed. Esophageal strictures and webs can be dilated repeatedly to improve swallowing [Azizkhan et al 2007]. A hoarse cry in an infant should alert to the possibility of airway obstruction with granulation tissue. Decisions about tracheostomy should involve the family and take into consideration the medical condition of the infant. Because of the poor prognosis and severe pain and discomfort experienced by these infants, a discussion with the family and hospital ethics committee often helps to determine the type of intervention and comfort care to provide [Yan et al 2007, Ida et al 2012]. Gastroesophageal reflux disease, when present, should be treated as in the general population. Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation. Treatment of granulation tissue can be attempted with high-potency topical steroids, silver nitrate, electrocautery, or autologous skin grafts. Psychosocial support, including social services and psychological counseling, is essential [Lucky et al 2007]. Pain management becomes an important part of daily care [Goldschneider & Lucky 2010]. In those with difficult-to-control pain, referral to a pain management specialist can be considered. Dental care is necessary because of inherent enamel abnormalities [Kirkham et al 2000, Krämer et al 2012]. Urologic and renal problems may be serious in this population [Kajbafzadeh et al 2010]. For those affected individuals who survive, referral to a urologist may be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Fluid and electrolyte problems, which can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease, require careful management. In infants and children with JEB with more severe involvement, failure to thrive may be a problem, requiring additional nutritional support including a feeding gastrostomy when necessary to assure adequate caloric intake [Haynes 2006]. In children who survive the newborn period, nutritional deficiencies must also be addressed when they are identified: Calcium and vitamin D replacement for osteopenia and osteoporosis Zinc supplementation for wound healing [Mellerio et al 2007] Treatment of iron-deficiency anemia (a chronic problem) with oral or intravenous iron infusions and red blood cell transfusions Wound infections should be treated with the appropriate antiseptic or antimicrobial medication.

Surveillance

Screening for iron-deficiency anemia should be routine, with complete blood counts and measurement of serum iron concentration to provide iron supplementation when necessary. Screening for zinc deficiency by measuring serum zinc concentration should be routine to provide zinc supplementation when necessary to enhance wound healing. Screening with bone mineral density scanning may detect early osteopenia and/or osteoporosis. No guidelines have been established regarding the age at which this should be initiated. Screening for dilated cardiomyopathy can be accomplished with regular echocardiograms [Lara-Corrales et al 2010]. Because of the risk for squamous cell carcinoma, surveillance in the second decade of life for wounds that do not heal, have exuberant scar tissue, or otherwise look abnormal is essential. Frequent biopsies of suspicious lesions followed by local excision may be necessary.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Most persons with JEB cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®. Silicone-based products provide a good substitute for tape. Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear should be avoided as they can cause trauma. Activities that, in general, traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) should be avoided; affected individuals who are determined to participate in such activities should be encouraged to find creative ways to protect their skin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Cesarean section may be recommended to reduce trauma to the skin of an affected fetus during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several approaches to gene therapy for JEB, focused on retroviral modification of in vitro epidermal cells, have been proposed [Robbins et al 2001, Ortiz-Urda et al 2003]. One successful clinical trial has been conducted using transplantation of sheets of genetically modified epidermal stem cells in one affected individual with biallelic LAMB3 pathogenic variants [Mavilio et al 2006, Di Nunzio et al 2008]. Animal models include intra-amniotic prenatal laminin 332 delivery in mouse [Mühle et al 2006] and a spontaneous form of JEB in dog [Capt et al 2005, Spirito et al 2006]. Natural gene therapy is being investigated using autologous revertant cells cultured from patches of non-blistering skin [Pasmooij et al 2012]. The knockout mouse model for all JEB-related genes should facilitate the development of these therapeutic approaches [Jiang & Uitto 2005]. Animal models that have been used to study EB were reviewed in Natsuga et al [2010]. Induced pleuripotent stem cells (IPS) are being studied in several laboratories around the world to address the treatment of other types of EB [Tolar et al 2013, Osborn et al 2013]. Protein replacement therapy with LAMB3 has been studied in vitro [Igoucheva et al 2008] with promising results. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.