http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ebs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS), the following evaluations are recommended: Consultation with a dermatologist to evaluate the sites of blister formation, including oral mucosa Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Supportive care to protect the skin from blistering, appropriate dressings that will not further damage the skin and will promote healing of open wounds, and prevention and treatment of secondary infection are the mainstays of EB treatment. Encourage children to tailor their activities to minimize trauma to the skin while participating as much as possible in age-appropriate play. Lance and drain new blisters to prevent further spread from fluid pressure. Dressings usually involve three layers: A primary nonadherent dressing that will adhere to the top layers of the epidermis must be used. There is wide variability in tolerance to different primary layers; some individuals with EBS can use ordinary bandages. Some dressings are impregnated with an emollient such as petrolatum or topical antiseptic (e.g., Vaseline® Gauze, Adaptic®, Xeroform). Nonstick products (e.g., Telfa or N-Terface®) or silicone-based products without adhesive (e.g., Mepitel® or Mepilex®) are also popular. A secondary layer absorbs drainage, provides stability for the primary layer, and adds padding to allow more activity. Foam dressings and/or rolls of gauze (e.g., Kerlix®) are commonly used. A tertiary layer, usually with some elastic properties, ensures the integrity of the dressing (e.g., Coban™ or elasticized tube gauze of varying diameters, such as BandNet®). Note: Many individuals with EBS, in contrast to those with junctional EB and dystrophic EB, find that excessive bandaging may actually lead to more blistering, presumably as a result of increased heat and sweating. Such individuals may benefit from dusting the affected areas with corn starch to help absorb moisture and reduce friction on the skin, followed by a simple (i.e., one-layer) dressing.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 In the following studies, small sample sizes limit the statistical validity and generalizability of the results; however, given the lack of effective treatments for EBS, these potentially helpful treatments should be considered on a case-by-case basis: 20% aluminum chloride applied to palms and soles can reduce blister formation in some individuals with EBS, presumably by decreasing sweating. A case report [Abitbol & Zhou 2009] and small study [Swartling et al 2010] suggest that injection of botulinum toxin into the feet is effective in reducing blistering and associated pain. The mechanism of action is unclear, but likely relates to reduction of sweating and subsequent maceration of the skin. In one study of a limited number of individuals with EBS-gen sev, cyproheptadine (Periactin®) reduced blistering. This may result from the anti-pruritic effect of the medication, but the true mechanism is not clear [Neufeld-Kaiser & Sybert 1997]. In another study, tetracycline reduced blister counts in two thirds of persons with EBS-loc [Weiner et al 2004]. A recent study evaluated three months of oral erythromycin therapy in six children ages one to eight years with EBS-gen sev, and showed the medication was well tolerated and improved blistering in three children [Chiaverini et al 2015]. An anti-inflammatory mechanism, rather an anti-microbial mechanism, is proposed for the effect of antibiotics in the treatment of EBS. Other. Use of keratolytics and softening agents such as urea for palmar plantar hyperkeratosis has some benefit in preventing tissue thickening and cracking. In addition, soaking the hands and feet in salt water helps soften hyperkeratosis and ease debridement of the thick skin.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Infection is the most common secondary complication. Surveillance for wound infection is important and treatment with topical and/or systemic antibiotics or silver-impregnated dressings or gels can be helpful. Additional nutritional support may be required for failure to thrive in infants and children with EBS-gen sev or EBS-gen intermed who have more severe involvement. Infants with significant oral disease may develop an aversion to eating by mouth, even after oral disease improves. The involvement of a feeding therapist in these cases is suggested. Management of fluid and electrolyte problems is critical, as they can be significant and even life-threatening in the neonatal period and in infants with widespread disease. Some children have delays or difficulty walking because of blistering and hyperkeratosis, especially in EBS-gen sev. Appropriate footwear and physical therapy are essential to preserve ambulation.

Surveillance

 Surveillance for infection and proper wound healing is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Excessive heat may exacerbate blistering and infection in EBS. Poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear can cause trauma and should be avoided. Avoiding activities that traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact sports) can reduce skin damage, but affected individuals who are determined to find ways to participate in these endeavors should be encouraged. Many individuals with EBS cannot use ordinary medical tape or Band-Aids®.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 If a fetus is known to be affected with any form of EB, caesarean delivery may reduce the trauma to the skin during delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Proposed approaches to gene therapy for EBS include use of ribozymes, addition of other functional proteins [D'Alessandro et al 2004], induction of a compensating pathogenic variant [Smith et al 2004a], and use of pathogenic variant-specific siRNAs [Atkinson et al 2011]; no clinical trials have been carried out. The inducible mouse model for EBS should facilitate the development of these therapeutic approaches [Arin & Roop 2004]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 The use of corticosteroids and vitamin E in treating EBS has been reported anecdotally; no rigorous clinical trials have been undertaken.