http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/edmd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), the following evaluations are recommended:

ECG, Holter-ECG monitoring, echocardiography, radionucleotide angiography, and cardiac MRI

Note: Electrophysiologic study is often advisable in EDMD; however, it is performed in selected individuals on the basis of the clinical presentation and the results of noninvasive studies and not as an "evaluation at initial diagnosis" in all individuals.

Evaluation of respiratory function (vital capacity measurement and other pulmonary volume measurements)

Evaluation of joints by a physical therapist or orthopedist to determine need for therapies (physiotherapy, mechanical aids, orthopedic surgeries)

For LMNA-linked EDMD: evaluation of metabolic functions (glycemia, insulinemia, trigylceridemia). Rarely, an individual with LMNA-linked EDMD has had an overlapping LMNA phenotype and additional partial lipodystrophy features, thus requiring a careful metabolic assessment [Garg et al 2002, van der Kooi et al 2002].

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Orthopedic surgeries to release Achilles tendons and other contractures or scoliosis as needed

Use of mechanical aids (canes, walkers, orthoses, wheelchairs) as needed to help ambulation

Specific treatments for cardiac features (arrhythmias, AV conduction disorders, and congestive heart failure), including antiarrhythmic drugs, cardiac pacemaker, implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), and both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic therapy for heart failure [Bécane et al 2000, Bonne et al 2003, Boriani et al 2003]. Heart transplantation may be necessary in the end stages of heart failure; some individuals may not be candidates for heart transplantation because of associated severe skeletal muscle and respiratory involvement.

Use of respiratory aids (respiratory muscle training and assisted coughing techniques, mechanical ventilation) if indicated in late stages

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Physical therapy and stretching exercises promote mobility and help prevent contractures.

When indicated, implantation of cardiac defibrillators can considerably reduce the risk of sudden death [Meune et al 2006].

Antithromboembolic drugs (vitamin K antagonists, warfarin, heparin) are probably required to prevent cerebral thromboembolism of cardiac origin in those individuals with either decreased left ventricular function or atrial arrhythmias [Boriani et al 2003].

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Annual cardiac assessment consisting of ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography in order to detect asymptomatic cardiac disease. More advanced and invasive cardiac assessment may be required.

Monitoring of respiratory function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Although malignant hyperthermia susceptibility has not been described in EDMD, it is appropriate to anticipate a possible malignant hyperthermia reaction and to avoid triggering agents such as depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) and volatile anesthetic drugs (halothane, isoflurane). Other anesthetic precautions have to be considered [Aldwinckle & Carr 2002].

Body weight should be monitored, as affected individuals may be predisposed to obesity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk sibs, parents, and relatives of individuals with EDMD because of the high risk for cardiac complications (including sudden death) associated with LMNA, EMD, and FLH1 pathogenic variants. Evaluation may allow early identification of family members who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures [Manilal et al 1998, Bécane et al 2000, Canki-Klain et al 2000, Vytopil et al 2002, Boriani et al 2003, Taylor et al 2003, Gueneau et al 2009, Knoblauch et al 2010, Jimenez-Escrig et al 2012]. Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the LMNA, EMD, or FHL1 pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known;

Cardiac evaluation if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In a woman with EDMD, pregnancy complications may include the development of cardiomyopathy or progression of preexisting cardiomyopathy, preterm delivery, respiratory involvement, cephalopelvic disproportion, and delivery of a low birth-weight infant. Pregnancy management is challenging, with very limited literature addressing the issue. Caesarean section delivery may be required. Referral of an affected pregnant woman to a specialized obstetric unit in close collaboration with a cardiologist is recommended for optimal pregnancy outcome.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.