http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/eds

Management

 For a detailed review of complications and management, see Wenstrup & Hoechstetter [2004].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), classic type, the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical examination of the skin with assessment of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scars and bruises, and other manifestations of classic EDS Evaluation of joint mobility with use of the Beighton score Evaluation for hypotonia and motor development in infants and children A baseline echocardiogram with aortic diameter measurement for individuals under age ten years Evaluation of clotting factors if severe easy bruising is present

Treatment of Manifestations

 In children with hypotonia and delayed motor development, a physiotherapeutic program is important. Non-weight-bearing muscular exercise, such as swimming, is useful to promote muscular development and coordination. Individuals with muscle hypotonia and joint instability with chronic pain may have to adjust lifestyle and professional choices accordingly. Emotional support and behavioral and psychological therapy may help in developing acceptance and coping skills. Dermal wounds should be closed without tension, preferably in two layers. Deep stitches should be applied generously. Cutaneous stitches should be left in place twice as long as usual and additional fixation of adjacent skin with adhesive tape can help prevent stretching of the scar. For recommendations on treatment of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type. (Note: Surgical stabilization of joints may lead to disappointing, or only temporary, improvement.) Anti-inflammatory drugs may help with joint pain. Long-term chronic pain may result in the need for mental health services. Cardiovascular problems should be treated in a standard manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Very young children with pronounced skin fragility can wear protective pads or bandages over the forehead, knees, and shins in order to avoid skin tears. Older children who are active can wear soccer pads or ski stockings with shin padding during activities. For recommendations on prevention of primary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Primary Manifestations. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising but has no effect on the primary findings of skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, and joint hypermobility. In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults, with proportionally reduced doses for children; however, there is no limitation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 For recommendations on prevention of secondary manifestations of joint laxity and dislocations, see EDS, Hypermobility Type: Management, Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Surveillance

 If no abnormalities are found on echocardiogram in an adult, a follow-up echocardiogram is not necessary. (Because longitudinal data on progression of aortic dilation are not available, specific recommendations for follow-up in individuals with a normal aortic diameter are not available.) Yearly echocardiogram is warranted if an abnormality such as aortic dilatation or mitral valve prolapse is present.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Sports with heavy joint strain (contact sports, fighting sports, football, running) Acetylsalicylate (aspirin)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

 Because of the increased risk of skin lacerations, postpartum hemorrhages, and prolapse of the uterus and/or bladder, monitoring of women throughout pregnancy and in the postpartum period is recommended. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may reduce easy bruising (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). In general, a dose of two grams per day is recommended for adults; however, no strict guidelines exist regarding recommended dose during the third trimester of pregnancy. Monitoring of pregnant women for preterm labor is warranted during the third trimester when the risk of premature rupture of the membranes is increased.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.