

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 Currently, no consensus exists regarding the appropriate extent of evaluation at the time of initial diagnosis. Approach to a vascular evaluation depends on the age of the individual and the circumstances in which the diagnosis is made. Because of the risk of asymptomatic aneurysm/dissection, initial visualization of the arterial tree is commonly undertaken [Chu et al 2014]; the approach employed varies by geographic region and by institution (see Surveillance). Because no specific gastrointestinal findings are known to precede or predict bowel rupture, there is no benefit from invasive GI evaluation. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is appropriate. Establishment of an organized care team including a primary care physician, vascular surgeon, general surgeon, and a geneticist may aid in emergency preparedness. In addition, individuals with vEDS should carry documentation of their genetic diagnosis, such as a MedicAlert® or emergency letter.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Surgical intervention may be life-saving in the face of bowel rupture, arterial rupture, or organ rupture (e.g., the uterus in pregnancy). When surgery is required for treatment, it is appropriate to target the approach and minimize surgical exploration because of the risk of inadvertent damage to other tissues [Oderich et al 2005]. In general, surgical procedures are more likely to be successful when the treating physician is aware of the diagnosis of vEDS and its associated tissue fragility [Shalhub et al 2014]. There are no guidelines to direct recommendations for elective repair in individuals with aneurysm(s) and vEDS. A decision about the timing and approach of an elective vascular procedure or the use of endovascular approaches is typically based on an individualized risk/benefit assessment. Reports of successful endovascular approaches are growing but no studies have compared outcomes between endovascular and open repair. Prompt surgical intervention of bowel rupture is essential to limit the extent of infection and facilitate early restoration of bowel continuity. Death from bowel rupture is uncommon because intervention is generally effective. Bowel continuity can be restored successfully in most instances, usually three to six months after the initial surgery. The recurrence of bowel tears proximal to the original site and the risk of complications resulting from repeat surgery have led some to recommend partial colectomy to reduce the risk of recurrent bowel rupture. Some physicians and affected individuals consider total colectomy as a prophylactic measure to avoid recurrent bowel complications and the need for repeat surgery [Fuchs & Fishman 2004]. Affected individuals should be instructed to seek immediate medical attention for sudden, unexplained pain.

Surveillance

 The use of surveillance of the arterial vasculature assumes that effective interventions will decrease the risk of arterial dissection or rupture and prolong life. At a time when an open surgical approach was the only option, the benefit of surveillance could not be established. As endovascular approaches to management of aneurysms and dissection become more available, intervention is considered earlier and surveillance is seen to have greater benefit. There are, however, no published data that assess the efficacy of screening strategies to identify the regions in the arterial vasculature at highest risk; conversely, there are examples in which regions of concern in the arterial vasculature failed to progress and arterial rupture occurred at other more distant sites. Thus, the benefit of controlled studies cannot be overemphasized. If undertaken, noninvasive imaging such as ultrasound examination, magnetic resonance angiogram, or computed tomography angiogram with and without venous contrast is preferred to identify aneurysms, dissections, and vascular ruptures [Chu et al 2014]. Because arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter and at sites of high pressure injection, conventional arteriograms are not recommended. Blood pressure monitoring on a regular basis is recommended to allow for early treatment if hypertension develops, which will presumably reduce vascular stress and injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Trauma. Because of inherent tissue fragility, it is prudent for individuals with vEDS to avoid collision sports (e.g., football), heavy lifting, and weight training. Of note, no evidence suggests that moderate recreational exercise is detrimental. Arteriography. Conventional arterial angiography (with contrast injection) should be discouraged because it has been associated with added de novo complications [Zilocchi et al 2007]. Arterial tear/dissection may result at the site of entry of the catheter; furthermore, injection pressure may lead to arterial aneurysms. Arteriography is currently best used as part of a planned interventional procedure, such as coil embolization or stenting of bleeding arteries. Routine colonoscopy. There are several reports of colonoscopy-associated bowel perforation in individuals with vEDS. Virtual colonoscopy, which also involves insufflation, may have similar complications. Routine colonoscopy for cancer screening is discouraged in the absence of concerning symptoms or a strong family history of colorectal cancer. Individuals with vEDS who have a family history of colon cancer are encouraged to utilize genetic testing for colon cancer risk assessment (provided the genetic etiology of colon cancer has been established in an affected family member). Elective surgery. Because tissue fragility results in a higher risk of surgical complications, elective surgery for individuals with vEDS is discouraged unless the benefit is expected to be substantial. In general, avoidance of surgery in favor of more conservative management is advised.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who could benefit from surveillance, awareness of treatment for potential complications, and appropriate restriction of high-impact sports. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; Clinical evaluation and physical examination if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 It is prudent to follow pregnant women with vEDS in a high-risk obstetrical program. It is not known if elective caesarian section or pre-term delivery decreases the risk of mortality. Educating the pregnant woman as to possible complications and the need for close monitoring is recommended. Experience with use of assisted reproductive technologies for women with vEDS is limited [Bergeron et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

 A clinical trial of the efficacy of a cardioselective β-blocker with β-2 agonist vasodilatory properties (celiprolol) in reducing risk of arterial rupture or dissection concluded that there was a benefit: a reduced number of arterial events (rupture or dissection, fatal or not) was reported in the treatment group [Ong et al 2010]. Although the study was directed to measure benefit in individuals with vEDS, randomization to treatment or control group was undertaken prior to molecular testing. The treated and untreated groups with a confirmed pathogenic variant differed in size and age distribution; thus, it is difficult to determine if there is a measurable benefit. No further studies published to date have attempted to replicate the original findings. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.