

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), kyphoscoliotic form, the following evaluations are recommended: Musculoskeletal
 Evaluation for kyphoscoliosis. Photographic and radiologic documentation of the spine is recommended in view of the progressive kyphoscoliosis.  Physical therapy evaluation to develop a plan for ongoing therapy to strengthen large muscle groups and prevent recurrent shoulder dislocation  Cardiovascular. Measurement of aortic root size and assessment of heart valves by echocardiogram at the time of diagnosis or by age five years  Ophthalmologic. Formal ophthalmologic evaluation at diagnosis for myopia, astigmatism, and potential for retinal detachment  Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Musculoskeletal
 Referral to an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis is appropriate.  Orthopedic surgery is not contraindicated in individuals with EDS, kyphoscoliotic form and can be performed as necessary.  Bracing may be required to support unstable joints. Physical therapy is recommended for older children, adolescents, and adults to strengthen large muscle groups, particularly at the shoulder girdle, and to prevent recurrent shoulder dislocation. Swimming is recommended.  Due to skin fragility, protective pads over knees, shins, and elbows may be helpful in preventing lacerations, particularly in children. The use of helmets in active sports is always advised. Cardiovascular
 Vigilant observation and control of blood pressure can reduce the risk of arterial rupture.  Vascular surgery is fraught with danger. Although virtually no surgical literature exists on EDS, kyphoscoliotic form, the review by Freeman et al [1996] on surgical complications of EDS, vascular type is relevant.  Individuals with aortic dilation may require treatment with beta blockers to prevent further expansion.  Ophthalmologic
 Myopia and/or astigmatism may be corrected by glasses or contact lenses.  Laser treatment of the retina is indicated in case of imminent detachment. 

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with mitral valve prolapse should follow standard American Heart Association guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine ophthalmologic examination for management of myopia and early detection of glaucoma or retinal detachment  Routine examination for inguinal hernia and surgical referral as necessary  Vigilant observation of blood pressure  Regular follow up by an orthopedic surgeon for management of kyphoscoliosis  Echocardiogram at five-year intervals, even if the initial echocardiogram is normal  Females should be made aware of complications associated with pregnancy (see Pregnancy Management).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 In children with significant joint hyperextensibility, sports which impact the joints such as gymnastics or long-distance running should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Affected pregnant women may be at increased risk for spontaneous abortions, premature rupture of membranes, and rupture of arteries [Esaka et al 2009]. Two affected women had a total of seven pregnancies resulting in three miscarriages and four healthy children, three of whom were born vaginally at term and one of whom was born at 24 weeks; there were no maternal complications [Steinmann, unpublished]. Delivery should be performed in a medical center. 

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Ascorbate therapy has been suggested as a treatment, but its effectiveness has not been biochemically proven. 