

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE), the recommended evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis) are as summarized in Table 2. Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy (EE)

Treatment of Manifestations

 Multi-specialty care that includes child neurology, pediatrics, clinical genetics, nutrition, gastroenterology, orthopedic, pain management, and physical therapy can help with timely detection and treatment of the multi-organ dysfunction that characterizes ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Treatment is primarily supportive including anti-spastic medications, muscle relaxants, and antiepileptic drugs. Physical therapy early in the disease course can help prevent contractures. Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy 
                  Gorman et al [2016]
                 Off-label compassionate use of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in combination with metronidazole may be considered as they are the only drugs known to slow disease progression and improve the metabolic abnormalities of EE [Viscomi et al 2010, Kılıç et al 2017]. N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a cell-permeable precursor of glutathione, is abundant in mitochondria where it can act as one of the physiologic acceptors of the sulfur atom of hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which has deficient clearance in persons with EE. Metronidazole is widely used to combat infections caused by anaerobic bacteria, and can reduce the sulfide-producing bacterial load in the large intestine.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

 The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay / intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country. Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states. Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies, and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed. 
              Ages 5-21 years
             In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21. Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood. All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider: Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. In the United States: Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction

 
              Gross motor dysfunction
             Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures). Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers). For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures. Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, writing). Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control. Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 All affected individuals should receive routine immunizations; as well as annual immunizations for influenza. Physicians must pay particular attention to the prevention of infections that could be fatal.

Surveillance

 Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected. Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 While clearance of circulating sulfide by a transplanted liver could be beneficial, to date only one instance of liver transplantation in EE has been reported [Dionisi-Vici et al 2016]. Although results were encouraging, follow up of this patient and experience with additional patients are necessary to determine therapeutic efficacy of liver transplantation in EE and possible relevance for national or state-mandated newborn screening, particularly in populations with relatively high prevalence of pathogenic variants. Possible future treatments include AAV-mediated gene therapy [Di Meo et al 2012] or liver transplantation [Dionisi-Vici et al 2016]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.