

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with EPB42-related hereditary spherocytosis (EPB42-HS), the following evaluations are recommended: Hemoglobin concentration and reticulocyte count to evaluate severity of disease Serum bilirubin concentration Transfusion history Serum ferritin concentration to evaluate iron load status Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate: Spleen size if physical examination is not conclusive due to body habitus or if contact sports are contemplated For evidence of cholelithiasis when symptoms are present. If hemolysis is significant a screening ultrasound may be considered after age 10-12 years, even without symptoms. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Detailed management guidelines for hereditary spherocytosis (HS) have been published [Eber & Lux 2004, Bolton-Maggs et al 2012]. Conservative management recommendations for mild EPB42-HS (Hgb 11-15 g/dL, reticulocytes 3-8%) (Table 1) include the following: Folic acid supplementation (400 µg 1x daily until age 1 year; then 1 mg 1x daily thereafter) Avoidance of iron supplementation unless concurrent iron deficiency is confirmed with iron studies, in which case treatment with supplemental iron should be carefully monitored and discontinued after iron stores are repleted to avoid iron overload Note: Hereditary spherocytosis (as all chronic hemolytic anemias) involves an increased risk for iron overload even with oral iron supplementation (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, if needed, for hemolytic or aplastic crisis Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. However, when disease is moderate (see Table 1) and normal activity or quality of life is compromised, splenectomy can be performed after age five years provided that hereditary stomatocytosis has been ruled out (see Differential Diagnosis). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS). Although splenectomy is curative, it entails potential long-term increased risk for life-threatening infection and, thus, should not be undertaken before the risks and benefits have been fully weighed [Casale & Perrotta 2011]. Ideally, the following immunizations should be completed before splenectomy: Immunizations for Streptococcus pneumoniae with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and for N. meningitidis with a meningococcal conjugate vaccine against the serogroups A, C, W, and Y (MenACWY) at least two weeks before splenectomy. A two-dose primary series of MenACWY is recommended 8-12 weeks apart [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2011]. Prevnar-13® and H. influenzae type b vaccines during infancy per general pediatric immunization guidelines The incidence of post-splenectomy sepsis varies among studies. Although low overall, the risk for sepsis, a life-threatening complication, is higher than in the general population [Iolascon et al 1998]. To reduce the risk of infection post splenectomy, the following are recommended: Give booster vaccination for PPSV23 five years after the first dose. No more than two PPSV23 doses are recommended [Pekka Nuorti & Whitney 2010]. Give booster dose for meningococcal vaccine three years after the primary series if the primary two-dose series was given between ages two and six years and every five years for persons whose two-dose primary series or booster dose was given at age seven years or older [Cohn et al 2013]. Serogroup B meningococcal vaccines are recommended for people age ten years and older with history of splenectomy. Controversy exists regarding the duration of use of antibiotics for prophylaxis post-splenectomy: some hematologists recommend prophylactic antibiotics for the first three years post splenectomy and others for life [Eber & Lux 2004]. The antibiotics recommended are penicillin V-K 250 mg twice daily or erythromycin for those allergic to penicillin. In any case, an individual who has undergone splenectomy needs immediate medical attention for fever and prompt use of IV antibiotics with good coverage for encapsulated organisms (typically ceftriaxone in doses adequate to treat meningitis: 100 mg/kg/day up to 2 g/day in single daily dose). Partial splenectomy appears to be associated with a lesser risk for post-splenectomy sepsis and a sustained decrease (although not elimination) of hemolysis and may be preferable for young children if the surgeon is experienced in the procedure [Bader-Meunier et al 2001]. An ongoing prospective observation of more than 100 children in a congenital hemolytic anemia multi-institutional registry, who have undergone total or partial splenectomy, may elucidate better the risks and benefits of each procedure [Rice et al 2012, Rice et al 2015]. Antibiotic prophylaxis may be discontinued one year after partial splenectomy if immune splenic function is adequate as assessed by pit count (percentage of pitted or pocked red cells) or the uptake of radioactive colloid by the spleen [Eber & Lux 2004]. 
            Cholecystectomy
           The gallbladder should be removed in affected individuals undergoing splenectomy who have a history of cholelithiasis. In children who require cholecystectomy, concurrent splenectomy is not recommended automatically any more. The need for splenectomy should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and the indication of splenectomy justified independently [Bolton-Maggs et al 2012, Ruparel et al 2014].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Splenectomy is rarely indicated in EPB42-HS, as disease severity is usually mild or moderate. Note: When indicated, splenectomy is curative; however, it can have potential life-threatening complications (see Treatment of Manifestations). Note: Total splenectomy is not recommended for children younger than age five years even if the child requires frequent transfusions for moderately severe HS (which is rare in EPB42-HS).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Regular immunizations are recommended as well as influenza vaccine annually to prevent infections that can precipitate hemolytic or aplastic crisis. Iron overload and its associated chronic organ failure are risks with any chronic hemolytic anemia especially if frequent transfusions are required. Treatment with an iron chelator should be implemented, typically after about ten transfusions (which correlate to a serum ferritin concentration of approximately 1000 ng/mL). The effectiveness of chelation should be monitored by evaluation of liver iron by T2*-weighted MRI or FerriScan® so that the dose of iron chelator can be adjusted appropriately.

Surveillance

 Neonates with HS require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus. Infants with HS require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion Those dependent on frequent transfusions require at least annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration. If iron chelation is required secondary to frequent transfusions in children too young to undergo splenectomy, appropriate monitoring for toxicity and effectiveness of chelation treatment is necessary [Musallam et al 2013]. When hemolysis is significant, ultrasound examination to evaluate for cholelithiasis is indicated by age ten to twelve years, and every five to ten years thereafter.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Any preparations containing iron should be avoided (see Treatment of Manifestations). Contact sports are not advisable in those with splenomegaly; of note, acute or excessive splenomegaly is a greater risk than chronic mild splenomegaly.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to perform laboratory evaluation of the phenotype (CBC and reticulocyte count, blood smear, osmotic fragility or ektacytometry) and clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the EPB42 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Neonates require monitoring of serum bilirubin concentration during the first week of life so that treatment for hyperbilirubinemia can be instituted promptly to avoid complications such as kernicterus. Infants require monitoring in the first two to four months of life for significant anemia, which may require RBC transfusion and initiation of folate supplementation See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Folic acid supplementation (800-1000 µg daily) is necessary in pregnant women with chronic hemolytic anemias such as EPB42-HS. Monitoring for exacerbation of anemia with CBC and reticulocyte count is recommended in pregnant women with HS, as hemolytic crisis and persistent anemia have been reported during pregnancy, especially in women who have not undergone splenectomy [Pajor et al 1993].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.