http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/epm1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Unverricht-Lundborg disease (EPM1), the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical evaluation including walking, coordination, handwriting, school performance, and emotional features Examination of myoclonus including evaluation of myoclonus at rest, with action, and in response to stimuli EEG evaluation before initiation of therapy, as it is most characteristic before use of anticonvulsive medication Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Symptomatic pharmacologic and rehabilitative management are the mainstay of patient care [Kälviäinen et al 2008]: Valproic acid is the first drug of choice. It diminishes myoclonus and the frequency of generalized seizures. Clonazepam, the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of myoclonic seizures, is used as add-on therapy [Shahwan et al 2005]. High-dose piracetam has been formally studied and has been found useful in the treatment of myoclonus [Koskiniemi et al 1998]. Levetiracetam has been evaluated in several series and seems to be effective for both myoclonus and generalized seizures. Topiramate and zonisamide may also be used as add-on therapies.

Surveillance

 Patients need lifelong clinical follow up and psychosocial support including evaluation of the drug treatment and comprehensive rehabilitation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Phenytoin should be avoided, as it has been found to have aggravating side effects on the associated neurologic symptoms, and may even accelerate cerebellar degeneration [Eldridge et al 1983]. Sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin) and GABAergic drugs (tiagabine, vigabatrin) as well as gabapentin and pregabalin should in general be avoided as they may aggravate myoclonus and myoclonic seizures [Medina et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Brivaracetam, a SV2A ligand that differs from levetiracetam by its mechanism of action profile, has demonstrated significant antiepileptic activity in experimental models of epilepsy and myoclonus. Brivaracetam has been granted orphan drug designation by the FDA (United States) for the treatment of symptomatic myoclonus, and by the EMEA (European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products; European Union) for the treatment of progressive myoclonic epilepsies. Brivaracetam is currently being investigated as an add-on treatment for Unverricht-Lundborg disease in adolescents and adults. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Vagus nerve stimulator therapy reduces seizures and significantly improves cerebellar function on neurologic examination [Smith et al 2000]. N-acetylcysteine has been tried with variable results [Edwards et al 2002].