http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/epp-ar

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile if not performed as part of diagnostic testing Assessment of hepatic function as well as imaging studies such as abdominal sonogram if cholelithiasis is suspected Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Acute photosensitivity. Afamelanotide (Scenesse®), a synthetic α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog was approved for treatment of EPP by the European Medicines Agency in 2014. The drug is administered through a subcutaneously inserted bioresorbable implant which results in increased pigmentation due to an increase in eumelanin. Phase III clinical trials in the US and Europe showed an increase in pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in individuals with EPP. In the United States, the drug is pending FDA approval. The phototoxic pain is not responsive to narcotic analgesics. Current management centers on prevention of the painful attacks by avoidance of sun/light, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass: Sun protection using protective clothing including long sleeves, gloves, and wide-brimmed hats Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to UV light. Grey or smoke-colored filters provide only partial protection. Tanning products. Some tanning creams which cause increased pigmentation may be helpful. Sun creams containing a physical reflecting agent are often effective but are not cosmetically acceptable to all. Topical sunscreens are typically not useful. β-carotene. Oral Lumitene™ (120-180 mg/dL) may improve tolerance to sunlight in some patients if the dose is adjusted to maintain serum carotene levels in the range of 10-15 μmol/L (600-800 μg/dL), causing mild skin discoloration due to carotenemia. The dose of Lumitene depends on age, ranging from two to ten 30-mg capsules per day and usually started six to eight weeks before summer. The beneficial effects of β-carotene may involve quenching of singlet oxygen or free radicals. However, there are currently no data to support its efficacy [Minder et al 2009]. Hepatic disease. Some affected individuals develop severe liver complications that are difficult to treat, often requiring liver transplantation [Anderson et al 2001]. Hepatic complications may be accompanied by motor neuropathy. Cholestyramine and other porphyrin absorbents, such as activated charcoal, may interrupt the enterohepatic circulation of protoporphyrin and promote its fecal excretion, leading to some improvement [McCullough et al 1988]. Plasmapheresis and intravenous hemin are sometimes beneficial [Do et al 2002]. Liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving measure in individuals with severe protoporphyric liver disease [McGuire et al 2005, Wahlin et al 2011b]. However, transplant recipients may experience a recurrence of protoporphyric liver disease in the transplanted liver. Combined bone marrow and liver transplantation is indicated in patients with liver failure to prevent future damage to the allografts [Rand et al 2006]. Other. Iron supplementation may be attempted in persons with anemia and abnormal iron metabolism; close monitoring is warranted. Both clinical improvement and increased photosensitivity have been reported during iron replacement therapy [Holme et al 2007, Lyoumi et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Sun avoidance is the only effective means of preventing primary manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin D supplementation is advised as patients are predisposed to vitamin D insufficiency as a result of to sun avoidance. Immunization for hepatitis A and B is recommended.

Surveillance

Annual assessment of erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels (free and zinc-chelated), hematologic indices, and iron profile is appropriate. Hepatic function should be monitored every six to 12 months. Hepatic imaging studies including abdominal sonogram are indicated if cholelithiasis is suspected. Vitamin D 25-OH levels should be monitored in all patients whether or not they are receiving supplements.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following are appropriate: Avoidance of sunlight and UV light In patients with hepatic dysfunction, avoidance of drugs that may induce cholestasis (e.g., estrogens) In patients with cholestatic liver failure, use of protective filters for artificial lights in the operating room to prevent phototoxic damage during procedures such as endoscopy and surgery [Wahlin et al 2008]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk family members as newborns or infants in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early intervention (sun protection) and future monitoring for signs of liver dysfunction. Evaluations can include the following: Molecular genetic testing if both FECH pathogenic variants in the family are known Biochemical testing to detect markedly increased free erythrocyte protoporphyrin if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is not complicated by EPP. There may be some improvement in photosensitivity during pregnancy as well as a reduction in protoporphyrin levels [Poh-Fitzpatrick 1997, Heerfordt & Wulf 2016].

Therapies Under Investigation

Phase III clinical trials from the US and Europe with a subcutaneous insertion of a biodegradable, slow-released α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog, afamelanotide (Scenesse®), which increases pigmentation by increasing melanin, showed increased pain-free sun exposure and improved quality of life in those with EPP [Harms et al 2009, Minder et al 2009, Minder 2010, Langendonk et al 2015]. A long-term observational study of 115 individuals receiving Scenesse® for up to eight years showed improved quality of life and high compliance with the drug [Biolcati et al 2015]. Scenesse® is currently approved for use in patients with EPP in the European Union. In the United States, the drug is pending FDA review. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.