http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ext

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary multiple osteochondromas (HMO), the following evaluations are recommended: Detailed history of symptoms from osteochondromas Physical examination to document location of osteochondromas, functional limitations, and deformity (shortness of stature, forearm bowing and shortening, knee and ankle angular deformities) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Osteochondromas require no therapy in the absence of clinical problems. Angular deformities, leg-length inequalities, and pain resulting from irritation of skin, tendons, or nerves often require surgery. Most individuals with HMO have at least one operative procedure and many have multiple procedures [Porter et al 2004]: Painful lesions without bony deformity can be treated with simple surgical excision. Excision of osteochondromas may also slow the growth disturbance and improve cosmesis and must include the cartilage cap and overlying perichondrium to avoid recurrence. Surgery for forearm deformity may involve excision of the osteochondromas, corrective osteotomies, and/or ulnar lengthening procedures that may improve pronation, supination, and forearm alignment [Matsubara et al 2006, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007, Watts et al 2007]; however, adults with HMO and untreated forearm deformities describe few functional limitations. Though uncomplicated resection of osteochondromas in growing children is frequently reported [Fogel et al 1984, Danielsson et al 1990, Shin et al 2006, Ishikawa et al 2007], there is a theoretic risk of growth abnormality resulting from resection of periphyseal osteochondromas. Abnormal growth and development of the forearm and leg in untreated individuals with HMO is common, including both proportionate and disproportionate shortening of the two bones of the forearm or leg, producing shortened and angulated limbs, respectively. Waiting to resect osteochondromas until they have migrated away from the physis would decrease the risk of injury to the physis, as well as potentially limiting the likelihood of recurrence of lesions [Chin et al 2000, Shin et al 2006]. However, numerous studies suggest that early treatment (in individuals age <10 years) of forearm deformities via resection of distal osteochondromas may decrease proportionate shortening and bowing of the forearm [Masada et al 1989, Ishikawa et al 2007] as well as deformity about the ankle [Chin et al 2000]. Leg-length inequalities greater than 2.5 cm are often treated with epiphysiodesis (growth plate arrest) of the longer leg. Angular misalignment of the lower limbs may be treated with hemiepiphysiodeses (or osteotomies) at the distal femur, proximal tibia, or distal tibia [Ofiram et al 2008, Boero et al 2011, Rupprecht et al 2011, Tompkins et al 2012, Driscoll et al 2013]. Early surgical treatment of tibio talar tilt may prevent or decrease the incidence of late deterioration of ankle function; long-term follow-up studies are needed [Noonan et al 2002]. Surgical resection is the treatment for sarcomatous degeneration. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy are controversial for secondary chondrosarcoma, but are often used in the setting of a secondary osteosarcoma.

Surveillance

Monitoring of the size of adult osteochondromas, in particular those involving the pelvis or scapula, may aid in early identification of malignant degeneration, but no cost/benefit analyses are available to support routine surveillance. Radiography, CT scanning, MRI, positron emission tomography and technicium-99 radionuclide imaging can be used to evaluate centrally located osteochondromas, but it is not known whether the benefits outweigh the risks of irradiation and the potential for false positive results that lead to unnecessary interventions. In addition, optimal screening intervals have not been determined. A single screening MRI of the spine in children with HMO has been recommended by some [Roach et al 2009] to identify spinal lesions that may cause pressure on the spinal cord. The presence of osteochondromas in the canal would then warrant close clinical follow up; encroaching lesions and those causing symptoms may merit excision.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Presymptomatic testing is not warranted because the clinical diagnosis is evident at an early age and because no precipitants, protective strategies, or specific nonsurgical interventions are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.