http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fa

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and management requirements in an individual diagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA), the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation by a hematologist, to include complete blood count, fetal hemoglobin, full blood typing, blood chemistries (assessing liver, kidney, and iron status), and bone marrow aspirate for cell morphology, FISH and cytogenetics, as well as biopsy for cellularity Note: The bone marrow of individuals with FA can exhibit signs of dysplasia, such as nuclear/cytoplasmic dys-synchrony, hypo-lobulated megakaryocytes, and bi-nucleated erythroid cells. These features must be distinguished from true forms of MDS by a hematopathologist experienced in the evaluation of MDS in individuals with FA. HLA typing of the affected individual, sibs, and parents for consideration of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Examination by an ophthalmologist Ultrasound examination of the kidneys and urinary tract Formal hearing evaluation Echocardiogram Referral to an endocrinologist Developmental assessment (particularly important for toddlers and school-age children) Referrals as indicated to an otolaryngologist, hand surgeon, gastroenterologist, gynecologist, and urologist Evaluation by a clinical geneticist and genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

 Recommendations for treatment were agreed upon at a 2014 consensus conference (full text). Androgens improve (at least transiently) the red cell and platelet counts in approximately 50% of individuals. Androgen therapy can be considered when the hemoglobin drops below 8 g/dL or the platelet count falls below 30,000/mm3 ('severe' – see Table 2). Although only 10%-20% of individuals receiving continuous low-dose androgen therapy are long-term responders, this option can be particularly useful for individuals who do not have access to or are not ready for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), or to individuals for whom of a suitable donor is not available. Oxymetholone, given orally at a starting dose of 2 mg/kg/day, may be increased up to 5 mg/kg/day. Doses may be slowly tapered to the minimal effective dose with careful monitoring of the blood counts. Other synthetic androgens used in FA include stanazolol in Asia, and oxandrolone and danazol in North America. Side effects of androgen administration include virilization and liver toxicity such as elevated liver enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis (vascular lesion with multiple blood-filled cysts), and hepatic tumors. Individuals taking androgens should be monitored for liver tumors and undergo regular liver function tests (LFT) for abnormalities. Blood tests for LFTs should be performed every three to six months; liver ultrasound should be performed every six to 12 months. If no response is seen after three to four months, androgens should be discontinued [Scheckenbach et al 2012, Rose et al 2014]. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves the neutrophil count in some individuals. G-CSF dose should be titrated to the lowest possible dose and frequency to keep ANC above 1,000/mm3. Note: (1) A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed prior to the initiation of G-CSF and monitored every six months throughout treatment, given the theoretic risk of stimulating the growth of a leukemic clone. (2) G-CSF should be administered in consultation with an FA expert. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations, including aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and acute leukemia. Ideally, HSCT is performed prior to onset of MDS/AML and before multiple transfusions [MacMillan & Wagner 2010, Mehta et al 2010]. Individuals with FA are sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation, need special transplant regimens, and should be cared for and transplanted at centers with the most experience in HSCT in FA. A multi-institutional study reported a one-year probability of overall survival of 80% in 45 individuals with FA transplanted for marrow failure and/or MDS, using alternative donors (including mismatched related and unrelated donors) and chemotherapy-only preparative regimen. Survival for individuals younger than age ten years transplanted for marrow failure was even better, at 91.3% (±5.9%) [Mehta et al 2017]. Fludarabine reduced the incidence of graft failure and allowed for removal of radiation from the preparative regimens in a matched sib donor setting [MacMillan et al 2015]. MDS/AML treatment remains challenging. Options include chemotherapy, HSCT with or without prior induction chemotherapy, and investigational trials. Chemotherapy should be undertaken in coordination with centers experienced with FA, as it can cause severe, prolonged, or irreversible myelosuppression. Plans for HSCT should be in place prior to starting chemotherapy. Published reports of chemotherapy regimens for AML in individuals with FA are sparse and limited by the unclear benefit to the overall outcome due to the lack of longitudinal follow up [Mehta et al 2007, Talbot et al 2014, Beier et al 2015]. Solid tumors. Prompt, aggressive workup for any symptoms suggestive of a malignancy is indicated. Early detection and surgical removal remains the mainstay of therapy. Treatment is challenging secondary to the increased toxicity associated with chemotherapy and radiation in FA. Data is limited on use of chemotherapy at standard doses or reduced doses and schedules in individuals with FA, and there are reports of severe or fatal toxicities and poor treatment outcomes [Masserot et al 2008, Hosoya et al 2010, Tan et al 2011, Spanier et al 2012]. Individuals diagnosed with a genital tract cancer should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist immediately, and care should be coordinated with FA experts.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination should be initiated at age nine years in order to reduce the risk of gynecologic cancer in females, and possibly reduce the risk of oral cancer in all individuals.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with FA treated with HSCT who developed graft vs host disease (GVHD) had a 28% incidence of head and neck cancers in the ten years following treatment (vs 0% in those without GVHD); this finding points to the importance of minimizing the risk of GVHD [Guardiola et al 2004]. Increased risk for GVHD observed in earlier studies was reduced significantly by T-cell depletion of the donor graft [Chaudhury et al 2008, MacMillan et al 2015]. Individuals successfully treated with HSCT are at increased risk for solid tumors, in addition to the baseline increased risk [Rosenberg et al 2005]. Due to the known contribution of radiation to the long-term complication of secondary solid tumors most recent efforts have focused on using a conditioning regimen without radiation even in an unrelated donor setting. German, Brazilian, and US groups now report excellent outcomes with alternative donors with a 'chemotherapy-only' preparative regimen in single-center studies. The study from Germany showed 88% survival and normal hematopoiesis at a median follow up of 30 months [Bonfim et al 2015, Chao et al 2015]. A prospective multi-institutional US study also showed similar excellent outcomes. One-year probabilities of overall and disease-free survival for the entire cohort, including patients with myeloid malignancy and those receiving mismatched related/haploidentical grafts, were 80% and 77.7% respectively at a median follow-up of 41 months. All young children (age <10 years) undergoing HSCT for marrow failure using low-dose busulfan-containing regimen survived [Mehta et al 2017].

Surveillance

 See 2014 consensus guidelines [Frohnmayer et al 2014] (full text). Annual evaluation with a multidisciplinary team including an endocrinologist Regular blood counts, every three to four months while stable and more often as needed Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy at least annually to evaluate morphology, cellularity (from the biopsy), FISH, and cytogenetics (the latter two for emergence of a malignant clone). Individuals on GCSF need to have a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy every six months, if possible. In individuals who develop Sweet syndrome (neutrophilic skin infiltration), prompt investigation for hematologic disease progression including bone marrow evaluation Notes: (1) Progressively changing blood counts without a potential cause (e.g., acute infection or suppression from medication) require immediate evaluation with a complete blood count and bone marrow examination with FISH and cytogenetics. (2) It is important to recognize that rising blood counts can be due to either the development of MDS/AML or, rarely, reversion of a germline mutation in a stem cell, which repopulates the marrow with normal cells (somatic stem cell mosaicism). These individuals may require immediate HSCT (for MDS/AML) or continued close monitoring with complete blood counts at least every one to two months and a bone marrow examination with cytogenetics every six months. 
            Individuals receiving androgen therapy Liver function tests every three to six months Liver ultrasound examination every six to 12 months for androgen-related changes, including tumors 
            Cancer surveillance Annual gynecologic assessment for genital lesions beginning at age 13. Thorough vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear can begin when women become sexually active or by age 18 years, whichever is earlier. Suspicious genital tract lesions should be biopsied. Examination every six months for oral, head, and neck cancers beginning by age nine to ten years. Screening should be performed by a dentist, oral surgeon, or ENT familiar with FA. Nasolaryngoscopy starting at age ten years, or within the first year after HSCT. Individuals with difficulty or pain with swallowing should be evaluated for esophageal cancer. For individuals with a history of premalignant or malignant lesions: surveillance examinations every two to three months For individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants in BRCA2: screening for neuroblastomas, brain tumors, and kidney tumors every six months (see also Risk to Family Members – Autosomal Recessive FA)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Blood transfusions. Blood products should be cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe and irradiated. To reduce the chances of sensitization, family members must not act as blood donors. Once an individual requires transfusions, he/she should be referred for transplantation. Toxic agents to avoid include smoking, second-hand smoke, and alcohol, which have been implicated in tumorigenesis. Unsafe sex practices increase the risk for HPV-associated malignancy. Radiographic studies for the purpose of surveillance should be minimized in the absence of clinical indications. However, baseline skeletal surveys may be considered, in order to document bony anomalies that may lead to problems with age, such as anomalies of the wrist, hip, and vertebrae.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate all sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from appropriate monitoring for physical abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and related cancers. DEB/MMC testing can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy is possible in females with FA, whether or not they have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [Dalle et al 2004, Nabhan et al 2010]. Pregnancy needs to be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician along with a hematologist.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Previous clinical trials failed to accomplish permanent gene correction of stem cells; current work is focusing on development of novel vector and delivery strategies [Tolar et al 2011]. The first FA lentiviral gene therapy trial led by the University of Washington/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center is now open [Becker et al 2010]. Dr. Juan Bueren has an open trial of a hematopoietic stem cell mobilization in Madrid, Spain and plans to have their FANCA gene therapy trial opened soon. A Phase I study of the antioxidant quercetin in children with Fanconi anemia is currently underway at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.