http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fabry

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Fabry disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Careful history for evidence of acroparesthesia, sweating abnormalities (i.e., hypohidrosis), or other manifestations of the disorder Renal function studies, including BUN, creatinine, and urinalysis Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiography Examination of the skin for angiokeratomas Formal audiology assessment Ophthalmologic evaluation Neurologic assessment Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations


Acroparesthesia Diphenylhydantoin. The severe pain of such episodes in affected males and heterozygous females often responds to low-maintenance doses of diphenylhydantoin by reducing the frequency and severity of the periodic crises of excruciating pain and constant discomfort. A potential side effect of diphenylhydantoin is gingival hypertrophy. Carbamazepine has similar effects. The combination of the two drugs may also significantly reduce the frequency and severity of the pain. Dose-related autonomic complications with carbamazepine include urinary retention, nausea, vomiting, and ileus. Gabapentin has been demonstrated to improve pain [Ries et al 2003]. Renal disease. Renal insufficiency is the most frequent and serious late complication in males with the classic phenotype. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be used in those with evidence of renal involvement, especially to reduce proteinuria [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014, Warnock et al 2015]. Chronic hemodialysis and/or renal transplantation have become lifesaving procedures. The engrafted kidney remains histologically free of glycosphingolipid deposition because the normal alpha-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme activity in the allograft catabolizes endogenous renal glycosphingolipid substrates. Therefore, successful renal transplantation corrects renal function. Reviews of the registries of the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplantation Association and the United States Renal Data System support excellent outcomes for renal transplantation in individuals with Fabry disease. For example, during the ten-year period from 1988 to 1998, 93 individuals who underwent renal transplantation were reported to the US registry. Compared to a matched control group, recipients with Fabry disease had equivalent five-year life survival (82% vs 83%) and graft survival (67% vs 75%), respectively. Note: (1) Immune function in males with Fabry disease is similar to that in other individuals with uremia, obviating any immunologic contraindication to transplantation in this disease. Autoimmune conditions have, however, been reported to occur at an increased frequency in individuals with Fabry disease [Martinez et al 2007]. (2) Transplantation of kidneys from female heterozygotes should be avoided, as the organs may already contain significant substrate deposition; all related potential donors must be evaluated to exclude affected males and heterozygous females.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). The two ERTs using recombinant or gene-activated human α-Gal A enzyme that have been evaluated in clinical trials are Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and Replagal™ (agalsidase alfa 0.2 mg/kg every 2 weeks). Both were approved in 2001 by the European Agency for Evaluation of Medical Products; only Fabrazyme® was approved by the FDA for use in the United States. The following is a summary of some of the clinical trials for each drug: Single-center double-blind placebo-controlled studies of agalsidase alfa have shown a beneficial effect of ERT on neuropathic pain [Schiffmann et al 2001] and left ventricular hypertrophy [Hughes et al 2008]. Data from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS) suggest that ERT with agalsidase alfa improves pain and quality of life, reduces the natural rate of decline of renal and cardiac function in males and females with Fabry disease [Mehta et al 2009] and may improve life expectancy [Beck et al 2015]. The enzyme is safe in children [Ramaswami et al 2006]. In persons with advanced renal disease, weekly administration of 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa may be associated with a slower decline in renal function [Schiffmann et al 2007, Schiffmann et al 2015]. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of agalsidase beta demonstrated increased clearance of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) from the endothelial cells of the kidney, heart, and skin among treated subjects [Eng et al 2001]. A Phase IV extension study showed that the risk of major clinical events (a combination of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, development of ESRD, or a 33% increase in serum creatinine concentration) was reduced by 53% with agalsidase beta treatment after adjustment for baseline proteinuria (P=0.06) [Banikazemi et al 2007]. In a ten-year follow up of these individuals, with additional data from the Fabry Registry, Germain et al [2015] reported that 49 of 52 were alive and 42/52 (81%) did not experience any severe clinical events during the ten-year treatment interval. Disease progression was most likely to be observed in those individuals who initiated treatment after age 40 years and/or had advanced renal disease at baseline. A study of cardiac outcomes from the Fabry Registry of 115 males treated with agalsidase beta for at least two years reports that treated individuals fared better than 48 untreated males. Left ventricular mass fell at a slope of -3.6 g/year in 31 males aged 18-30 years but rose by 9.5 g/year in 15 males who were not treated [Germain et al 2013]. The largest comparative study is the Canadian Fabry Disease initiative. Sirrs et al [2014] have reported five-year follow-up data on 362 subjects for a composite endpoint (death, neurologic or cardiovascular events, development of ESRD, or sustained increase in serum creatinine of 50% from baseline). Ninety-two of 178 individuals treated with ERT were randomly allocated to either agalsidase alfa or agalsidase beta. No differences were found with regard to the clinical efficacy of the two medications, and individuals who switched from agalsidase beta to agalsidase alfa during the time of Fabrazyme® shortage were stable. In comparison with the placebo group in the Banikazemi study individuals treated with ERT had a significant reduction in clinical events, which occurred at an older age. The eight-year follow-up data continued to suggest that the two medications are equivalent at their standard doses [M West, personal communication]. Antibody formation has been reported with both agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta in males, but not females [Linthorst et al 2005, Wilcox et al 2012]. Lenders et al [2015] reported that 40% of 68 males with Fabry disease on ERT have evidence of serum-mediated inhibition of agalsidase activity. They further reported that inhibition-positive individuals have worse clinical outcomes and higher levels of lyso-Gb3 than inhibition-negative individuals. There appeared to be no difference between agalsidase alfa and beta with regard to the development of serum inhibitors. The impact of antibody formation on the overall efficacy of treatment is currently unknown. During 2009-2012, a shortage of agalsidase beta resulted in the substitution of agalsidase alfa for agalsidase beta in several cohorts of affected individuals. Reports thus far have not indicated any significant difference in clinical parameters as a result of this transition [Smid et al 2011, Tsuboi & Yamamoto 2012, Pisani et al 2013, Goker-Alpan et al 2016]. Lubanda et al [2009] have shown in a small study of 21 individuals that those who have been ‘stabilized’ with agalsidase beta at 1 g/kg can thereafter be safely treated with a maintenance dose of 0.3 g/kg every other week. A study of lower-dose agalsidase beta has been conducted in children (FIELD study [Wijburg et al 2015]); it will be interesting to observe if lower doses of agalsidase beta are equally efficacious in children. There is an emerging consensus that ERT has, at best, a limited impact on the long-term outcome of Fabry disease. Studies of consecutive affected persons from individual centers suggest that cardiac, renal, and cerebrovascular outcomes are comparable among treated and untreated cohorts [Rombach et al 2013, Weidemann et al 2013]. A recent Cochrane review has also highlighted the generally poor quality of evidence in favor of ERT for Fabry disease. Despite these emerging data, a panel of physician experts have recommended that ERT be initiated as early as possible in all males with Fabry disease, including children and those with ESRD undergoing dialysis and renal transplantation, and in heterozygous females with significant disease [Desnick et al 2003, Eng et al 2006] because all are at high risk for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and neurologic complications including transient ischemic attacks and strokes. The treatment initiation guidelines from a group of European physicians are generally more conservative [Biegstraaten et al 2015]. They emphasize the need to start ERT before the advent of irreversible complications and suggest that initiation of ERT after irreversible organ damage has occurred is to be avoided. ERT should be discontinued if it is making no impact on organ function in an individual; and compliance should be closely monitored.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The prophylaxis for renovascular disease, ischemic heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease in persons with Fabry disease is the same as for the general population. Proteinuria/microalbuminuria should be minimized with ACE inhibitors/ARBs [Tahir et al 2007]; blood pressure control optimized; and cholesterol normalized [Waldek & Feriozzi 2014]. Aspirin and other anti-platelet agents such as clopidogrel may be recommended for the prophylaxis of stroke. Although evidence as to the effect on long-term outcomes is lacking, use of aspirin and lipid-lowering agents and optimal blood pressure control are recommended in persons with symptoms of cardiac ischemia [Eng et al 2006]. The role of ERT in the long-term prophylaxis of renal, cardiac, and CNS manifestations is unproven; however, on the basis of stabilization of organ function in persons with more advanced disease, some have suggested the initiation of ERT in early disease stages: at first sign of disease manifestations in boys; at age 12-13 years in asymptomatic boys; and at the time of diagnosis in adult males [Eng et al 2006]. Studies indicate that late initiation of therapy when renal or cardiac manifestations are significant is associated with less effect than initiation earlier in the disease course [Germain et al 2015, Ortiz et al 2016].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Annual or more frequent renal function studies Annual cardiology evaluation Annual audiology evaluation Biennial brain MRI/MRA

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The obstructive lung disease, which has been documented in older hemizygous males and heterozygous females, is more severe in smokers; therefore, affected individuals should be discouraged from smoking. Amiodarone has been reported to induce cellular and biochemical changes resulting in a phenocopy in particular of the keratopathy of Fabry disease [Whitley et al 1983]. Given potential effects on cellular levels of α-Gal A enzyme activity, it has been contraindicated in persons with Fabry disease. However, little evidence of a detrimental effect in this specific group exists and the relative benefit in individuals with cardiac arrhythmia should be considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk male and female relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment (ERT) and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known: Males. Measure α-Gal A enzyme activity. Females. Measurement of α-Gal A enzyme activity is unreliable in females although demonstration of decreased α-Gal A enzyme activity is diagnostic of the heterozygous state. Ophthalmologic examination for the characteristic whorl-like corneal opacities by slit-lamp microscopy can be considered if enzyme analysis is uninformative. However, only 80%-90% of heterozygous females have the corneal lesions. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene replacement therapy has been investigated in the mouse model of Fabry disease [Ziegler et al 1999, Ziegler et al 2002, Ziegler et al 2004]. A trial of gene therapy via autologous stem cell transplantation is currently in progress in Canada. Chaperone therapy, a novel approach, uses small molecules designed to enhance the residual enzyme activity by protecting the mutated enzyme from misfolding and degradation in the cell [Desnick & Schuchman 2002]. A report of chaperone therapy in a male with the cardiac variant demonstrated the "proof of concept" for this therapeutic strategy for Fabry disease [Frustaci et al 2001]. Phase I trials have demonstrated elevation of plasma α-Gal A levels in healthy volunteers [Fan et al 1999, Ishii et al 2004]. Phase III trials are now in progress in males and females with Fabry disease with a pharmacologic chaperone (1-deoxygalactonojirimycin; DGJ; Migalastat Amicus Therapeutics, NJ, USA). DGJ has been demonstrated to enhance trafficking of mutated α-Gal A to lysosomes of fibroblasts derived from persons with Fabry disease and to increase enzyme activity while reducing GL-3 substrate in tissues of a transgenic/knockout animal model of Fabry disease. In 2016 Migalastat received marketing approval in the European Union. Alternative enzyme therapy. A PEGylated version of recombinant α-Gal A with a longer circulating half-life is currently in a Phase II trial. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

Substrate reduction therapy for Fabry disease has a biochemical rationale. Clinical trials of substrate reduction therapy will be commencing soon.