http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/factor-v-leiden

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To assess the risk for thrombosis in an individual diagnosed with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, the following evaluations are recommended: Individuals heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele should be tested for other inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders. Testing should include: DNA testing for the prothrombin gene pathogeic variant (G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 20210) Multiple phospholipid-dependent coagulation assays for a lupus inhibitor Serologic assays for anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-beta2-glycoprotein 1 antibodies Evaluation in high-risk individuals (i.e., those with a history of recurrent VTE, especially at young age, or those with strong family history of VTE at young age) should also include assays of: Protein C activity Antithrombin activity Protein S activity or free protein S antigen Note: (1) Measurement of serum concentration of homocysteine is no longer routinely recommended since no data support a change in duration of anticoagulation or the use of vitamin supplementation in individuals with hyperhomocysteinemia and a history of VTE. In a randomized placebo-controlled trial, supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B12, and pyridoxine did not reduce the incidence of recurrent VTE [den Heijer et al 2007]. (2) There is no clinical rationale for DNA testing for MTHFR polymorphisms. (3) Although routine measurement of factor VIII levels is not recommended, testing may be useful in selected cases [Chandler et al 2002]. (4) It is still unclear whether assessment of clotting factor concentrations should be included in a thrombophilia evaluation [Chandler et al 2002].

Treatment of Manifestations



Thrombosis

The management of individuals with factor V Leiden thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances. The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin or intravenous unfractionated heparin [Kearon et al 2008a]. Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with low molecular-weight heparin (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international normalized ratio (INR). A target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.5 (therapeutic range 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in individuals with homozygous factor V Leiden [Baglin et al 1998, Kearon et al 2008a]. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin therapy should be overlapped for at least five days, and until the INR has been within the therapeutic range on two consecutive measurements over two days. Low molecular-weight heparin and warfarin are both safe in breast-feeding women. The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be tailored to the individual, based on an assessment of the risks for VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with an incident VTE develop recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent ten years [Prandoni et al 1996]. Since individuals remain at risk for recurrence even after ten years, VTE is now considered a chronic disease. The optimal duration of anticoagulation for individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele is debated. Individuals with a spontaneous thrombosis and no identifiable provoking factors or persistent risk factors require a longer course of anticoagulation. In contrast, individuals with transient (reversible) risk factors such as surgery require a shorter course of therapy [Kearon et al 2008b]. The risk for VTE recurrence is higher in persons with proximal than with distal DVT (relative risk=0.5) and in those with one or more prior episodes of VTE. Other risk factors for recurrent VTE include male sex and a negative D-dimer level one month after discontinuation of warfarin [McRae et al 2006, Palareti et al 2006]. Multiple other studies confirmed residual proximal thrombosis after a course of anticoagulation as a strong risk factor for recurrence [Siragusa et al 2008, Prandoni et al 2009]. The presence of hereditary thrombophilia was not a major factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2008 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy based on evidence that these disorders are not major determinants of recurrence risk. Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2008b]. Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring. Long-term anticoagulation should also be considered in individuals homozygous for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant or with multiple thrombophilic disorders [Kearon et al 2008b]. In these individuals at high risk for recurrence, the potential benefits from long-term warfarin may outweigh the bleeding risks. Individuals receiving long-term therapy should be reevaluated at periodic intervals to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation outweigh the bleeding risks. Unfractionated and low molecular-weight heparin, fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide), and warfarin are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolism. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin and argatroban) are approved for use in certain circumstances. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008]. Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT. Treatment of thrombosis in children. It is unknown whether the presence of a factor V Leiden allele should influence the duration of anticoagulation in children. There are no randomized trials of antithrombotic therapy of VTE in children and treatment guidelines are adapted from those in adults. The American College of Chest Physicians 2008 guidelines recommend at least three months of anticoagulation after a provoked VTE. A minimum of six months is recommended for children with a first idiopathic VTE. Indefinite anticoagulation is favored for children with recurrent idiopathic VTE [Monagle et al 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for asymptomatic individuals who are heterozygous for the factor V Leiden allele because the 1%-3%/year risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated less than 1%/year risk for thrombosis. Prophylactic anticoagulation. Because the initial thrombosis in factor V Leiden heterozygotes occurs in association with other circumstantial risk factors in 50% of cases, a short course of prophylactic anticoagulation during exposure to hemostatic stresses may prevent some of these episodes. Prophylactic anticoagulation should be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for all asymptomatic carriers. Decisions regarding prophylactic anticoagulation should be based on a risk/benefit assessment in each individual case. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in consensus guidelines [Geerts et al 2008]. Pregnancy. No consensus exists on the optimal management of factor V Leiden thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are similar to those for individuals who are not pregnant [Kujovich 2004b, Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Until more specific guidelines are defined by prospective trials, decisions about anticoagulation should be individualized based on the thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis. Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy: Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis. These women should be warned about potential thrombotic complications, counseled about the risks and benefits of anticoagulation during pregnancy, and offered a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation after delivery, as the greatest thrombotic risk is in the initial postpartum period [Bates et al 2008]. Is recommended for women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of unprovoked VTE. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin should be given during pregnancy, followed by a four- to six-week course of anticoagulation post partum [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008]. Should be considered for heterozygous women with a prior estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, Bates et al 2008]. Should be considered for asymptomatic women with homozygous factor V Leiden or double heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or with other combined thrombophilic defects, especially those with circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Barbour 2001, Bates et al 2008]. Graduated elastic compression stockings are recommended for all women with a prior DVT [Bates et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Prevention of pregnancy loss. The current data on antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss are limited to several observational studies and two randomized trials. In one study, 50 women with thrombophilia (including 20 factor V Leiden heterozygotes) and recurrent pregnancy loss were treated with enoxaparin throughout 61 subsequent pregnancies. The live birth rate was 75% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 20% in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2000]. Another study reported a similar live birth rate of 77% with enoxaparin prophylaxis compared to 44% in untreated historical controls, suggesting a threefold greater likelihood of a favorable outcome. The beneficial effect of anticoagulation was most pronounced in women with factor V Leiden thrombophilia, although the small number of individuals studied precluded definitive conclusions [Carp et al 2003]. A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women with factor V Leiden, the prothrombin 20210G>A pathogenic variant, or protein S deficiency and a single unexplained fetal loss. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin, suggesting a 15-fold higher likelihood of a successful outcome. In the subgroup of women with heterozygous factor V Leiden (n=72) the live birth rate was 94% with enoxaparin prophylaxis, compared to 33% with aspirin, suggesting a 34-fold higher likelihood of a successful pregnancy outcome [Gris et al 2004]. A prospective randomized trial (Live-Enox) compared two different prophylactic doses of enoxaparin in thrombophilic women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss (including 55 heterozygous for factor V Leiden). Both prophylactic doses (40 mg/day and 80 mg/day) achieved similar high live birth rates of 84% and 78%, respectively. These rates were substantially higher than the 23% live birth rate in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005b]. No prospective randomized trials including an untreated control group confirming the benefit of low molecular weight heparin in preventing pregnancy loss in thrombophilic women have been performed. However, the concordant results of the studies cited above suggest that anticoagulation may improve pregnancy outcome in thrombophilic women. Antithrombotic prophylaxis may be considered in selected women with factor V Leiden and unexplained pregnancy loss after an informed discussion of the risks and the data suggesting benefit [Walker et al 2005]. ACCP 2008 and recent obstetric consensus guidelines and expert opinion do not routinely recommend antithrombotic therapy for women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy loss because of the lack of sufficient evidence confirming benefit [Duhl et al 2007, Bates et al 2008, Rodger et al 2008]. Several randomized trials with a no treatment or placebo arm are currently underway. Until the results are available, the risks and benefits of antithrombotic therapy and limited evidence of an improved pregnancy outcome should be discussed with the patient to allow an informed decision. Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in thrombophilic women with other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited. In the Live-Enox study, the incidence of preeclampsia, placental abruption, and fetal growth retardation was substantially lower with enoxaparin prophylaxis than in prior untreated pregnancies [Brenner et al 2005a]. A study of thrombophilic women with prior fetal loss who received either enoxaparin or aspirin during a subsequent pregnancy showed that those who received enoxaparin had newborns with significantly higher birth weights and fewer classified as small for gestational age [Gris et al 2004]. However, neither study was designed to evaluate these complications as primary outcomes. A recent pilot randomized trial compared dalteparin to no treatment in a group of women without thrombophilia and a prior history of placental-mediated complications. Prophylactic dose dalteparin significantly reduced the incidence of the composite outcome of severe preeclampsia, low birth weight, placental abruption, and fetal death after 20 weeks. However, the study design excluded women with factor V Leiden [Rey et al 2009]. ACCP 2008 guidelines recommend low-dose aspirin throughout pregnancy for women at high risk for preeclampsia. Unfractionated or low molecular-weight heparin is not routinely recommended for thrombophilic women with a history of preeclampsia or other adverse pregnancy outcomes [Bates et al 2008]. An obstetric expert consensus panel was also unable to make recommendations on the efficacy and safety of low molecular-weight heparin in this group [Duhl et al 2007]. Decisions about antithrombotic therapy in women with factor V Leiden and pregnancy complications should be based on an individual risk/benefit assessment. Assessment of the maternal thrombotic risk during pregnancy should also be incorporated into the decision regarding prophylaxis.

Surveillance

Individuals on long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation of their clinical course to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk. Selected factor V Leiden heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Women with a factor V Leiden allele and a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT. Asymptomatic women who are heterozygous for factor V Leiden should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT use and should be encouraged to consider alternative forms of contraception and control of menopausal symptoms. Asymptomatic heterozygous women electing to use oral contraceptives should avoid third-generation formulations because of their higher thrombotic risk. Homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen containing contraception and HRT. For heterozygous women who require short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms, low-dose transdermal preparations may have a lower thrombotic risk [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

The genetic status of asymptomatic at-risk family members can be established using molecular genetic testing; however, the indications for family testing are unresolved. In the absence of evidence that early diagnosis of factor V Leiden reduces morbidity or mortality, decisions regarding testing should be made on an individual basis. Clarification of factor V Leiden allele status may be useful in women considering hormonal contraception or pregnancy or in families with a strong history of recurrent venous thrombosis at a young age. Asymptomatic factor V Leiden heterozygotes and homozygotes should be aware of the signs and symptoms of venous thromboembolism that require immediate medical attention and the potential need for prophylactic anticoagulation in high-risk circumstances. They should be informed that although a factor V allele is an established risk factor, it does not predict thrombosis with certainty because the clinical course is variable, even within the same family. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several novel inhibitors of the initiation of coagulation and fibrin formation are in various stages of clinical development. Two new oral direct factor Xa inhibitors (rivaroxaban and apixaban) and an oral direct thrombin inhibitor (dabigatran) were effective for prophylaxis and treatment of VTE in multiple randomized trials and will likely be available within the next several years. Long-acting pentasaccharides administered on a weekly basis are also in advanced clinical trials [Gross & Weitz 2008, Weitz et al 2008]. None of these new antithrombotic agents is specific for factor V Leiden or thrombophilia in general. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.