http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fahn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN), the following evaluations may be useful: Neurologic examination for dystonia, ataxia, and spasticity, including formal evaluation of ambulation, speech, and feeding Ophthalmologic assessment for evidence of optic atrophy or eye movement abnormalities Screening developmental assessment, with referral for more formal testing if delay is indicated Assessment for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy and appropriate assistive devices

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms. Weighted gloves can sometimes be used to assist with dysmetria. Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be debilitating. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following: Oral trihexyphenidyl, baclofen, tizanidine, benzodiazepines, and/or dantrolene Intramuscular botulinum toxin targeting abnormal co-contraction of selected muscle groups Ablative pallidotomy or thalamotomy. Dystonia may return despite this aggressive measure [Justesen et al 1999]. (For discussion of deep brain stimulation [DBS] see Therapies Under Investigation.) It is important to help affected individuals to maintain independence whenever possible. Affected individuals should be referred to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the visually impaired (if optic atrophy is present), and special education. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids such as a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities and augmentative communication devices.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition and prevent aspiration. Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated.

Surveillance

 The following should be performed on a regular basis: Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status Ophthalmologic assessment. Fundus photography may be helpful in characterizing changes in the optic nerve over time. Assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing Regular review of communication needs and environmental adaptations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Deep brain stimulation (DBS). To the authors’ knowledge, DBS has not yet been employed in the treatment of dystonia secondary to FAHN. Ongoing studies in the use of DBS for the management of other forms of NBIA suggest that it does provide benefit to a subset of affected individuals [Timmermann et al 2010]. Future studies will be necessary to determine whether DBS may be similarly useful for dystonia in FAHN. Intrathecal baclofen pump. The implantable intrathecal baclofen pump has shown efficacy in ameliorating dystonia in some forms of NBIA. The intraventricular baclofen pump has been used successfully in at least one person with NBIA among a cohort of individuals with refractory dystonia [Albright & Ferson 2009]. Additional experience is necessary to better define the optimal mode of drug delivery and risk/benefit ratio. Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as trials using deferiprone have been published in other disorders of brain iron accumulation, including Friedreich ataxia [Boddaert et al 2007] and superficial siderosis [Levy & Llinas 2011]. Deferiprone can cross the blood-brain barrier and remove intracellular iron. A single case report suggests regression of symptoms in an adult with NBIA of unknown cause [Forni et al 2008]. A recently completed phase II deferiprone trial in Italy in persons with PKAN demonstrated after six months of treatment decreased T2 hypointensity but no detectable change in clinical symptom severity [Zorzi et al 2011]. No serious treatment-related adverse events occurred. Long-term clinical trials of deferiprone in specific forms of NBIA will be necessary to further assess safety and efficacy. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Riluzole, recently recommended for cerebellar ataxia [Ristori et al 2010], has not to the authors’ knowledge undergone a therapeutic trial in FAHN.