

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 Individuals who are diagnosed with FAP or attenuated FAP should be counseled about age-appropriate recommendations for surveillance and prevention of primary manifestations, in addition to treatment of manifestations, as outlined in this section. Currently, consensus management guidelines for GAPPS are unavailable.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Practice parameters, including information on surgery, have been outlined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) [Provenzale et al 2016] (full text), the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] (full text), the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons [Church et al 2003b], the American Society of Clinical Oncology [Stoffel et al 2015] (full text), and the Society of Surgical Oncology [Guillem et al 2006] (full text). Colonic polyps. For individuals with FAP, colectomy is recommended after adenomas emerge. Colectomy may be delayed depending on adenoma size, presence of advanced histology (villous architecture, high-grade dysplasia), and number of adenomatous polyps. Absolute indications for colectomy include documented or suspected colorectal cancer or significant symptoms (obstruction, bleeding – although these are uncommon in the absence of cancer). Relative indications for colectomy include presence of multiple adenomas larger than 6 mm that cannot be reasonably managed by endoscopy, a significant increase in adenoma number between surveillance examinations, presence of adenomas with high-grade dysplasia or inability to adequately survey the colon (e.g., due to innumerous diminutive adenomas or limited access/compliance with colonoscopy). For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient (see Surveillance). Types of colectomy include the following: Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA) which can be performed laparoscopically, laparoscopically-assisted, or open. The IPAA can be stapled, leaving 1-2 cm of anal transition epithelium and low rectal mucosa; or it can be hand-sewn after a complete anal mucosectomy. Total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA). This is a single-stage procedure. Total proctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy The choice of procedure depends on the clinical circumstances. An IPAA is generally performed in FAP where the rectal polyp burden is high or as a second procedure after IRA when rectal disease burden cannot be managed endoscopically. The advantage of this procedure is nearly eliminating the risk of rectal cancer and relatively good preservation of bowel function. There may be an increased risk of bladder/sexual dysfunction and functional results can be variable. A study of individuals with FAP and ileal pouches found that 57% had adenomatous polyps in the ileal pouch. No apparent relationship between the development of pouch adenomas and the severity of polyps in the colon or duodenum was found [Groves et al 2005]. Cancer in the surgical transition zone has been reported [Ooi et al 2003] but is rare. An IRA is generally considered when the rectal polyp burden is low and deemed to be endoscopically manageable (usually in the setting of attenuated FAP). It is a technically straightforward procedure with low complication rates. It is usually associated with good functional outcome and minimizes risk of sexual or urinary dysfunction. This procedure should not be performed if there is severe rectal disease or the individual cannot reliably undergo endoscopic surveillance of the remaining rectum post-operatively. A total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy is almost never required unless a proctocolectomy is necessary (due to rectal polyp/cancer burden) and a contraindication to IPAA is present (e.g., a mesenteric desmoid preventing a pouch from reaching pelvic floor, low rectal cancer invading pelvic floor, or individual preference due to poor sphincter control). Small-bowel polyps. Endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas is recommended if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms [Wallace & Phillips 1998, Saurin et al 1999, Kadmon et al 2001]. Surgical options include a pancreas-sparing duodenectomy which is a good option when the papilla is not involved and there is no suspicion for cancer. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) is a surgical option associated with significantly higher morbidity; however, it must be considered if the duodenal papilla is involved or there is confirmed or strongly suspected cancer. Osteomas may be removed for cosmetic reasons. Desmoid tumors. Available treatments include surgical excision (associated with high rates of recurrence), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-estrogens, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and radiation [Griffioen et al 1998, Clark et al 1999, Smith et al 2000a, Tonelli et al 2003, Gega et al 2006]. A review of desmoid treatments can be found in Guillem et al [2006]. Adrenal tumors.
Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP. Chemoprevention. There are currently no FDA-approved chemopreventive agents for FAP. NSAIDs. Non-placebo controlled trials and observational studies on sulindac were initially promising, showing remarkable reduction in polyp size and number.. However, these preliminary studies were limited in their design (non-placebo controlled, limited number of affected individuals, some individuals with only surveyable rectum). Several controlled trials subsequently confirmed a decrease in polyp burden during sulindac therapy [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a, Nugent et al 1993]. Rapid reappearance or increase in polyp number was observed, however, after sulindac was stopped [Labayle et al 1991, Giardiello et al 1993a]. A subsequent study designed to evaluate primary prevention of polyps in indivduals with APC pathogenic variants showed a non-statistically significant trend towards benefit compared to placebo [Giardiello et al 2002]. The FDA initially approved celecoxib for FAP based on evidence showing decrease in polyp burden and size in the colon (as well as modest decrease in the duodenum) [Steinbach et al 2000, Phillips et al 2002]. However, due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular safety concerns, rofecoxib was taken off the market altogether and FDA approval for celecoxib for FAP was withdrawn. Aspirin has been shown to be of little or no benefit in FAP [Burn et al 2011, Ishikawa et al 2013]. Interest in combination of NSAIDs with other drugs was raised when reports of sulindac plus difluoromethylornithine (celecoxib) showed marked reduction in sporadic metachronous adenomas [Meyskens et al 2008]. In a randomized placebo-controlled study of 92 participants with FAP, sulindac plus erlotinib (an EGF receptor inhibitor) resulted in decreased duodenal polyp burden compared to placebo after six months of use [Samadder et al 2016]. Adverse events were common in the treatment group (87% experienced an acne-like rash), though serious adverse events were rare (2 total participants) [Samadder et al 2016]. When celecoxib was compared to celecoxib plus difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in FAP, there was no significant difference in polyp burden within a defined endoscopic field (however, when more comprehensive video assessment was used, there was a decrease in polyp burden in the combination therapy group) [Lynch et al 2016]. A number of chemoprevention trials are currently under way (see Therapies Under Investigation). The FDA has stated that changes in adenoma number and size are insufficient for regulatory approval, with evidence of clinical benefit required. Suitable examples of clinical benefit cited include decreasing the risk of colorectal cancer or reducing the need for surgery. Trials currently under way are designed to address these end points. Note: NSAID use before colectomy remains experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Colectomy is advised to reduce the risk for colorectal cancer in FAP. For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, but in approximately one third of individuals, the colonic polyps are limited enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is sufficient to prevent colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy can therefore be utilized for surveillance, as well as prevention of colorectal cancer. To reduce the risk for duodenal/periampullary adenocarcinoma, endoscopic or surgical removal of duodenal and/or ampullary adenomas should be considered if polyps exhibit villous change or severe dysplasia, exceed one centimeter in diameter, or cause symptoms.

Surveillance

 Multiple professional societies have published guidelines based on the available evidence to date as well as expert consensus [Church et al 2003b, Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. The following surveillance recommendations are based on these expert society guidelines. 
            In individuals known to have FAP
           Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy every one to two years, beginning at age ten to 12 years Colonoscopy, once polyps are detected Annual colonoscopy thereafter if colectomy is delayed more than a year after polyps emerge. In individuals age ten to 20 years in whom adenomas are smaller than 6.0 mm and without villous component or high grade dysplasia, delay in colectomy may be considered. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) including complete visualization of the ampulla of Vater (using a duodenoscope if necessary) is recommended, though the age of initiation is variable. The American College of Gastroenterology recommends beginning screening at age 23 to 30 years, whereas the NCCN recommends starting at age 20 to 25 years or prior to colectomy. Surveillance is recommended every six months to four years depending on duodenal adenoma burden. The frequency of EGD depends on the severity of duodenal adenomas; Spigelman staging criteria can help determine the frequency. The Spigelman staging criteria are summarized by Syngal et al [2015] (see Table 9). The NCCN recommends examination of the stomach at time of upper endoscopy (frequency determined by duodenal polyp surveillance). Fundic gland polyps are common in FAP and low-grade dysplasia can be found, but rarely progresses. Specific gastric polyp screening or surgery should be considered in the setting of high-grade dysplasia only. Non-fundic gland polyps should be removed endoscopically. Annual physical examination including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations and neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm) and palpation of the thyroid starting in the late teenage years Thyroid cancer. In addition to annual thyroid examination, starting in late teenage years [NCCN 2016], annual thyroid ultrasound may be considered with fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]; however, data supporting this recommendation are limited [NCCN 2016]. Annual abdominal palpation for desmoids. If family history of desmoids, consider MRI or CT scan within one to three years post colectomy and then every five to ten years. Data to support screening and treatment of desmoid tumors are limited. Small-bowel polyps and cancer. Although the American College of Gastroenterology [Syngal et al 2015] does not recommend routine small bowel screening distal to the duodenum, the NCCN recommends considering adding small bowel visualization to CT or MRI for desmoids (if applicable), especially if duodenal polyposis is advanced. Screening for hepatoblastoma. Efficacy in individuals with FAP is unclear. Screening protocols in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, in which the risk for hepatoblastoma is also increased, often include frequent (every 2-3 months) abdominal ultrasound examinations and measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations, and have resulted in early detection of hepatoblastomas [Tan & Amor 2006]. Screening for hepatoblastoma in FAP using liver palpation, abdominal ultrasound, and measurement of AFP every three to six months during the first five years of life has been suggested [NCCN 2016]. Adrenal tumors. Smith et al [2000b] and Ferrández et al [2006] found no evidence to warrant screening for adrenal masses in FAP. 
            In individuals who have undergone colectomy
           If total colectomy with IPAA is performed, routine endoscopic surveillance of the ileal pouch is recommended every two years [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. If subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is performed, surveillance of the remaining rectum every six to 12 months, depending on the number of polyps that develop [Syngal et al 2015, NCCN 2016]. Cancer may still occur in the remaining rectum, but the risk is low with current management [Church et al 2003a]. If total colectomy with end ileostomy is performed, ileoscopy is recommended every two years [NCCN 2016]. 
            In individuals known to have attenuated FAP
           Colonoscopy every two to three years, beginning in late teens Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy with polypectomy every one to two years depending on polyp burden Colectomy. The absolute and relative indications for colectomy are the same as for FAP (see Surveillance). Screening and surveillance of the upper gastrointestinal tract as for FAP (see Surveillance) Annual physical examination, including evaluation for extraintestinal manifestations, neurologic deficits (to screen for CNS neoplasm), and palpation of the thyroid with consideration of follow-up ultrasound examination and fine-needle aspiration if thyroid nodules are present [Herraiz et al 2007]. Thyroid screening with ultrasound, even without clinical findings, may also be warranted, as none of the five affected individuals with thyroid cancer in one study were detected with neck examination [Jarrar et al 2011]. Due to the lower risk of desmoid tumors and hepatoblastomas in attenuated FAP compared to FAP, screening of these tumors is currently not recommended. In individuals known to have GAPPS. It is currently unknown if screening for gastric cancer or prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Due to the extent of gastric polyposis, in addition to reports of rapid progression of fundic gland polyposis, gastric cancer surveillance in this condition may have limited effectiveness [Repak et al 2016].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Surgery and desmoid risk. There is evidence that the risk for desmoid tumors is increased by abdominal surgery and may be higher in surgical procedures that require two stages to complete. Individuals at high risk for desmoids (women; those with APC pathogenic variants in codons 1395-1493; those with a family history of desmoids) may consider delaying surgery longer than might otherwise be recommended or undergoing an operation that is likely to be definitive for colorectal cancer risk (e.g., total colectomy with ileostomy) in order to minimize the likelihood of the need for a second operation. Surgery and fecundity. There is a lower rate of fecundity in women after a total colectomy with ileo-anal anastamosis than after an ileorectal anastamosis. This issue should be included as part of the discussion of surgical options with women with FAP [Olsen et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Recommended genetic testing for at-risk family members. Early recognition of APC-associated polyposis conditions may allow for timely intervention and improved final outcome; thus, surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk children for early manifestations is appropriate; see Syngal et al [2015] (full text), NCCN [2016]. Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members (see Genetic Counseling) improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant. A cost analysis comparing molecular genetic testing and sigmoidoscopy screening for individuals at risk for APC-associated polyposis conditions shows that genetic testing is more cost effective than sigmoidoscopy in determining who in the family is affected [Cromwell et al 1998]. Additionally, individuals diagnosed with APC-associated polyposis conditions as a result of having an affected relative have a significantly greater life expectancy than those individuals diagnosed on the basis of symptoms [Heiskanen et al 2000]. As colon screening for those at risk for FAP begins as early as age ten to 12 years, molecular genetic testing is generally offered to children at risk for FAP by age ten years. Genetic testing at birth may also be warranted, as some parents and pediatricians may consider hepatoblastoma screening from infancy to age five years in affected offspring. Colon screening for those with attenuated FAP begins in late teenage years; thus, molecular genetic testing may be delayed until that time. Note: No evidence points to an optimal age at which to begin screening; thus, the ages at which testing is performed and screening initiated may vary by center, family history, hepatoblastoma screening, and/or the needs of the parents and/or child.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy/fertility/hormone use. Limited information is available on the effect of pregnancy on females with FAP. In one study of 58 Danish women with FAP including 16 who had undergone colonic surgery, the same frequency of fertility, pregnancy, and delivery was observed as in a control population [Johansen et al 1990]. A larger study of 162 women with FAP compared fertility rates before and after two types of colorectal surgery with a control population. Women with FAP who had not yet undergone surgery had the same fertility as a control population of normal women. Additionally, those women with FAP who had a colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA) had the same fertility as the control population. Fertility was significantly reduced in women with FAP who had a proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) compared to the control population [Olsen et al 2003]. In another study, the prevalence of self-reported fertility problems was similar among individuals with FAP who had undergone IRA, IPAA, or proctocolectomy with ileostomy [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010]. However, those who had their first surgical procedure at a younger age had more postoperative fertility problems [Nieuwenhuis et al 2010]. Little evidence supports an association between desmoid tumor development or growth and pregnancy [Sinha et al 2011]. Women who have undergone colectomy are considered to be at the same risk for obstetric complications as any other woman who has had major abdominal surgery and are more likely to be delivered by C-section than those without such surgery. As anti-estrogen medications have been successfully used in the treatment of desmoid tumors, the development of desmoid tumors is thought to be affected by hormones important in pregnancy. However, one study has shown that women who had a previous pregnancy and developed a desmoid tumor had significantly fewer complications from the desmoid tumor than those who had never had a pregnancy [Church & McGannon 2000]. In a study of women with FAP at the time of their colectomy, no association was found between pregnancy history and colonic polyp severity; however, the proportion of parous women with severe duodenal disease was significantly higher than the proportion of nulliparous women [Suraweera et al 2007]. Some studies have suggested that female hormones protect against colorectal cancer development in the general population. In one woman, reduction in polyps after use of oral contraceptives was observed [Giardiello et al 2005].

Therapies Under Investigation

 There is currently an ongoing (recruitment is complete) multicenter trial comparing DFMO plus sulindac versus each agent alone to evaluate time to first occurrence of an FAP-related event (defined as need for surgery or development of advanced neoplasia or death). See ClinicalTrials. In a single controlled trial, the omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) led to a 20%-30% decrease in FAP polyp size and number [West et al 2010]. Trials with similar agents are being planned. Curcumin is the main component in the spice turmeric. In a small uncontrolled series of five affected individuals, all individuals had a reduction in polyp size and number after six months of therapy compared to baseline [Cruz-Correa et al 2006]. Recruitment has been completed on a 12-month dual-center, double-blinded randomized placebo-controlled trial of curcumin in FAP with a primary outcome of polyp size and number. See ClinicalTrials. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.