http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fbxl4-mtddepl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of the disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome, the evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) listed in Table 4 are recommended.


Table 4. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis




System
Evaluation
Comment




Eyes
Ophthalmologic evaluation



ENT
Hearing assessment



Cardiovascular
Cardiac evaluation w/electrocardiogram & echocardiography
Consider referral to cardiology if results are abnormal


Gastrointestinal
Nutritional evaluation; swallowing assessment for feeding difficulties



Evaluation of liver function w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile


Neurologic
Neurology consultation including comprehensive neurologic examination



Brain MRI to evaluate extent of the disease



Electroencephalogram
If there is a history of seizures


Immunologic
Complete blood count to evaluate for neutropenia
Consider more detailed immunologic evaluation if there is a history of recurrent infections


Miscellaneous / Other
Developmental evaluation to provide baseline level of functioning & recommendations for services (speech, occupational, & physical therapy)



Consultation w/a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including Neurology, Nutrition, Clinical Genetics/ Metabolism, and Developmental Pediatrics. Other specialties including Gastroenterology, Cardiology, Hematology, Immunology, Ophthalmology, and Nephrology may be involved based on the associated complications. No definite treatment is available to date; thus, treatment is mainly supportive (Table 5). Administration of cofactors and antioxidants, used in mitochondrial disorders with (generally) limited evidence of benefit, may be considered.


Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome




Manifestation
Treatment
Considerations/Other




Inadequate nutrition
A nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube are frequently needed due to feeding difficulties & failure to thrive
In one affected child, improved nutrition resulted in improvement in hypogammaglobulinemia & neutropenia 1


Seizures
Standard treatment w/antiepileptic drugs



Immobility/wheelchair dependence
Consultation w/physical medicine & rehabilitation (PM&R) specialists to help w/mobility or assistive devices (e.g., wheelchair



Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia
Standard treatment per Cardiology recommendations



Neutropenia
Consider granulocyte colony stimulating factor 2



Significant acidosis
Consider bicarbonate therapy



Cataract and/or strabismus
Surgical treatment if indicated



Hearing loss
Hearing aids






1. 

Antoun et al [2016]



2. 

Huemer et al [2015]

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with FBXL4-related mtDNA depletion syndrome 
Antoun et al [2016] 
Huemer et al [2015]

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states. Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed. 
Ages 5-21 years In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21. Discussion about transition plans including financial and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood. All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider: Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction


Gross motor dysfunction Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility. Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers). Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing). Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control. Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Regular immunization to prevent life-threatening infections is indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis may be indicated for those with immunodeficiency [Antoun et al 2016].

Surveillance

No surveillance guidelines have been published. The following evaluations should be performed on a regular basis, with the treating physician determining the frequency based on initial presentation and severity of the condition.


Table 6. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome




System
Evaluation




Eyes
Ophthalmologic evaluation


ENT/Mouth
Hearing evaluation


Cardiovascular
Echocardiogram & electrocardiogram to monitor for development of cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia, respectively


Gastrointestinal
Continued assessment of nutrition and growth


Measurement of serum lactate, electrolytes, & liver function tests w/AST/ALT, bilirubin, total protein, albumin, & coagulation profile


Neurologic
Regular neurologic evaluations & developmental assessments


Immunologic
Complete blood count

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with FBXL4-Related mtDNA Depletion Syndrome

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.