

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of neurologic and intellectual impairment in an individual diagnosed with familial dysautonomia, the following evaluations are recommended: Standardized intelligence tests; frequently demonstrate better verbal than motor performance. Electroencephalography; may identify epileptic activity, although seizures with decerebrate posturing can follow breath holding even in children with normal EEG findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); frequently shows generalized atrophy, including in the cerebellum, which may contribute worsening of the ataxic gait and greater balance problems. Assessment of chronic respiratory disease including spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Feeding problems. Maintain adequate nutrition and avoid aspiration. For infants, thickened formula and different-shaped nipples are useful in managing orophyaryngeal incoordination. Aversion to feeding and failure to thrive are managed frequently by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement. Gastroesophageal reflux. Upright positioning with feeds, prokinetic agents, H2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and gastrostomy with or without fundoplication are appropriate. Vomiting crises are treated with intravenous or rectal diazepam (0.2 mg/kg q3h) and rectal chloral hydrate (30 mg/kg q6h), and IV administration of fluids to prevent dehydration. Other treatments used include [Palma et al 2014]: Alpha2 adrenergic agonist clonidine (transdermal clonidine patch): 0.1-0.3 mg/24h provides stable blood levels and is preferable to oral dosages. Clonidine, which augments baroreflex sensitivity and parasympathetic modulation in familial dysautonomia, stabilizes the cardiovascular system and may attenuate feeding-induced crises [Marthol et al 2003]. Although no controlled trials have been conducted, clonidine is frequently used in autonomic crisis. Slow tapering is recommended when discontinuing clonidine treatment [Palma et al 2014]. In some patients admitted to an ICU, dexmedetomidine (a selective agonist of alpha2 adrenoreceptors in the brain and spinal cord that inhibit sympathetic outflow) was effective. Carbidopa (a reversible dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor) 200 mg three times daily was assessed in a recent double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that provided level II-b evidence that treatment with carbidopa can reduce the frequency and severity of hypertensive vomiting [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013]. Lung disease. Chronic lung disease is treated with daily chest physiotherapy (nebulization, bronchodilators, cough augmentation, incentive spirometry, and postural drainage). Giarraffa et al [2005] determined that the use of high-frequency chest-wall oscillation improved all measured health outcomes significantly, including pneumonias, hospitalizations, antibiotic courses, antibiotic days, doctor visits, absenteeism, and oxygen saturation. Early diagnosis of pneumonia and infectious agents is important due to the common involvement of gastric flora (secondary to aspirations). Individuals with FD are prone to viral respiratory infections and, in some cases, concomitant bacterial infections. Treatment with oseltamivir is indicated for influenza virus infections [Palma et al 2014]. Orthostatic hypotension. Therapeutic measures include hydration, elastic stockings, and leg exercises to increase muscle tone and reduce pooling of blood in the veins of the legs. Counter-maneuvers (e.g., squatting, bending forward, and abdominal compression) improve orthostatic blood pressure in persons with FD mainly by increasing cardiac output [Tutaj et al 2006]. Squatting had the greatest effect. However, the suitability and effectiveness of a specific counter-maneuver depend on the orthopedic and/or neurologic complications identified in each individual. To determine whether fludrocortisone is effective in treating postural hypotension and whether it has an effect on survival and secondary long-term FD problems, Axelrod et al [2005] compared persons treated with fludrocortisone with untreated persons and found that cumulative survival was significantly higher during the first decade in treated versus untreated individuals. In subsequent decades, the addition of midodrine improved cumulative survival. Of note, treatment of orthostatic hypotension with high doses of fludrocortisone (>0.2 mg/day) was shown to accelerate the progression of renal damage in persons with FD [Norcliffe-Kaufmann et al 2013]. Hypertension. Attention to factors precipitating hypertension rather than use of antihypertensive agents is appropriate because blood pressure is labile. Sleeping with the head of the bed raised (20°-40°) helps to reduce orthostatic hypotension by lowering supine hypertension, reducing nocturnal pressure-diuresis, and raising intravascular volume in the morning. The guidelines for hypertension treatment in patients with FD and chronic kidney disease are the same as for the general population. Kidney and bladder. Chronic renal failure, resulting from ischemic glomerulosclerosis, is common. Adequate control of blood pressure is an important factor in delaying the appearance of kidney disease. Renal tubular acidosis, which occurs frequently in FD, often requires treatment with bicarbonate. Hyperkalemia, which is also common, is treated with low potassium diet. Bradyarrhythmia. Speculating that fatal bradyarrhythmia is an etiologic factor in sudden death associated with FD, Gold-von Simson et al [2005] studied 20 persons with FD with a history of syncope and cardiac arrest and concluded that a pacemaker may protect from fatal bradyarrhythmia and may decrease the incidence of syncope. If sleep-disordered breathing is confirmed, treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) must be initiated. Eyes. Decreased corneal sensation and absence of tearing predispose to corneal ulcerations, which can be managed with artificial tear solutions containing methylcellulose administered three to six times daily, maintenance of normal body hydration, and moisture chamber spectacle attachments. Soft contact lenses can promote corneal healing. Tarsorrhaphy is reserved for treatment of corneal injury that is unresponsive to these measures. Corneal transplantation has had limited success. Chronic blepharitis is common and requires treatment with combined topical antibiotic/corticosteroid ointment. Strabismus is almost always present (93%), and early surgical correction may help. Spine. Spinal fusion may be necessary. 
            Other
           Many adults use walkers or wheelchairs when outside the home. Sialorrhea is a common. Surgical and anti-cholinergic drugs were used in the past. Recently the use of botulinium toxin injected to major salivary glands has been suggested [Daniel & Cardona 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Use of general anesthetics requires adequate hydration. Fitting of braces requires care as reduced sensitivity to pain may cause decubitus ulcers to develop at pressure points. Exercise can help correct or prevent secondary contractures.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine assessment of growth in children Periodic evaluation of chronic respiratory disease: spirometry (possible from age 6 years onwards), arterial blood gases, polysomnography, and a swallow study. Follow-up frequency depends on findings. Regular monitoring of blood pressure and optimal management of blood pressure lability to help prevent some of the neurologic progression with age, which can be associated with compromised cerebral perfusion Routine monitoring of other cardiovascular problems that can worsen with age (e.g., a greater degree of postural hypotension, worsening of supine hypertension, development of ischemic glomerulosclerosis, and cardiac arrhythmias) [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007] Monitoring for adequate hydration by measurement of blood urea nitrogen levels Screening for sleep-disordered breathing with polysomnography Periodic eye examination for strabismus, corneal opacities, or abnormal eye movements Annual examination of the spine for early evidence of scoliosis to permit timely institution of bracing and exercise therapy Periodic assessment of psychomotor development and behavior in children

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Symptoms tend to be worse in hot or humid weather; patients should try to avoid being outdoors in such conditions as much as possible. Other situations that can exacerbate disease manifestations include a full bladder; frequent visits to the lavatory are recommended [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]. Since long car rides, coming out of a movie theater, or fatigue can also worsen symptoms, such situations should be avoided to the extent that this is possible [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]. Episodic hypertension can occur in response to emotional stress or visceral pain, and therefore patients should also try to avoid these [Axelrod & Gold-von Simson 2007]. Environmental situations associated with hypobaric hypoxia (e.g., aircraft flight or ascent to high altitude) pose a potential risk to patients with daytime hypercapnia [Palma et al 2014].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancies in women with FD are considered high risk because of abrupt changes in blood pressure. High blood pressure secondary to FD is difficult to differentiate from toxemia or other causes of pregnancy-related high blood pressure. Awareness of volume loss and low blood pressure is important because of the absence of reflex tachycardia to low blood pressure. Visceral pain related to contractions during labor is perceived normally; therefor, analgesia should be provided. Epidural anesthesia is preferable due to blood pressure lability during general anesthesia or spinal block [Maayan et al 2000].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Kinetin. FD results from an intron 20 pathogenic variant that causes a unique pattern of tissue-specific exon skipping. Accurate splicing of the mutated allele is particularly inefficient in the nervous system. Slaugenhaupt et al [2004] showed that treatment with the plant cytokinin kinetin alters splicing of ELP1 (IKBKAP) and significantly increases inclusion of exon 20 from the endogenous gene. Hims et al [2007] demonstrated that treatment of FD lymphoblast cell lines with kinetin increases ELP1 mRNA and elongator complex protein 1 (Elp1, also known as IKBKAP or IKAP) to normal levels and that deletion of a region at the end of ELP1 exon 20 disrupts the ability of kinetin to improve exon inclusion. In a later study, Gold-von Simson et al [2009] investigated whether oral kinetin altered ELP1 splicing in vivo. They administered kinetin to 29 healthy carriers of the major ELP1 pathogenic variant associated with FD and monitored adverse effects, as well as kinetin and ELP1 mRNA levels. After eight days they found that ELP1 mRNA expression in leukocytes increased as kinetin levels increased and noted that these findings strongly suggest a therapeutic role for kinetin in FD. In a study conducted by Axelrod et al [2011], kinetin was administered to eight individuals with FD at a dose of 23.5 mg/kg/d for 28 days. An increase in wild type ELP1 mRNA expression in leukocytes was noted after eight days in six of the eight; after 28 days, the mean increase compared with baseline was significant (p = 0.002). Long-term clinical trials are warranted. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The isolation of human iPSCs offers a novel strategy for modeling human disease. Lee et al [2009] derived patient-specific FD-iPSCs from three persons with familial dysautonomia and performed directed differentiation into cells of all three germ layers including peripheral neurons. They exposed FD-iPSC-derived neural crest precursors to kinetin, which resulted in a dramatic reduction of the mutated ELP1 splice form. In contrast, no significant improvements in ELP1 splicing were observed after ECGC or tocotrienol exposure. The kinetin-mediated decrease in mutated ELP1 was associated with an increase in normal ELP1 levels and the ratio of normal:mutated transcript. No significant increase in normal ELP1 transcript levels was observed after kinetin treatment of neural crest precursors derived from control iPSCs. Although short-term (1-day or 5-day) kinetin treatment of FD-iPSC-derived neural crest precursors had considerable effects on ELP1 splicing, it did not result in a significant increase in the expression of neurogenic markers or improve migration behavior. They next tested the effect of continuous (28-day) kinetin treatment of FD-iPSCs starting at the pluripotent stage one day before differentiation. Notably, continuous kinetin treatment induced a significant increase in the percentage of differentiating neurons and in the expression of key peripheral neuron markers such as ASCL1 and SCG10 at the neural crest precursor stage. No significant increase was observed in FD-iPSC neural crest precursor cell migration, suggesting incomplete restoration of disease phenotype. The authors note that while future studies will be required to define the developmental windows of kinetin action in greater detail, these data indicate that long-term treatment beginning in the early stage may be particularly beneficial in persons with FD. More recently Lee et al [2012] performed large scale screening using FD-induced pluripotent stem cells to identify compounds that rescue IKBKAP expression. They screened 6,912 small-molecule compounds and characterized eight that rescued expression of IKBKAP. One of the compounds, SKF-86466, was found to induce IKBKAP transcription through modulation of intracellular cAMP levels and PKA-dependent CREB phosphorylation. SKF-86466 also rescued IKAP protein expression and the disease-specific loss of autonomic neuronal marker expression. SKF or other compounds including kinetin do not rescue the migratory defect of FD-iPSC derived neural crest cells. Because it is not clear whether any of the compounds will affect degenerative aspects of the disease such as the survival of postmitotic sensory or autonomic neurons, more pre-clinical studies are required. Tocotrienols.
Anderson & Rubin [2005] found that individuals with FD have reduced MAO A mRNA levels, and that FD-derived cells, stimulated with tocotrienols (members of the vitamin E family) or (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG, a major polyphenolic antioxidant present in green tea to produce increased levels of functional Elp1, expressed increased amounts of MAO A mRNA transcript and protein. They found that administration of tocotrienol to individuals with FD resulted in increased expression of both functional Elp1 and MAO A transcripts in peripheral blood cells and suggested that this demonstrates the value of therapeutic approaches designed to elevate cellular levels of functional Elp1 and MAO A. Subsequently, Rubin et al [2008] examined the impact of tocotrienols on the frequency of hypertensive crises and cardiac function. After three to four months of tocotrienol ingestion, 80% of the patients reported a significant (50%) decrease in the number of crises. In a smaller group of patients, most exhibited a post-exercise increase in heart rate and a decrease in the QT interval. Based on these findings, the authors hypothesized that tocotrienol therapy would improve the long-term clinical outlook and survival of patients with FD. In a study by Anderson et al [2012] the simultaneous exposure of FD-derived cells to genistein and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) resulted in the almost exclusive production of the exon-20-containing transcript and the production of wild type amounts of IKAP protein. The authors suggest clinical evaluation of combined administration of these commonly used nutraceuticals. Pregabalin.
Axelrod & Berlin [2009] investigated the use of pregabalin, a 3-isobutyl derivative of GABA known to have anticonvulsant, antiepileptic, anxiolytic, and analgesic activities, in the treatment of nausea and dysautonomic crises. They treated a cohort of 15 patients with FD who experienced frequent dysautonomic crises with pregabalin and found that nausea and overt crises markedly decreased in 13 (87%). The overall assessments of benefit were extremely favorable, prompting the authors to suggest that pregabalin may be a potentially useful therapeutic agent in FD. Phosphatidylserine (PS). Another study performed by Keren et al [2010] showed that PS, a phospholipidic component of cell membranes and FDA-approved food supplement, elevates the levels of IKAP (ELP-1) in FD cell lines. While kinetin increases the levels of correctly spliced IKAP transcripts (thus altering the ratio between exon 20 inclusion and skipping), phosphatidylserine appears to increase levels of transcription without altering the ratio. PS treatment of FD cells elevated wild type IKAP mRNA and protein levels and resulted in a cell cycle distribution similar to that of the control cells. A significant number of genes up-regulated following PS treatment are also involved in DNA metabolic processes and in DNA repair mechanisms. On increases in cellular metabolism and synthesis of nucleotides, transcription by RNA polymerase II increases; thus, the increase in mRNA levels is not specific to IKAP. Recently, Bochner et al [2013] showed an increase of IKBAKP mRNA and IKAP protein levels following PS administration in various tissues of FD humanized mice (homozygous humanized mouse strain carrying human exon 20 and its two flanking introns) without affecting exon 20 inclusion levels. The authors of the studies suggest PS as a potential therapeutic agent. Digoxin. The cardiac glycoside digoxin was shown by Liu et al [2013] to alter and increase the production of the wild type, exon 20-containing, I ELP1-encoded transcript and the full-length IκB-kinase-complex-associated protein in FD-derived cells. The digoxin-mediated effect on splicing was SRSF3-binding site dependent; the site is located in the intron 5' of the alternatively spliced exon and digoxin was shown to mediate its effect by suppressing the level of the SRSF3 protein. These experiments were conducted in cells transfected with an ELP1 minigene construct bearing the IVS20+6T>C pathogenic variant. The author suggests further investigation of the possible use of digoxin as a therapeutic modality for FD. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.