

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (adFEVR), the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmologic examination, including indirect ophthalmoscopy and scleral depression Fundus fluorescein angiography, which increases the detection rate of peripheral avascularity in asymptomatic affected individuals [Ober et al 1980]

Treatment of Manifestations

 Retinal avascularity per se often requires no treatment; however, it can induce ischemia, leading to neovascularization of the retinal periphery, which can be treated with prophylactic cryotherapy or argon laser photocoagulation to attempt to induce regression of the new vessels. Similar treatments are used to treat retinal holes and areas of retinal exudate to prevent retinal detachment. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments produced by retinal traction are repaired surgically using conventional methods, but the prognosis is guarded. Exudative retinal detachments may be stabilized with cryotherapy, but the prognosis is poor.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The arc of peripheral retinal avascularity, thought to be an aberration of retinal development, is not preventable using current treatments.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Patients with FEVR associated with reduced bone density would be expected to benefit from drugs used to treat osteoporosis, although long-term data demonstrating an increase in bone density in these patients is not yet available [Downey et al 2006].

Surveillance

 Children who are at risk based on family history should undergo regular fundus examination to evaluate for the development of retinal neovascularization, traction, or exudate. Asymptomatic individuals with a small region of peripheral avascularity may require annual review only. Those with active neovascularization or exudate may well require treatment and close observation thereafter. Individuals with retinal traction require review at intervals depending on the degree of stability of the clinical findings. The frequency of the review varies by individual depending on the assessment of the examining clinician.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Relatives at risk benefit from fundus examination and, ideally, fundus fluorescein angiography to identify any characteristic lesions. Prophylaxis in the form of peripheral retinal ablation with laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy depends on the individual's age and the progression of the lesion. If the pathogenic mutation has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing of at-risk family members may be useful: relatives who do not have the family-specific mutation do not need regular retinal examinations. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors are currently in widespread use for acquired retinal diseases with a neovascular or exudative component. An as-yet unpublished study presented information on six children with FEVR and sight-threatening retinal neovascularization and exudate who had failed to stabilize with conventional treatments [Drenser 2006]. Treatment with pegaptanib sodium intravitreal injection resulted in a sustained decrease in exudate over six months; however, retinal traction continued to progress; in some eyes this appeared to be initiated by VEGF inhibition. The long-term effects of VEGF inhibition on the eye and the effects of VEGF inhibition in a pediatric population are currently unknown. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.