http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/flnb-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FLNB-related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended: Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) syndrome Ophthalmologic examination for retinal anomalies Audiometry to assess for sensorineural hearing loss Spine films to evaluate for vertebral abnormalities that predispose to scoliosis Cervical spine films to evaluate for cervical dysplasia Medical genetics consultation Larsen syndrome Lateral cervical spine films in flexion and extension to look for dysplasia that can lead to cervical cord myelopathyNote: Early diagnosis of cervical kyphosis may influence the surgical approach used to stabilize the spine (see Treatment of Manifestations). Audiometry to assess hearing Assessment of the hips for dislocation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Cervical spine instability. Case series indicate that early intervention to improve cervical spine stability in asymptomatic infants using posterior arthrodesis is successful. In infants with myelopathic signs function can be stabilized, if not improved, by a combination of anterior decompression and circumferential arthrodesis [Johnston et al 1996, Sakaura et al 2007, Madera et al 2008]. Large joint dislocations. Conservative, nonsurgical management of hip dislocation in Larsen syndrome is often unsuccessful and operative reduction is usually required. Scoliosis is treated medically; no effective surgical intervention has been described. Club feet are managed in a routine manner. Cleft palate should be treated by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team when possible. Hearing loss. Ideally, the team evaluating and treating the deaf individual should consist of an otolaryngologist with expertise in the management of early childhood otologic disorders, an audiologist experienced in the assessment of hearing loss in children, a clinical geneticist, and a pediatrician. The expertise of an educator of the Deaf may also be required. An important part of the evaluation is determining the appropriate habilitation option. Possibilities include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Evidence suggests that preemptive posterior stabilization of the cervical spine in individuals with Larsen syndrome with cervical spine dysplasia may prevent this complication and that combined anterior and posterior stabilization can lead to clinical improvement in individuals with evidence of myelopathy [Sakaura et al 2007]. Because of the cervical vertebral abnormalities observed in both SCT syndrome and Larsen syndrome, the cervical spine should be evaluated for features of instability prior to general anesthesia. Care must be taken intraoperatively to minimize extension of the cervical spine [Malik & Choudhry 2002, Critchley & Chan 2003]. Additionally, individuals with Larsen syndrome are at increased risk for airway complications related to laryngotracheomalacia; thus, it has been suggested that anesthetic agents that exhibit more rapid induction and recovery are preferred [Morishima et al 2004].

Surveillance

 Vertebral anomalies can lead to progressive scoliosis; orthopedic monitoring is therefore indicated. If an individual with Larsen syndrome is born without dislocated hips, careful surveillance should be maintained to ensure that dislocation does not occur.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Delivery of an affected infant has the potential to be complicated by extended breech presentation due to dislocation of the hips and knees.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.