http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fmf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to assess joint problems Urinalysis for the presence of protein. If proteinuria is found, further evaluation is required including measurement of 24-hour urinary protein, renal function tests, and consider a rectal biopsy for the presence of amyloid. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 For information on treatment with colchicine see Prevention of Primary Manifestations. Colchicine is not effective as treatment for an acute FMF attack. During an acute episode, the therapeutic approach should be mainly supportive, including administration of intravenous saline for hydration and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), paracetamol or dipyrone for pain relief [Ozturk et al 2011]. Febrile and inflammatory episodes are usually treated with NSAIDs. End-stage renal disease caused by renal amyloidosis should be treated as for other causes of renal failure. The long-term outcome of live related-donor renal transplantation in individuals with FMF-amyloidosis is similar to that in the general transplant population [Sherif et al 2003].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 
            Colchicine Homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. Individuals who are homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val or compound heterozygous for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele should be treated with colchicine as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed to prevent both the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Colchicine is given orally, 1-2 mg/day in adults. Children may need 0.5-1 mg/day according to age and weight. Affected individuals should receive colchicine for life. Individuals who do not have the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant and who are only mildly affected (those with infrequent inflammatory attacks) should either be treated with colchicine or be monitored every six months for the presence of proteinuria. Continuous treatment with colchicine appears to be less indicated for individuals who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Glu148Gln. Colchicine should only be given to these individuals if they develop severe inflammatory episodes and/or proteinuria as a result of amyloidosis. Heterozygotes. The presence of a single MEFV pathogenic variant together with clinical symptoms is sufficient to warrant the initiation of a trial of colchicine; therefore, manifesting heterozygotes should be treated [Booty et al 2009]. However, for asymptomatic heterozygotes there is no indication for treatment. Complications of colchicine use occasionally include myopathy and toxic epidermal necrolysis-like reaction. Treatment of affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine. Some individuals appear to be unresponsive to colchicine treatment. In one study this was associated with inadequate colchicine concentration in mononuclear cells, possibly resulting from a genetic defect underlying FMF [Lidar et al 2004] or from poor compliance. Canakinumab is an anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody that binds human IL-1β and neutralizes its pro-inflammatory effects. Canakinumab has been recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of CAPS. Canakinumab differs from anakinra and rilonacept in that it has high specificity for IL-1β, it has a longer half-life than anakinra (26 days), it can be administered every two months, and its effectiveness lasts longer. In one individual with FMF with longstanding destructive arthritis, canakinumab, given as a first-line agent, induced a complete clinical remission [Mitroulis et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Mitroulis et al 2011, Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Canakinumab was effective in an individual with FMF who was unresponsive to colchicine and anakinra [Hacihamdioglu & Ozen 2012]. Alpa & Roccatello [2015] reported continued efficacy after two years of treatment. Rilonacept, an IL-1 receptor fusion protein, reduced the fever episodes by 76%, and improved quality of life [Hashkes et al 2012], but failed to reduce the duration of the attacks. Results were confirmed in a subsequent study extended to 14 colchicine-resistant individuals [Hashkes et al 2014]. Hentgen et al [2013b] recommended that rilonacept, which is a long half-life molecule, should be considered only if anakinra, a short half-life molecule, has been proven to be effective. Anakinra, an IL-1-receptor inhibitor with a short half-life, has been shown to have a therapeutic advantage in persons with FMF who are resistant to colchicine. Several reports indicate that this offers a relatively safe and effective treatment (100 mg daily or every other day) for persons who do not respond to colchicine [Belkhir et al 2007, Bhat et al 2007, Gattringer et al 2007, Kuijk et al 2007, Calligaris et al 2008, Roldan et al 2008, Moser et al 2009, Petropoulou et al 2010, Meinzer et al 2011, Ozen et al 2011, Ozturk et al 2011, Hentgen et al 2013b]. Anakinra has been found to stop the attacks in 75% of individuals who did not respond to colchicine. Anakinra is expensive and has mild side effects, such as painful local reactions at the site of injections and possible risk of bronchopulmonary infection, especially in persons with other risk factors for pulmonary infections. Further studies are needed to investigate the long-term effects of this drug if it is to be taken continuously as required in severely affected individuals with FMF. Anakinra treatment should be considered in the presence of secondary amyloidosis, in candidates for renal transplantation due to end-stage renal amyloidosis, individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine, and individuals developing major side effects from colchicine. Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), was studied in a few individuals and found to be effective in the treatment of one individual with FMF who was resistant to colchicine, resulting in the complete remission of febrile abdominal episodes [Ozgocmen et al 2006]. In another individual, infliximab ameliorated the proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome secondary to amyloidosis and the recurrent attacks of arthritis and abdominal pain [Metyas et al 2004]. Weekly intravenous colchicine (1.0 mg) to supplement oral colchicine resulted in a 50% reduction (except joint attacks) in attack frequency in one study of 13 individuals [Lidar et al 2003]. This is not a long-term solution. Thalidomide has been used successfully in sporadic cases [Seyahi et al 2002, Seyahi et al 2006] but is not frequently used. Etanercept, a TNF dimeric fusion protein, has been shown to decrease the disease severity in colchicine-resistant individuals; three of the 14 individuals included in the study had adverse effects and switched to IL-1-receptor inhibitor [Sakallioglu et al 2006, Seyahi et al 2006, Mor et al 2007]. Interferon alpha is another therapeutic agent that has shown signs of promise in a few reports for affected individuals who are unresponsive to colchicine [Tunca et al 2004, Tweezer-Zaks et al 2008, Vandecasteele et al 2011]. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that included 34 individuals given interferon alpha or placebo, the authors could not demonstrate a definitive effect. Interferon alpha was effective in suppressing the acute inflammation of FMF only if administered at the earliest phase [Tunca et al 2004]. The possibility of interferon alpha side effects (e.g., chills and fatigue) should also be considered. Sulphasalazine. The use of sulphasalazine has been reported in a girl age eight years with a five-year history of typical FMF attacks. She was homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Met694Val and for several months had had arthritis of one knee that was unresponsive to NSAIDs or colchicine. Resolution was achieved after the addition of sulphasalazine at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day [Bakkaloglu et al 2009].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Treatment with colchicine 1.0 mg/day prevents renal amyloidosis even if the FMF attacks do not respond to the medication.

Surveillance

 All individuals with FMF including those not currently being treated, those being treated with colchicine, and those receiving medication other than colchicine should undergo an annual physical examination, a urine spot test for protein, and an evaluation for hematuria [Twig et al 2014]. Kosan et al [2013] additionally recommended monitoring acute-phase reactants (ESR and fibrinogen levels) at regular intervals during attack-free periods, particularly in those with the p.Met694Val pathogenic variant.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Cisplatin. One report suggests that cisplatin worsens symptoms of FMF [Toubi et al 2003]. Cyclosporin A appears to adversely affect renal transplant graft survival in individuals with FMF [Shabtai et al 2002]. It has also been reported to trigger FMF attacks, which responded well to colchicine in a previously asymptomatic individual with myelodysplastic syndrome who was heterozygous for the MEFV pathogenic variant p.Met694Ile [Sasaki et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing should be offered to all first-degree relatives and other at-risk family members as early as possible whether or not they have symptoms. This is especially important when the p.Met694Val allele is present because other affected family members may not have inflammatory attacks, but nevertheless remain at risk for amyloidosis (FMF type 2) and thus need to be treated with colchicine (1.0 mg/day) to prevent the development of renal amyloidosis. Note: About 15% of individuals with autosomal dominant FMF develop amyloidosis and end-stage renal failure if untreated. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Ben-Chetrit et al [2010] conducted a survey to evaluate the outcome of 179 pregnancies of women taking colchicine to treat FMF. No differences were found between the treated group and the control group regarding early abortions, late abortions, or congenital malformations. Similar findings were reported by Diav-Citrin et al [2010]. Nevertheless, it is still important to discuss the option of amniocentesis for every pregnancy in mothers treated with colchicine.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The decrease of blood nitric oxide (NO) levels in individuals with FMF may trigger fever by initiating the production of IL-6. Plasma NO levels in those with FMF were significantly increased during attack-free periods following treatment with ImmunoGuard®, which has a normalizing effect both on NO and IL-6 blood levels in persons with FMF during attacks [Panossian et al 2003]. However, further studies are needed to confirm a single report of successful treatment of FMF with ImmunoGuard® (Andrographis paniculata Nees) [Amaryan et al 2003]. The role of biologics such as other anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) agents (adalimumab and golimumab) in the treatment of FMF has recently been investigated [Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. Anti-TNF agents have shown efficacy in rheumatic diseases, and there are many reports of persons with FMF responding favorably to treatment with these agents [Ozgocmen & Akgul 2011]. One study showed that the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine significantly decreased the number of acute attacks in individuals with colchicine-resistant FMF, several of whom also suffered from depression. The authors suggested that the depression may have triggered the attacks, and that treatment of the depression had the effect of suppressing the attacks [Onat et al 2007]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.