

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in a child diagnosed with hereditary folate malabsorption (HFM), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment by a pediatric neurologist to determine baseline neurologic status Baseline (and follow-up) formal cognitive testing Note: Appropriate monitoring of neurologic/cognitive response to treatment is recommended to ensure that the CSF folate levels achieved with treatment are adequate. Initial evaluation and follow up by a metabolic genetic specialist

Treatment of Manifestations

 The goal of treatment is to prevent hematologic, immunologic, and neurologic deficits and to optimize the cognitive development of children with this disorder. Complete reversal of the systemic consequences of folate deficiency is easily achieved. While correction of the neurologic consequences is more difficult, favorable neurologic outcomes are possible when adequate treatment is initiated promptly. “Folates” refers to a family of B9 vitamin compounds that are interconvertible in a series of intracellular biochemical reactions. Folate can be effective when administered by oral or parenteral routes; however, much higher oral than parenteral doses are required to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The parenteral route is probably more effective in achieving CSF folate levels appropriate to the age of the affected individual. In either case, achieving CSF folate levels in the normal range for the age of the affected individual is challenging [Torres et al 2015].

Folate Formulations

 Based on the current understanding of folate transport and metabolism, the following reduced folates can be used to treat HFM: 5-formyltetrahydrofolate (5-formylTHF), also known as folinic acid or Leucovorin®, is a racemic stable form of folate. The active isomer is found in low quantities in normal human tissues. Leucovorin is available in oral and parenteral formulations. There is considerable experience in dosing with this folate form (see Folate Dosing). The active isomer of 5-formylTHF, (6S)5-formylTHF (also known as Isovorin® or Fusilev®), is available for parenteral administration. Anecdotal observations suggest that the active isomer may be more effective for treatment when there is refractory neurologic disease. The biologic impact of the active isomer is twice that of the racemic mixture when the dose is the same. The physiologic folate predominant in blood and tissues, (6S)5-methyltetrahydrofolate or (6S)5-methylTHF, is now available commercially as Metafolin® and Deplin®. Neither drug is available for parenteral administration. Published information on the use of (6S)5-methylTHF for the treatment of HFM is not available, although the dosing should be comparable to that of (6S)5-formylTHF. The formulation of Metafolin® is too low (800 µg) to make this agent feasible for the treatment of HFM. Deplin® is available as a 15-mg tablet. Note: If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Folate Dosing

 Because HFM is rare, controlled studies to establish optimal treatment have not been possible. The oral dose of 5-formylTHF required to overcome the loss of PCFT-mediated intestinal folate absorption appears to vary from individual to individual. The dose required to obviate the neurologic consequences is much higher than that needed to correct the systemic folate deficiency. The dose should be guided by its effect on trough CSF folate concentrations. The end-point is CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to the normal range for the affected individual’s age: The reported oral dose of 5-formylTHF associated with a “good” outcome is approximately 150-200 mg daily [Geller et al 2002]. Much higher doses have been used as well [personal communication to Author]. A reasonable starting oral dose of 5-formylTHF in an infant could be 50 mg or 10-15 mg/kg given daily as a single dose. Note: Normal CSF folate is approximately 100 nmol/L for infants to age two years, decreasing to approximately 75 nmol/L by age five years and to approximately 65 nmol/L by age 19 years [Verbeek et al 2008]. The parenteral dose required to achieve adequate blood folate levels is much lower than the oral dose. With intramuscular injections of approximately 1.0 mg/day of 5-formylTHF, the anemia will fully correct; however, the endpoint for treatment is based on the CSF folate level, which will require much higher folate doses [Torres et al 2015].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Infants diagnosed by genetic testing before signs and symptoms appear should be treated immediately to prevent the onset of folate deficiency and the metabolic and clinical consequences of the disorder.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 If transfusion is required, care should be taken to administer blood products that are appropriate given the immunologic status of the affected individual (e.g., washed packed red blood cells for those who have IgA-deficienciency).

Surveillance

 The following should be monitored periodically to assess the adequacy of treatment, and more frequently following initial diagnosis when treatment is being optimized: Complete blood count Serum and CSF folate concentrations. In particular, monitoring the trough CSF folate concentration is critical to assure that the dose of folate is sufficient to achieve CSF folate concentrations as close as possible to what is normal for the affected individual’s age. Neurologic/cognitive status to ensure that CSF folate levels are adequate Serum and CSF homocysteine concentrations. A high homocysteine concentration is the most sensitive indicator of folate deficiency. Serum immunoglobulin concentrations until they are within the normal range and the hemoglobin and serum folate levels are normal and stable

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 If possible, folic acid should be avoided as a treatment of HFM. Although folic acid is very stable and inexpensive, and is the most common pharmacologic source of folate, it is not a physiologic folate. Folic acid binds very tightly to folate receptors, which transport the physiologic folate, 5-methylTHF, into cells by an endocytic mechanism [Kamen & Smith 2004]. Thus, folic acid may interfere with the interaction between 5-methylTHF and folate receptors required for 5-methylTHF transport across the choroid plexus into the cerebrospinal fluid [Grapp et al 2013, Zhao et al 2017].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include the following: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Molecular genetic testing of younger at-risk sibs who have not undergone prenatal testing should be performed immediately after birth. Those with biallelic SLC46A1 pathogenic variants should be treated with 5-formyltetrahydrofolate immediately. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known and genetic testing is not possible, assessment of blood and CSF folate levels and, if warranted, intestinal absorption of folate in at-risk sibs immediately after birth, or as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed in the proband See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 There is no systematic information on the outcome of pregnancy in women with HFM. Although the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) is highly expressed in the placenta [Qiu et al 2006], a woman with homozygous pathogenic variants in SLC46A1 that resulted in no PCFT protein production had two normal pregnancies and delivered two healthy infants. The affected woman’s parenteral 5-formylTHF dose was increased when pregnancy was planned [Poncz et al 1981; Poncz & Cohen 1996; Min et al 2008; Goldman, personal communication to Author]. Women with HFM who wish to become pregnant should increase their dose of 5-formylTHF intake above the maintenance dose well in advance of attempting to conceive. Prenatal vitamins are available containing 5-methylTHF rather than folic acid. Of note, infants with HFM do not appear to be at an increased risk for malformations (e.g., neural tube defects) typically associated with maternal folate deficiency during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.