http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fragilex

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Fragile X syndrome. To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with fragile X syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete developmental and educational assessments (including speech and language evaluation and occupational/physical therapy evaluation) for educational planning Behavioral and psychological assessment to determine the presence of concentration/attention problems, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, aggression, and depression In infants, feeding assessment (including attention to possible gastroesophageal reflux) Physical examination to evaluate for hypotonia and/or connective tissue findings, primarily joint hyperextensibility and pes planus Cardiac auscultation for mitral valve prolapse. If indicated by a murmur or click, consider echocardiography (usually in adulthood). Assessment for hypertension History for possible seizure activity Ophthalmologic evaluation for possible strabismus In young children, history and physical examination for evidence of recurrent otitis media FXTAS. To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FXTAS, the following are recommended: Neurologic examination Behavioral and psychological assessment Neuroradiologic evaluation POI. To establish the extent of disease in a woman diagnosed with POI, gynecologic evaluation including hormonal and/or ultrasonographic assessment is appropriate. Note: The diagnosis of POI does not eliminate the possibility of subsequent conception. A premutation carrier woman had a child with fragile X syndrome after being diagnosed with POI [Corrigan et al 2005, Nelson et al 2005]. It is estimated that 5%-10% of women with POI may conceive after the diagnosis [Nelson et al 2005].

Treatment of Manifestations

Fragile X syndrome. No specific treatment is available. Supportive therapy for children and adults with fragile X syndrome currently consists of the following [Hagerman et al 2009, Utari et al 2010]: Recognition of the need for special education and anticipatory management such as the avoidance of excessive stimulation whenever possible may ameliorate some of the behavioral difficulties. Early educational intervention, special education, and vocational training should be aimed specifically at the known impediments to learning. Parents and teachers of children with fragile X syndrome have recognized the need for individual attention, small class size, and the avoidance of sudden change. More specific guidelines are available through education resources (see Resources). Pharmacologic management of behavioral issues that significantly affect social interaction is appropriate. No particular pharmacologic treatment has been shown to be uniquely beneficial; therapy must be individualized and closely monitored. A closely monitored and integrated program of behavioral management and pharmacologic treatment with an experienced developmental team may prove to be beneficial. Routine medical management of strabismus, otitis media, gastroesophageal reflux, seizures, mitral valve prolapse, and hypertension is appropriate. FXTAS. No specific treatment is available. Supportive care for problems with gait and/or cognitive deficits may require assistance with activities of daily living. POI. No specific treatment is available. Gynecologic or reproductive endocrinologic evaluation can provide appropriate treatment and counseling for reproductive options.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Folic acid should be avoided in individuals with poorly controlled seizures [Hagerman 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.