http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/friedreich

Management

Guidelines have been published to assist with management of FRDA [Corben et al 2014, www.curefa.org].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the following evaluations are recommended, if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis: Neurologic assessment Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment of strength and balance, need for adaptive aids, and the home and work environment Speech and swallowing assessment Assessment for significant scoliosis; assessment by an orthopedic surgeon, as needed ECG and echocardiogram for evidence of cardiomyopathy; assessment by a cardiologist if abnormal Bladder function with referral to a urologist if severe symptoms are present Assessment for obstructive sleep apnea and referral for formal assessment and management if present Random blood glucose concentration for evidence of diabetes mellitus Ophthalmologic assessment if ophthalmologic symptoms are present Hearing assessment and referral for amplification apparatus if required Psychological assessment Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There is little objective evidence regarding management of FRDA. A multidisciplinary approach is essential for maximal benefit because FRDA affects multiple organ systems: Prostheses, walking aids, wheelchairs, and physical therapy as prescribed by a physiatrist (rehabilitation medicine specialist) to maintain an active lifestyle In-patient rehabilitation, which has been shown to improve physical function as measured by the Functional Independence Measure [Milne et al 2012] Occupational therapy assessment to ensure a safe home and work environment To manage spasticity: physical therapy including stretching programs, standing frame and splints, pharmacologic agents such as baclofen and botulinum toxin. Intrathecal baclofen can be beneficial where oral administration is unsuccessful or side effects are excessive [Berntsson et al 2013]. Orthopedic interventions, both operative and non-operative, for scoliosis [Milbrandt et al 2008] and foot deformities [Delatycki et al 2005] may be necessary. Speech therapy to maximize communication skills Management of dysphagia that may include dietary modification and, in the late stages of disease, use of nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding Treatment of cardiac disease to reduce morbidity and mortality, including antiarrhythmic agents, anticardiac failure medication, anticoagulants, and pacemaker/implantable cardioverter defibrillator insertion [Lynch et al 2012a]. Cardiac transplantation is more controversial but has been used particularly when there is severe cardiac disease in the setting of mild neurologic symptoms [Sedlak et al 2004, Yoon et al 2012, McCormick et al 2017]. Antispasmodic agents for bladder dysfunction, with some individuals requiring botulinum toxin for the bladder and some requiring intermittent or permanent catheterization Treatment of sleep apnea by continuous positive airway pressure Treatment of diabetes mellitus with diet and, if necessary, oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin Hearing aids, microphone, and receiver as needed [Rance et al 2010] (see also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview) Psychological (counseling and/or pharmacologic) support for affected individuals and family

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

Measures include the following: Active management of spasticity with physiotherapy and botulinum toxin to prevent permanent contracture and the need for surgery Treatment of scoliosis with physiotherapy, botulinum toxin, and surgery to prevent cardiopulmonary complications that can result from severe scoliosis Treatment of diabetes mellitus to prevent complications that can arise from untreated/inadequately treated diabetes Treatment of cardiac complications of FRDA to prevent arrhythmias that can result in mortality Treatment of sleep apnea to prevent neurologic and cardiopulmonary complications that can result from untreated sleep apnea

Surveillance

Published clinical management guidelines provide detailed discussion of recommended surveillance [Corben et al 2014, www.curefa.org]. The following are appropriate. If ECG and echocardiogram performed at the time of initial diagnosis are normal, annual repeat testing Annual fasting blood sugar to monitor for diabetes mellitus Hearing assessment every two to three years or more often if symptoms are present. This should include testing of hearing in background noise, as it is more often abnormal than the common audiogram assessed in a quiet environment [Rance et al 2008] Sleep study to investigate for obstructive sleep apnea if concerns are raised by clinical history or a screening test such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol can exacerbate ataxia and should be consumed in moderation. Illicit drugs may well affect neuronal well-being and may exacerbate FRDA and thus should be avoided. Environments that place an ambulant individual at risk for falls (e.g., rough surfaces) should be avoided. Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with FRDA comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

Close cardiac monitoring is recommended in any woman with FRDA during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

A summary of therapies under investigation can be found online. Deficiency of frataxin results in abnormal accumulation of intramitochondrial iron, defective mitochondrial respiration, and overproduction of oxygen free radicals with evidence of oxidant-induced intracellular damage (see Molecular Genetics). Antioxidant therapy by free radical scavengers (coenzyme Q10, vitamin E, and idebenone, a short-chain analog of coenzyme Q10) and chelation therapy have been considered potential treatments for slowing the progression of FRDA.

Antioxidant Therapy


Coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E Following three to six months' antioxidant treatment with coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E, Lodi et al [2001] showed improved ATP production in the heart and skeletal muscle of individuals with FRDA. An open-label trial of these agents in ten individuals for 47 months resulted in sustained improvement in bioenergetics and improved cardiac function, as assessed by increased fractional shortening [Hart et al 2005]. A study that compared low-dose coenzyme Q10 (30 mg/day) to high-dose coenzyme Q10 (600 mg/day) and vitamin E (2100 IU/day) over two years found no difference in the change in International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) score between the two groups [Cooper et al 2008]. A significant proportion of individuals with FRDA had low serum coenzyme Q10 levels. Idebenone has shown promise as a treatment for FRDA: A reduction in left ventricular hypertrophy has been found in some studies [Hausse et al 2002, Buyse et al 2003, Mariotti et al 2003] but not in others [Lagedrost et al 2011]. A Phase II clinical trial of three doses of idebenone (5, 15, and 45 mg/kg) compared to placebo suggested a dose-related neurologic benefit as measured by the ICARS [Di Prospero et al 2007]. However, no significant neurologic benefit was shown in a Phase III study of idebenone conducted on 70 individuals with FRDA age eight to 18 years [Lynch et al 2010]. The results of another Phase III study from Europe are expected to be published shortly. A0001 (α-tocopheryl quinone) is an antioxidant with superior bioavailability to idebenone. It showed promise in a small one-month placebo controlled study [Lynch et al 2012b]. EPI-743. A0001 is no longer being developed but a related compound, EPI-743, is being evaluated in placebo-controlled studies in adults and children with FRDA. Results from this study have not yet been published.

Chelation Therapy

Iron chelators have been proposed as a possible therapy for lowering the intramitochondrial iron overload. Nonspecific iron chelators (e.g., desferrioxamine) for the specific reduction of mitochondrial iron overload may not be effective; a clinical trial was terminated for lack of efficacy. The oral iron chelator deferiprone showed promise as a treatment for FRDA in an open-label study [Boddaert et al 2007]. Iron in the cerebellar dentate nucleus was reduced as measured by MRI; neurologic benefit was suggested. However, a Phase II placebo-controlled study of deferiprone demonstrated worsening of ataxia in those treated with 40 mg/kg/day with reduced left vertricular mass index in those on 20 and 40 mg/kg/day [Pandolfo et al 2014]. An 11-month open-labeled study of combined low-dose deferiprone and low-dose idebenone (both given at 20 mg/kg/day) found a significant reduction in intraventricular septum thickness and left ventricular mass index over the course of the study [Velasco-Sánchez et al 2011]. Although there was no significant change in the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale score, some subscale scores showed significant increases and others showed significant decreases over the course of the study. Desferrioxamine along with pyridoxal isonicotinoyl hydrazone, a mitochondrial permeable ligand, limited cardiac hypertrophy in a conditional Fxn knockout mouse model [Whitnall et al 2008].

Increasing Frataxin Levels

Because the abnormal GAA repeat expansion results in reduced quantities of normal FXN transcript and frataxin protein, a number of studies have been conducted to identify compounds that increase their levels. This is achieved mainly by increasing FXN expression and stabilizing the FXN transcript and frataxin protein. In some cases the exact mechanism underlying the increase in frataxin levels is not yet understood. Agents that have been found to increase frataxin levels in cellular models include hemin, butyric acid [Sarsero et al 2003], and erythropoietin [Sturm et al 2005]. An open-label study of erythropoietin resulted in increased frataxin levels and significant decrease in the levels of urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine and serum peroxides, which are markers of oxidative stress [Boesch et al 2007]. An in vitro study showed that carbamylated erythropoietin, which does not bind to the erythropoietin receptor and therefore is non-erythropoietic, increased frataxin to levels similar to native erythropoietin [Sturm et al 2010]. A Phase II study of carbamylated erythropoietin did not identify any clinical benefit nor evidence of increase in frataxin levels after 43 days’ treatment [Boesch et al 2014]. A small six-month placebo-controlled study of erythropoietin did not identify any biochemical or clinical benefit of treatment [Mariotti et al 2012]. A placebo-controlled study of epoetin alfa did not identify benefit for peak oxygen uptake in an exercise test, frataxin levels nor neurologic outcomes [Saccà et al 2016]. Specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors show much promise as treatments for FRDA through upregulation of FXN expression [Herman et al 2006, Libri et al 2014, Soragni et al 2014]. A Phase I human trial of RG2833, a class I HDAC inhibitor molecule that is known to reverse the epigenetic silencing in FRDA [Soragni et al 2014, Chutake et al 2016], was shown to be well tolerated and resulted in increased production of FXN transcript in vivo [Soragni et al 2014]. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3), a class III HDAC inhibitor, was shown to increase frataxin expression in FRDA cell and mouse models [Chan et al 2013]. An open-label dose escalation study of nicotinimide in FRDA showed a dose-dependent increase in FXN transcript and protein, achieving levels seen in asymptomatic carriers [Libri et al 2014]. However, no changes were observed in clinical measures in this short eight-week trial. Interferon gamma was found to upregulate frataxin in cell and mouse models of FRDA [Tomassini et al 2012]. It also prevents pathologic changes in dorsal root ganglia and improves motor performance in a FRDA mouse model. An open-label study of interferon gamma showed evidence of neurologic improvement as assessed by FARS score, without any increase in frataxin levels [Seyer et al 2015]. A placebo controlled study was subsequently performed and failed to meet its primary end point [Author, personal communication]. Resveratrol has also been shown to upregulate frataxin expression in vitro and in vivo [Li et al 2013]. An open-label study of 1 g/day and 5 g/day of resveratrol for three months did not result in increased lymphocyte frataxin levels [Yiu et al 2015]. Those on 5 g/day had significant improvement in a number of neurologic tests and in the oxidative stress marker F2-isoprostanes. A placebo-controlled study is to commence shortly.

Other Therapies

Varenicline, an agent used to assist with smoking cessation, was identified as a possible therapy for ataxia [Zesiewicz et al 2009]; however, a Phase II study was prematurely terminated due to concerns about safety and tolerability of the drug. PPAR gamma agonists have been suggested as therapies for FRDA because they increase frataxin levels in vitro [Marmolino et al 2009] and improve antioxidant responses [Marmolino et al 2010]. A Phase II study of one PPAR gamma agonist, pioglitazone, is underway. An open-label study of thiamine (vitamin B1) in 34 individuals with FRDA (100 mg intramuscular 2x/week for between 80 and 930 days) revealed improvement of neurologic symptoms as measured by SARA, reappearance of deep tendon reflexes in 57%, and reduction in intraventricular septal thickness [Costantini et al 2016]. Gene therapy to supplement the loss of function of frataxin is also under consideration. The cardiomyopathy of a conditional cardiac FXN deletion mouse model was both prevented and reversed by intravenous FXN delivered by an adeno-associated virus vector [Perdomini et al 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.