http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fryns

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Fryns syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Chest and abdominal radiographs Cranial ultrasound examination Echocardiogram Abdominal ultrasound examination Examination for dysmorphic features and digital anomalies by a clinical geneticist Depending on the clinical situation, further evaluation with a cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, a complete radiographic skeletal survey, and a detailed ophthalmologic examination should be considered to evaluate for other physical findings that could be present.

Treatment of Manifestations

The physical manifestations of Fryns syndrome are treated by surgery and/or supportive measures in the same way that the same manifestations are treated when they are not part of a syndrome. However, treatment of the diaphragmatic hernia often takes precedence over the management of other anomalies present. For congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), the neonate is immediately intubated to prevent inflation of herniated bowel. Medical therapies are used to stabilize the infant prior to surgical repair. High-frequency oscillatory ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) have achieved recent popularity in the treatment of CDH [Fallon et al 2013] but proof of improved survival with ECMO has not been established [Losty 2014]. Nitric oxide and surfactant have also been trialed as therapies for persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN). In Fryns syndrome, additional anomalies may dictate further consultations; management by a pediatric neurologist, pediatric cardiologist, pediatric gastroenterologist, pediatric nephrologist, and a craniofacial team may be appropriate. See also Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Overview.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The diaphragmatic defects in Fryns syndrome may be amenable to surgical repair in the prenatal period. Survival in a controlled trial of open hysterotomy-guided fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion versus conventional care was not improved; an experimental, minimally invasive approach called percutaneous fetal endoluminal tracheal occlusion is still being evaluated [Losty 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

For those with prenatally detected CDH, it is important to prevent lung injury that can result from inflation of bowel that has herniated into the chest and immediate intubation at birth has been recommended as above.

Surveillance

There are no specific surveillance guidelines for Fryns syndrome. In those who survive the neonatal period, surveillance depends on the types of malformations present and is specific to the individual. Infants with successful CDH repair should be followed by a multidisciplinary team at a specialized center, with periodic evaluations by a pediatric surgeon, nurse specialist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, and nutritionist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing of sibs at risk for Fryns syndrome requires an evaluation for physical anomalies (see Diagnosis and Management, Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis). If chromosome studies were not obtained on the proband, CMA to evaluate for the possibility of a chromosome disorder (see Differential Diagnosis) could be performed in the sib(s) at risk. A high index of suspicion for a chromosome aberration should prompt evaluation for deletions of the chromosomal loci associated with a Fryns syndrome-like phenotype. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancies are managed according to the malformations that have been diagnosed. One literature review concluded that fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) used as a prenatal interventional strategy can increase survival in cases with severe CDH [Cundy et al 2014], although this technique has most frequently been used for isolated CDH rather than Fryns syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Many different treatments are currently being evaluated for the management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.