http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/fsh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to assess strength and functional limitations

Evaluation for physical therapy and need for assistive devices

Assessment of hearing if the individual has symptomatic hearing loss

Ophthalmologic evaluation for the presence of retinal telangiectasias

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Standards of care and management of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy were agreed upon at the 171st ENMC International Workshop. A consensus on the following topics and the recommendations from that conference [Tawil et al 2010] are outlined below:


Physical therapy and rehabilitation

Consultation with a physical therapist is indicated.

Establishment of follow-up frequency is important at the time of diagnosis. Individuals with FSHD should be seen at a frequency based on their disease severity, which for some will be frequent initially, and may include occupational and speech therapy in infantile onset forms of FSHD. For others with mild involvement, annual visits would be appropriate.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation consultations can help establish appropriate exercise regimens and assistive devices that may enhance mobility and reduce the risk of falls in home environments.

Exercise in FSHD

Exercise with moderate weights is not detrimental to individuals with FSHD [Milner-Brown & Miller 1988, van der Kooi et al 2004].

Aerobic training (when possible) has been beneficial to affected individuals [Olsen et al 2005].

Any type of exercise regimen should be instituted under the guidance of a physical therapist and personalized according to the individual’s disease symptoms, age, and cardiovascular status.

Pain. Chronic pain should be managed by physical therapy and medication as necessary.

Respiratory dysfunction. Ventilatory support such as BiPAP should be considered as necessary for those with hypoventilation.

Hearing loss. Standard therapies for hearing loss, including amplification if necessary, are appropriate.

Ophthalmologic disease. Exposure keratitis may occur in individuals who sleep with their eyes partially open. Use of lubricants to prevent drying of the sclera or in more severe cases taping the eyes shut during sleep may be required.


Orthopedic intervention

Ankle/foot orthoses can improve mobility and prevent falls in individuals with foot drop.

Surgical fixation of the scapula to the chest wall often improves range of motion of the arms, although this gain can be short-lived in individuals with rapidly progressive disease [Diab et al 2005, Krishnan et al 2005, Giannini et al 2006]. Evaluation of such individuals prior to surgery is warranted to assure a functional and sustained benefit.

Surveillance 



For those with a confirmed diagnosis of FSHD, the following surveillance applies:

Pain. Pain should be assessed at regular visits to primary care physicians and physical therapists.


Respiratory dysfunction

Affected individuals with moderate to severe FSHD, defined as those with proximal lower extremity weakness, should be routinely screened for hypoventilation.

Yearly forced vital capacity (FVC) measurements should be monitored for all affected individuals who are wheelchair bound, have pelvic girdle weakness and superimposed pulmonary disease, and/or have moderate to severe kyphoscoliosis, lumbar hyperlordosis, or chest wall deformities.


Hearing loss

As in children who are at risk for hearing loss for other reasons, hearing can be followed routinely by periodic assessment as part of school-based testing.

Hearing screens are particularly important in severe infantile onset forms of FSHD, as hearing loss can result in delayed language acquisition.

Adults should have a formal hearing evaluation based purely on symptoms. No additional audiometry screening of asymptomatic individuals is necessary.


Ophthalmologic disease

Annual dilated ophthalmoscopy in childhood is indicated.

In adults, a dilated retinal exam should be performed at the time of diagnosis; if vascular disease is absent, follow-up exams are only necessary if visual symptoms develop.

In children known to be at risk for FSHD (because of family history) but for whom the diagnosis has not yet been confirmed, annual dilated ophthalmoscopy is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Outcome of 105 pregnancies in 38 women with FSHD was generally favorable [Ciafaloni et al 2006]. However, rates for low birth-weight infants, augmented extraction procedures such as forceps and vacuum assisted deliveries, delivery by Cesarean section, and anesthetic complications were higher than for the general population. Worsening of weakness occurred in 24% of the pregnancies, beginning during the pregnancy and generally not resolving after delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation



MYO-029, an antibody designed to inhibit the activity of myostatin and enhance the growth and strength of muscles, has been developed. Because results in animal models of muscular dystrophy indicated that this could result in increased strength, a clinical trial was initiated in 2005 and completed in 2007. The study was designed primarily as a safety study for antibody injection into humans and identification of side effects. The study had four treatment groups on increasing doses of MYO-029 and a group that received a placebo for comparison. Side effects from the highest dose of MYO-029 caused that group to be discontinued from the study. The injections were fairly well tolerated; hypersensitivity reactions (rashes, itching, and occasionally more systemic reactions) limiting the dose that could be injected were the most common reactions. Such reactions are generally expected for the injection of biologically active proteins into the blood stream.

With respect to FSHD, 22 people who received MYO-29 injections of various doses finished the study. A total of five withdrew voluntarily and four were in the high-dose cohort and were discontinued from the study. People who received the MYO-029 injections and placebo injections were evaluated for muscle strength (6 months of dosing and 3 months of follow-up for a total of 9 months). Using a number of both quantitative and subjective parameters, no difference in strength was measured or perceived by subjects in the study regardless of dose. The study authors [Wagner et al 2008] did state that many more subjects would have been necessary (160 with FSHD) to demonstrate a significant difference in strength, thus it cannot be concluded that the treatment was completely unsuccessful; further, the primary goal of the study was determination of safety rather than demonstration of increase in strength.

Muscle biopsies from subjects who received MYO-029 showed no significant adverse effect by several measures. A dose-dependent increase in fiber size diameter (essentially an increase in muscle size) was observed (low dose: 2% increase; medium dose: 2.2% increase; high dose: 5.3% increase in size). Thus, the MYO-029 appeared to have an effect on muscle.

The study also indicated that more potent inhibitors of myostatin are being developed [Wagner et al 2008].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



A 24-week trial of dilitazem did not improve findings in individuals with FSHD [Elsheikh et al 2007].

Steroids, albuterol, and creatine have not proven effective [Tawil & van der Maarel 2006].

Two controlled studies of oral albuterol in FSHD [Kissel et al 2001, van der Kooi et al 2004] did not show significant global improvement in strength despite a modest increase in muscle mass. A Cochrane review concluded that further study of albuterol in FSHD is needed [Rose & Tawil 2004].

Corticosteroids have been used in individuals who have evidence of inflammation on muscle biopsy. Although transient improvement in strength has been reported, a natural history-controlled study in eight individuals with FSHD revealed no improvement after 12 weeks of treatment with prednisone [Tawil et al 1997].