http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ftd-grn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GRN-related frontotemporal dementia (FTD-GRN), the following evaluations are recommended: Detailed general, neurologic, and family history Physical, neurologic, and cognitive examination Medical genetics consultation When clinical cognitive assessments are not informative enough, a neuropsychological assessment may be performed to provide a more comprehensive and objective view of a patient's cognitive function. Formal neuropsychological assessment requires comparison of the patient's raw score on a specific test to a large general population normative sample which is usually drawn from a population comparable to the person being examined. This allows for the patient's performance to be compared to a suitable control group, adjusted for age, gender, level of education, and/or ethnicity. While much more sensitive than bedside clinical cognitive examination, such assessment is resource intensive and time consuming.

Treatment of Manifestations

There is currently no known treatment for FTD-GRN or FTD in general. However, some behavioral symptoms such as apathy, impulsivity, and compulsiveness may respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Symptoms of roaming, delusions, and hallucinations may respond to antipsychotic medications. Although reports have suggested potential benefits with certain pharmacotherapy on management of FTD in general, evidence from randomized controlled trials is limited [Freedman 2007]. All of the following findings require confirmation with larger clinical trials. One double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over trial suggests that trazodone, a serotonergic agent, may be beneficial in treating the symptoms of irritability, agitation, depression, and eating disorders in FTD [Lebert et al 2004]. While an open-label study suggested some benefits on behavioral symptoms with paroxetine, a double-blind placebo-controlled trial of ten subjects found worsening of performance on paired associates learning, reversal learning, and delayed pattern recognition [Moretti et al 2003, Deakin et al 2004]. A study of galantamine in FTD-bv and primary progressive aphasia (PPA) found significant benefits in subjects with PPA but not in those with FTD-bv [Kertesz et al 2005]. A follow-up study of 36 individuals who were on galantamine therapy for 18 weeks revealed stabilization but not improvement on language scores in the PPA group [Kertesz et al 2008]. A 12-month open-label rivastigmine trial showed improvement of behavioral symptoms and decreased caregiver burden in individuals with FTD but the treatment did not prevent cognitive decline [Moretti et al 2004]. A double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over study of methylphenidate found attenuation of risk-taking behavior but worsening of spatial span [Rahman et al 2006]. A small clinical trial of dextroamphetamine treatment on eight individuals with FTD-bv revealed improvement of behavioral symptoms [Huey et al 2008]. A few open-label studies of memantine, a partial NMDA agonist, demonstrated an improvement on the frontal battery inventory (FBI) in individuals with FTD-bv after a six-month trial, but a decline in other cognitive performance was observed [Diehl-Schmid et al 2008]. Among the three subtypes of FTD, PPA-PNFA remained stable on cognitive and functional measurements when treated with memantine [Boxer et al 2009]. A study using [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) as a surrogate outcome in individuals with semantic dementia found that cortical metabolic activity in salience network hubs were sustained when treated with memantine over a six-month period [Chow et al 2013]. Note: Donepezil treatment has been associated with exacerbation of disinhibition and compulsion symptoms [Mendez et al 2007].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Limited epidemiologic studies suggest that head injury may be a risk factor for FTD in general, although this finding requires confirmation [Rosso et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A clinical trial on a formulation of methothioninium (TRx0237), a compound that has been shown to inhibit tau aggregation in preclinical studies and may also have effect on TDP-43, is currently underway for individuals with FTD-bv. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.