http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ftdp-17

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a MAPT-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: A structured general medical history and family history Physical examination and neurologic examination Evaluation of the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance by neuropsychological examination

Treatment of Manifestations

 Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations. Individuals with seizures are treated with antiepileptic drugs. The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment. Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTDP-17 often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in FTD patients treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A Phase II trial with davunetide, a neuroactive peptide believed to stabilize microtubules, is investigating safety and tolerability of this drug in patients with tauopathies such as PSP, CBD, and FTDP-17. Several trials with memantine are underway in patients with FTD in general, as well as a trial with oxytocin and its effect on social cognition. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for more information on FTD studies and for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of other disorders and conditions.