http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/g6pc3-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with G6PC3 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Full blood count to look for evidence of other hematologic involvement (i.e., intermittent thrombocytopenia and/or lymphopenia) Immunologic evaluation for T-cell subsets in individuals with a more severe presentation and unusual non-bacterial infections Consultation with a cardiologist to evaluate for congenital heart disease Renal and pelvic ultrasound examination to look for urogenital malformations Growth parameters in children and pubertal development in adolescents Age appropriate endocrine assessment for evidence of the hormone deficiencies reported (i.e., growth hormone, gonadotropins, thyroid hormone) Biochemical investigations to look for abnormalities in the lipid profile Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Neutropenia. Treatment with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) improves neutrophil numbers, reduces the number of infections, and improves the quality of life [Boztug et al 2009, McDermott et al 2010, Boztug et al 2012]. Of note, the dose required to keep absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L can vary greatly among patients. In some patients G-CSF -- even in large doses -- may fail to control infections [Smith et al 2012]. A few mildly affected individuals have been reported to be adequately managed with prophylactic antibiotics alone [Banka et al 2013]. However, prophylactic antibiotics have a limited use for preventing severe infections or bronchiectasis and inflammatory bowel disease. Fevers and infections require prompt treatment with antibiotics. 
Other

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Good dental hygiene, including careful brushing and flossing and regular visits to the dentist, helps decrease the potential for infection. Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered with dental procedures, including routine dental repair and cleaning, especially in individuals with heart defects.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Routine management of congenital heart disease, renal and urinary tract malformations Routine management of hormone deficiencies Consideration of oral steroids for inflammatory bowel disease [Desplantes et al 2014] or anti-TNF treatment [Bégin et al 2013]. Some complications of IBD such as bowel stenosis may require appropriate surgical intervention. Consideration of pancreatic enzyme supplementation if steatorrhea is present [Desplantes et al 2014] Chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for acute myelogeneous leukemia Frequent follow up by a hematologist or immunologist to monitor infection frequency and neutrophil counts to ensure an adequate response to G-CSF (i.e., absolute neutrophil counts above 0.5x109/L) Monitoring of growth in children and pubertal development in adolescents Biochemical profile including lipid profile Monitoring for development of varicose veins, especially in adults Monitoring for osteopenia/osteoporosis If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the G6PC3 pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the following evaluations can be used to help clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs: full blood count, bone marrow examination (if persistent severe neutropenia is detected on full blood count), directed general examination for prominence of superficial veins, echocardiogram, and a renal and pelvic ultrasound examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early diagnosis and management of the hematologic, cardiac, renal, and endocrine abnormalities of G6PC3 deficiency. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.