

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), the following evaluations are recommended: Medical genetics consultation Physical examination with particular attention to blood pressure and peripheral pulses, as well as presence of bowing of the long bones (i.e., evidence of autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets) Metabolic workup including serum creatinine, serum phosphorus, urine phosphorus, urine creatinine, and alkaline phosphatase to evaluate for evidence of hypophosphatemic rickets by measuring the tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP) and the ratio of the renal tubular maximum reabsorption rate of phosphate to the glomerular filtration rate (TmP/GFR) Serum levels of cardiac-specific troponin T or troponin I to evaluate for evidence of ischemia Pediatric cardiology consultation including: ECG to assess for signs of left ventricular hypertrophy or ischemia Echocardiogram to monitor left ventricular systolic function and to assess for the presence of calcifications, left ventricular hypertrophy, or pericardial effusion CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis (if possible with runoff to lower extremities) to evaluate the extent and distribution of vascular calcification Skeletal survey to assess for either periarticular calcification or findings typical of rickets such as widening of the growth plate, bowing of the long bones, or metaphyseal widening, cupping, or fraying. Include cervical films to evaluate for cervical spine fusion. Audiologic assessment for conductive or sensorineural hearing loss Pediatric nephrology consultation in the setting of refractory hypertension

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Treatment of arterial calcification
           Bisphosphonate therapy. In a non-randomized, retrospective study, Rutsch et al [2008] compared 43 infants who survived their first day of life (including 17 treated with bisphosphonates) to 26 who did not receive bisphosphonates. Infants treated with bisphosphonates showed significantly increased survival (p=0.026, log-rank test).  Etidronate, a non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate, is the most commonly used based on its potent antimineralization effect. Etidronate doses vary from 5 mg/kg/d [Corbatón Blasco et al 1991] to as high as 35 mg/kg/d [Van Dyck et al 1989], with a usual dose of 20 mg/kg/d [Edouard et al 2011].  Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates such as pamidronate and risedronate were originally formulated to be more potent antiresorptive drugs and, thus, to have a less potent antimineralization effect at therapeutic levels [Otero et al 2013]. The dose of pamidronate has varied from 0.1 mg/kg/week to as high as 5 mg/kg/d IV [Rutsch et al 2008]; the dose of risedronate is 1 mg/kg/week PO [Ramjan et al 2009]. Of note, death can occur even if treatment is started early with etidronate [Stuart et al 1990, Stuart 1993, Galletti et al 2011] or pamidronate [Kalal et al 2012]. After initiation of therapy, vascular calcifications have been reported to disappear as early as 2.5 weeks (as assessed by x-rays, a relatively insensitive method) [van der Sluis et al 2006] and as late as two years [Meradji et al 1978]. Vascular calcifications do not reappear after discontinuation of treatment [Meradji et al 1978], even after ten years [van der Sluis et al 2006]. However, arterial stenosis has been known to persist despite resolution of calcification [Thiaville et al 1994]. Periarticular calcifications have disappeared in some individuals [Meradji et al 1978], whereas in others they have persisted despite treatment, disappearing only after treatment was discontinued [Otero et al 2013].Prolonged etidronate use in patients with GACI has been associated with severe skeletal toxicity, including radiographic findings resembling hypophosphatasia (pan craniosynostosis, bowing of long bones, metaphyseal cupping and fraying, radiolucent tongues) or osteopetrosis (osteosclerosis and femoral Erlenmeyer flask deformity) [Otero et al 2013]. The optimal duration of treatment remains unclear, with reports of children being treated for almost 18 months [van Dyck et al 1989], two years [Edouard et al 2011], three years [Ramjan et al 2009], and almost seven years (in 1 child) [Otero et al 2013]. Given the risk of severe adverse skeletal effects with prolonged bisphosphonate treatment and the failure of calcifications to reappear after discontinuation of treatment, some authors recommend close monitoring for resolution of arterial calcifications during treatment so that use of bisphosphonates can be discontinued as soon as possible [Otero et al 2013]. From current available data (which are limited by small sample size and lack of randomized control data) it is difficult to determine if bisphosphonate treatment is truly protective or if resolution of findings reflects the natural history of the disease. 
            Cardiovascular treatment
           Anti-hypertensive therapy. Since standard anti-hypertensive therapy is warranted for hypertension and since hypertension in GACI is likely caused by renal artery stenosis, in theory it may be beneficial to use medications that act on the renin-angiotensin system, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs).  In one case, severe hypertension refractory to conventional treatment responded to prostaglandin infusion (PGE1) at a dose of 0.017-0.068 μg/kg/min [Ciana et al 1997].  Prevention of coronary thrombosis. Aspirin therapy is warranted in patients with severe coronary stenosis, who are at increased risk for coronary thrombosis. Treatment of hearing loss. Patients with sensorineural hearing loss may benefit from hearing aids. Treatment of hypophosphatemic rickets involves calcitriol and oral phosphate supplements in standard doses of 15 ng/kg/d (calcitriol) and 40-60 mg/kg/d (phosphate) [Lorenz-Depiereux et al 2010], with doses adjusted according to serum phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase levels.  Hypercalciuria should be avoided in patients with hypophosphatemic rickets treated with calcitriol or other vitamin D analogs. Freychet et al [2014] reported one patient with biallelic ENPP1 mutations with calciuria of 5 mg/kg/d after institution of alfacalcidol who developed new-onset nephrocalcinosis; cardiac, hepatic, and pancreatic calcifications as evaluated by ultrasound; and recurrence of previously regressed periarticular calcifications as assessed by x-ray. While most of these calcifications regressed when the calciuria was maintained at less than 4 mg/kg/d, the nephrocalcinosis remained unchanged. Thus, it seems prudent to monitor calciuria in order to maintain it at levels below 4 mg/kg/d. Orthopedics consultation should be obtained if bone deformities develop as a consequence of hypophosphatemic rickets, as surgical interventions may be necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Patients with GACI are predisposed to periarticular calcifications, and at least two individuals with cervical spine fusion have been reported [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008, Nitschke et al 2012]. Thus, it seems prudent to perform a lateral cervical spine x-ray when elective endotracheal intubation is necessary, for example, prior to surgery. In persons with cervical spine fusion, fiberoptic intubation is recommended and, if hypertension is also present, a nasal route may be preferred over an oral route since it produces a less prominent pressor response [Gopalakrishnan et al 2008].

Surveillance

 No specific guidelines address the issue of surveillance. The appropriate intervals for monitoring depend on the clinical findings, and need to be more frequent in those with a more severe presentation.  One individual reported in the literature was followed with clinical evaluation and assessment of mineral homeostasis every three months; echocardiography, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), and low-dose radiation CT every six months; and x-rays of the wrists and knees every year [Edouard et al 2011]. Another individual was followed with weekly assessment of mineral homeostasis and troponin, monthly echocardiograms, and CT every three to four months [Michael A Levine, personal communication].  When individuals with GACI develop hypophosphatemic rickets that requires treatment with calcitriol and phosphorus supplementation, urine calcium should be followed regularly so as to avoid hypercalciuria.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although there have been no clinical studies, it seems prudent to avoid the use of warfarin if possible because matrix Gla protein (MGP), a potent anti-mineralization factor, needs to be activated by a vitamin K-dependent enzyme, and warfarin interferes with the vitamin K cycle. Warfarin has also been shown to accelerate ectopic mineralization in Abcc6 knockout mice [Li et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the younger sibs of a proband with GACI in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.  If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, imaging studies can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Pregnancy needs to be managed by a high-risk maternal fetal obstetrician.  Bisphosphonates have been tried antenatally, with both unsuccessful [Stuart 1993] and successful results [Michael A Levine, personal communication].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder. 

Other

 Intravenous sodium thiosulfate 25% diluted in D5W has been tried in at least two individuals at a dose of 12.5 mg/m2/day [Michael A Levine, personal communication]. Therapy was discontinued at age one year in one and at age three years in the other. Although both children are still alive at the ages of one and three years, it is not known if this is due to the natural course of the disease or a beneficial effect of the sodium thiosulfate. Of note, the daily administration of sodium thiosulfate requires the insertion of a central venous catheter. No individuals with GACI have been reported to have received a heart transplant. One patient listed for transplant had a left ventricular assist device placed, but expired before she could receive the transplant [Glatz et al 2006].