

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with giant axonal neuropathy (GAN), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of development/cognitive abilities to establish the extent of disease and monitor progression or attempted intervention Medical genetics consultation The following investigations may be used to confirm clinically apparent problems but also to uncover subclinical involvement of PNS and CNS lesions which are not clinically apparent: Clinical and electrophysiologic (sensory and motor NCVs, electromyography) examination of the peripheral motor and sensory nervous system (including assessment of the function of cranial nerves) to establish the extent of disease and monitor progression Neuroophthalmologic examination to look for nystagmus resulting from cerebellar dysfunction or strabismus caused by involvement of cranial nerves III, IV, or VI EEG, somatosensory and motor evoked potentials, and brain MRI to determine the degree of CNS involvement

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment, focused on managing the clinical findings, often involves a team including (pediatric) neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, physiotherapists, psychologists, and speech and occupational therapists. Major goals are to optimize intellectual and physical development and, later in life, to slow the inevitable deterioration of these capacities. Note: Early intellectual development is nearly normal in many affected children, enabling them to attend a normal school initially; however, significant intellectual impairment usually occurs before the second decade of life. Treatment includes the following: Speech and occupational therapy to improve communication and activities of daily living Early intervention and special education directed to the individual's disability. Frequent reassessment is needed because of the progressive nature of the disorder. Special education often becomes necessary between ages five and 12 years. Physiotherapy (typically for distal weakness, ataxia, and spasticity) to preserve mobility as long as possible Orthopedic surgery as required for foot deformities (Note, however, that most affected individuals become wheelchair bound between ages ten and 20 years for other reasons.) Appropriate ophthalmologic treatment (e.g., surgery or glasses), especially if diplopia occurs

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Wheelchair-bound or bedridden patients require frequent examination for decubitus ulcers and appropriate prophylaxis.

Surveillance

 The following should be monitored in persons with GAN: Intellectual development/deterioration Progression of the peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, spasticity, and cranial nerve dysfunction The frequency of the monitoring should depend on disease progression; annual or more frequent evaluation is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.