http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gata1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GATA1-related cytopenia, the following are recommended: Complete blood count and examination of the peripheral smear to assess the degree of cytopenia(s) Detailed history of age at which hematologic disease was manifest Documentation of abnormal/unexpected bleeding episodes and platelet counts obtained at the time of the episodes to help determine whether platelet function is abnormal and whether disease severity has changed over time Note: Platelet aggregation studies may also be useful to identify functional abnormalities that predict a greater risk of bleeding for any given platelet count, but studies can be difficult to interpret when platelet counts are lower than 100,000/μL. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with GATA1-related cytopenia are treated supportively. Thrombocytopenia. Individuals with moderate to severe epistaxis, gingival bleeding, or gastrointestinal bleeding should receive platelet transfusions. Transfusion requirements vary from person to person as bleeding can be related to quantitative and/or qualitative platelet defects. For individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects, DDAVP treatment may be helpful for short-term management of mild to moderate bleeding. Individuals who are only mildly symptomatic (easy bruisability without mucosal or more severe bleeding) do not require specific treatment. There is no evidence that splenectomy is beneficial in people with GATA1-related disease, although this treatment may be considered if splenomegaly is severe. Although splenectomy may improve the cytopenias, platelet dysfunction will not be improved. Anemia. Erythrocyte transfusions are indicated when anemia is symptomatic (fatigue, tachycardia). Iron overload and the development of alloantibodies may limit chronic transfusion therapy. Extended pre-transfusion red blood cell phenotyping and matching for minor erythrocyte antigens in individuals receiving frequent transfusions can reduce the risk of alloimmunization. Neutropenia. Individuals with neutropenia who present with fever should be evaluated promptly with a physical examination, complete blood count, and blood culture and should receive appropriate parenteral antibiotics. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). For severe cases, BMT can be curative [Hollanda et al 2006, Phillips et al 2007, Parrella et al 2014]. BMT should be considered in individuals with severe phenotypes of GATA1-related cytopenia, particularly if an HLA-matched donor is available. While BMT may offer a cure, clinical experience with BMT in this disease is limited and families must be counseled on the significant risks and morbidity associated with BMT.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The only definitive cure for GATA1-related cytopenia is bone marrow transplantation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should receive a platelet transfusion prior to surgical or invasive dental procedures. Individuals with neutropenia should be counseled regarding their increased risk of infection. They should avoid crowds and contact with individuals who have communicable diseases. When febrile, those who are severely neutropenic (absolute neutrophil count <500/µL) should seek medical attention; typically blood cultures are obtained and parenteral antibiotics are administered to avoid the possibility of life-threatening sepsis.

Surveillance

Depending on the phenotype of the disease, complete blood counts should be monitored so that supportive care can be provided as needed. Individuals with mild cytopenias require infrequent monitoring (yearly), while those with severe cytopenias who require transfusions should have complete blood counts monthly or as indicated by clinical signs and symptoms. Individuals undergoing repeated erythrocyte transfusions should be monitored for iron overload and managed appropriately with iron chelation therapy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with thrombocytopenia should avoid antiplatelet agents including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., ibuprofen). Individuals with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet aggregation defects should be advised to avoid contact sports or activities with a high risk of trauma. Individuals with significant neutropenia should avoid crowds and close contact with persons who have a communicable disease to minimize risk of infection. Individuals with significant splenomegaly should avoid contact sports, which involve increased risk for traumatic splenic rupture.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing for the familial GATA1 pathogenic variant; A screening complete blood count to evaluate for thrombocytopenia, anemia, or neutropenia. Note: Platelet, erythrocyte, and neutrophil counts can vary significantly in individuals with GATA1 pathogenic variants; normal results do not rule out the possibility that the relative has a GATA1 pathogenic variant. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Unlike immune-mediated platelet disorders such as immune thrombocytopenic purpura, GATA1-related thrombocytopenia does not respond to steroid or immunoglobulin therapy. Supplemental erythropoietin therapy is unlikely to be effective because the anemia is secondary to ineffective erythropoiesis, not erythropoietin deficiency.