http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gcps

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Most individuals diagnosed with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) have the craniofacial and limb anomalies only. As for all individuals with malformations, a dysmorphology examination is appropriate to exclude other anomalies. Sophisticated imaging, especially of the CNS, is not routinely indicated unless the clinician detects findings or symptoms that specifically indicate such an evaluation. Similarly, as most individuals with GCPS have normal development, screening beyond the standard Denver Developmental Screening test is not recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations *

The author is not aware of craniofacial reconstructive surgery being performed on individuals with GCPS as the widely spaced eyes and macrocephaly are generally not sufficiently severe to warrant surgery. Repair of polydactyly should be undertaken on an elective basis. Preaxial polydactyly of the hands is considered to be a higher priority for surgical correction than postaxial polydactyly of the hand or any type of polydactyly of the foot because of the importance of early and proper development of the prehensile grasp. Cutaneous syndactyly of the fingers is usually repaired if it is more than minimal. As is true for any malformation of the feet, surgical correction must be carefully considered. Cosmetic benefits and easier fitting of shoes can be outweighed by potential orthopedic complications. Seizures are treated symptomatically. *As with the diagnostic criteria (see Diagnosis), no published data support these recommendations, which are those of the author.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The only recognized preventable secondary complication may be developmental delay, which may be preventable or ameliorated by early intervention.

Surveillance *

Individuals with an OFC that is increasing faster than normal, signs of increased intracranial pressure, developmental delay, loss of milestones, or seizures should undergo appropriate CNS imaging studies to exclude hydrocephalus, other CNS abnormalities, or cerebral cavernous malformations (seen in some individuals with GCPS and large deletions [Bilguvar et al 2007; Author, unpublished observations]). *As with the diagnostic criteria (see Diagnosis), no published data support these recommendations, which are those of the author.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.