http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gefs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an SCN1A-related seizure disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination Cognitive neuropsychological evaluation Behavioral neuropsychological evaluation Electroencephalogram (EEG), including video EEG telemetry where ictal onset or semiology is unclear Clinical genetics evaluation [Pal et al 2010]

Treatment of Manifestations

 Care is best provided by a physician (e.g., pediatric epileptologist) familiar with the pharmacotherapy for this disorder. Seizure control is critical because children with SCN1A-related seizure disorder are at high risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP). In addition, prolonged acute seizures may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010]. Pharmacologic treatment focuses on the observations that abnormal SCN1A channels disproportionately affect GABA neurons [Yu et al 2006] and that the associated seizures respond optimally to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that bind to the GABA receptor: Clobazam (0.2-1 mg mg/kg/day), part of the standard of care in Europe, is now approved by the FDA in the US. Clobazam is FDA approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009]. Stiripentol (30-100 mg/kg/day) is accepted by epileptologists as an effective therapeutic agent in SCN1A-related seizure disorders. It is part of the early standard of care in Europe, and is used in the US after other conventional anticonvulsants have failed. It is not approved by the FDA for use in the US, but the evidence of effectiveness in SCN1A-related epilepsy is more specific than for any other agent (based on double-blind evaluation of seizure reduction in severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) [Chiron et al 2000]). As a result, stiripentol is not considered an “investigational” therapy. Thanh et al [2002] demonstrated efficacy of the drug when compared with placebo; only moderate side effects including drowsiness, loss of appetite, and occasional neutropenia in infants and young children were observed. In a recent US survey of 82 children with Dravet syndrome, stiripentol was found to be effective in reducing prolonged seizures [Wirrell et al 2013].Stiripentol, which acts directly on GABAA receptors [Quilichini et al 2006], is also a potent inhibitor of the hepatic enzymes CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. As a result, it increases the serum concentration of several common AEDs, including valproic acid, clobazam, and its metabolite nor-clobazam [Thanh et al 2002]. Doses above 50 mg/kg/day are usually not tolerated when used in conjunction with valproic acid and clobazam.Children older than age 12 years may not tolerate stiripentol because of digestive tract side effects and nausea [Thanh et al 2002]. Benzodiazepines. Individuals taking stiripentol must exercise caution in the use of benzodiazepines [Thanh et al 2002]. A single infusion of diazepam and clonazepam appears to be safe [Thanh et al 2002]. Topiramate [Coppola et al 2002] Valproic acid (10-30 mg/kg/day) [Thanh et al 2002] Ethosuximide. Can be effective for absence seizures. The dose is usually limited by gastrointestinal side effects, which can be minimized by more frequent dosing. Levetiracetam (20-80 mg/kg/day). Often effective, but may make seizures worse in some individuals [Caraballo et al 2010]. Potassium bromide. Not FDA-approved in the US, but widely used in Japan with reasonable effectiveness [Tanabe et al 2008]. Phenobarbital. Although effective, phenobarbital is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition. When it is taken in combination with stiripentol, the serum concentration of phenobarbital is increased because stiripentol slows the metabolism and excretion of barbiturates. Ketogenic diet.
Dressler et al [2010] report that seizures were reduced by more than 50% in 62.5% of persons with Dravet syndrome who stayed on the diet for six months. The findings of Nabbout et al [2011] in 15 individuals also support the use of the ketogenic diet in Dravet syndrome. Sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN1A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected. Due to the sedating effects of seizure medications and the possibility of respiratory depression (especially with benzodiazepines and barbiturates), parents are advised to take a CPR course. Routine seizure and personal safety counseling is indicated. Seizures are not always responsive to conventional AEDs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective for SCN1A-related SMEI seizures [Dravet et al 2002]: Ethosuximide and high-dose piracetam for myoclonic seizures Corticosteroids Immunoglobulins Non-medical interventions that families have reported to be helpful include the following [Nolan et al 2008]: Placement of an indwelling venous access device Creating a portable microenvironment Having a written emergency department protocol Establishing emergency routines for the family Assigning a parent on call to lessen the effect on the siblings Creating personal time to decrease parent stress Finding respite care Contacting an internet support group

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals experiencing atonic seizures or myoclonic-astatic epilepsy should be advised to wear a protective helmet. Although immunization may trigger a seizure, it does not affect the natural course of the disorder. McIntosh et al [2010] looked retrospectively at a cohort of 14 individuals with Dravet syndrome, and found no effect of immunization on cognitive outcome. These authors suggest that the immunization schedule not be altered and that the risk for fever following immunization could be reduced by providing a scheduled, long-acting NSAID (e.g., naproxen). The treating neurologist may also consider increasing the anticonvulsant dose(s) temporarily around the time of the immunization.

Surveillance

 Serial neuropsychological evaluation for neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral deterioration is appropriate. EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Several antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) which are effective for most forms of epilepsy can make seizures due to heterozygous SCN1A pathogenic variants worse: Carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and vigabatrin, which can induce or increase myoclonic seizures [Horn et al 1986, Guerrini et al 1998, Ceulemans et al 2004a] Phenytoin, which may worsen seizures and can induce choreoathetosis [Saito et al 2001] Rufinamide, which has a pharmacologic mechanism similar to carbamazepine and phenytoin and may exacerbate seizures as well Acetaminophen, which is hepatotoxic in overdose. Given the possibility of interaction with anticonvulsant medications, especially valproate and topiramate [Nicolai et al 2008], acetaminophen should be avoided. Any of the NSAIDs are effective as antipyretics, and represent much lower risk. Activities in which a sudden loss of consciousness could lead to injury or death should be avoided (e.g., bathing, swimming, driving, or working/playing at heights).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 In addition to the considerations described in Genetic Counseling, other pregnancy-related considerations include the following: Risk of major malformations (especially due to valproic acid exposure in utero [Samrén et al 1997]) and minor anomalies Advantages and disadvantages of increasing maternal periconceptional folic acid supplementation to 4000 µg daily, particularly when women are taking valproic acid or carbamazepine during pregnancy Effect of in utero exposure to anticonvulsants on future cognitive development [Meador et al 2009] Effect of anticonvulsants on hormonal methods of birth control Effects of anticonvulsants on conception; the risk for complications in mothers who are on anticonvulsants Effect of pregnancy on anticonvulsant metabolism Effect of pregnancy on maternal seizure control Pregnancy, family planning, and contraception are issues that should be raised with every female near childbearing age who has epilepsy. These considerations are not unique to or (aside from medication selection) significantly influenced by the presence of an SCN1A-related seizure disorder.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Cannabis-derived compounds (including cannabidiol [CBD], tetrahydrocannabinol [THC], and marijuana oils), collectively called “cannabinoids,” have received much attention from the media based on anecdotal experiences; however, there is currently no scientific evidence that they are effective. As a result, they should never be used in place of treatments that are known to be effective. A randomized clinical trial is required to determine whether cannabinoid treatment is effective. There has been rapid progress in starting such a trial, and it is expected to begin in 2014. Cannabinoids are bioactive and may have psychotropic and/or systemic side effects; they also may act as an immunosuppressant and an anti-inflammatory in animal models and thus should be studied carefully in immature humans before widespread use is considered [Rieder et al 2010, Bergamaschi et al 2011]. Thalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS) was reported by Andrade et al [2010] in two children with Dravet syndrome with ten-year follow up. One showed “marked improvement” after implantation, whereas the other received no benefit. Lacosamide has not been studied in SCN1A-related seizure disorders; however, there are theoretic reasons why it may be effective [Curia et al 2009]. Verapamil was reported to help two girls with severe epilepsy resulting from mutation of SCN1A [Iannetti et al 2009]; however, it has not been formally studied. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Persons with epilepsy should be made aware of local motor vehicle driving laws and physician reporting laws. Hippocampal sclerosis can occur as a secondary feature of SCN1A-related seizure disorders [Livingston et al 2009], but there is no proven role for surgery given the widespread epileptogenic potential in this disorder. Of note, Scheffer et al [2007] reported good outcomes after temporal lobe surgery in two persons with mutation of SCN1B.