http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/glc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), examination under anesthesia or sedation is warranted to make a complete assessment of both eyes. The examination includes the following:

Measurement of intraocular pressure (IOP) within the first few minutes of anesthesia

Measurement of corneal diameter

Examination of the anterior segment

Direct gonioscopy to rule out secondary glaucoma

Dilated fundus examination to evaluate for optic nerve damage

If the cornea is opaque, ultrasound biomicroscopy or optical coherence tomography to aid in evaluating the anterior segment structures

Measurement of axial length

If the child is examined under anesthesia, consent may be obtained to perform the appropriate surgical procedure after evaluation under anesthesia.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



The primary goal of treatment is to decrease IOP to prevent vision-threatening complications including corneal opacification and glaucomatous optic atrophy. Early treatment to control IOP will reverse some of these complications in children. A Cochcrane review analyzed the literature that addressed the surgical management of congenital glaucoma but could not draw any conclusions from the analysis [Ghate & Wang 2015].

Surgical treatment. The following approach is based on the work of deLuise & Anderson [1983], Ho & Walton [2004], Bowman et al [2011], Sharaawy & Bhartiya [2011], and Al-Obeidan et al [2014].

PCG is almost always managed surgically. The primary goal of surgery is to eliminate the resistance to aqueous outflow caused by the structural abnormalities in the anterior chamber angle. This goal may be accomplished through an internal approach (goniotomy) or an external approach (trabeculotomy or trabeculectomy).

In goniotomy, the surgeon visualizes the anterior chamber structures through a special lens (goniolens) to create openings in the trabecular meshwork. The goal of the procedure is to eliminate any resistance imposed by the abnormal trabecular meshwork. A clear cornea is necessary for direct visualization of the anterior chamber structures during this procedure.

In trabeculotomy, the trabecular meshwork is incised by cannulating Schlemm's canal with a metal probe or suture via an external opening in the sclera.

In trabeculectomy, a section of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal is removed under a partial thickness sclera flap to create a wound fistula [Morales et al 2013, Chen et al 2014a].

In deep sclerectomy the dissection of a deep scleral flap, deroofing of Schlemm's canal, and preserving the structural integrity of the trabecular meshwork results in improved aqueous outflow outside the anterior chamber.

Note: In contrast to goniotomy, deep sclerectomy, trabeculotomy, and trabeculectomy can be performed in individuals with advanced glaucoma and cloudy corneas.

Glaucoma drainage implants or cyclodestruction may be used to control IOP when initial surgical procedures have failed.

More than one surgical intervention may be necessary to control IOP; thus, significant morbidity is associated with both PCG and the currently available surgical treatment options. Individuals with milder forms of disease who present later in childhood often do well with a single surgical procedure and have an excellent visual prognosis later in life.

Clarity of the cornea and other ocular media, control of the ocular dimensions (corneal diameters and axial lengths), and optic nerve damage are important indicators of the course of the disease following surgery. Reported success rates for each (initial) procedure are approximately 80%. Infants with elevated IOP and cloudy corneas at birth have the poorest prognosis. The most favorable outcome is seen in infants in whom surgery is performed between the second and eighth month of life. With increasing age, surgery is less effective in preserving vision.

Medications. Beta-blockers (e.g., timolol), parasympathomimetics (e.g., pilocarpine), sympathomimetics (e.g., adrenergic agonists and alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and prostaglandin agonists have all been used. These medications, particularly the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists, may have severe side effects and must be used with caution in infants and children [Maris et al 2005, Papadopoulos & Khaw 2007].

Surgery should not be delayed in an attempt to achieve medical control of IOP.

Medication may be used preoperatively to lower the IOP to prevent optic nerve damage, to reduce the risk of sudden decompression of the globe, and to clear the cornea for better visualization during examination and surgery.

Postoperatively, medication may help control IOP until the success of the surgical procedure is established.

Medical therapy is also used when surgery may be life threatening or has led to incomplete control of the glaucoma [deLuise & Anderson 1983].

Treatment of refractive errors. Amblyopia from uncorrected refractive errors often associated with PCG must be treated to obtain optimal visual function.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Medications such as Phospholine Iodide® (echothiophate) need to be discontinued before surgery, especially if succinylcholine is used because of the danger of prolonged apnea.

Surveillance



Lifelong monitoring is necessary to ensure control of IOP to preserve remaining vision and to prevent further loss of vision; the intervals at which monitoring needs to be performed vary depending on the severity of disease and control of IOP.

Once IOP is controlled and the child is visually rehabilitated, follow up is typically every three months to keep IOP at the "target" level, which depends on the severity of the glaucomatous optic nerve damage and the age of the individual. Standard clinical follow-up tests include optic nerve photography and visual field testing. The complete ophthalmic evaluation often requires examination under anesthesia or sedation in infants and in young and uncooperative children. This process may be challenging to the individual, the family, and the treating physician [deLuise & Anderson 1983, Ho & Walton 2004].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Alpha-2 agonists should be avoided in children in the treatment of elevated IOP because of the risk for apnea and bradycardia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Testing at-risk sibs in the neonatal period may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis of PCG early and in avoiding repeated examinations under anesthesia in at-risk young children.

Molecular genetic testing alone is appropriate in sibs of affected individuals in whom the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified.

If the PCG-related pathogenic variant(s) have not been identified in an affected family member (i.e., no definitive exclusion of the disease is possible by molecular genetic testing), screening including IOP measurements under anesthesia/sedation may be necessary.

Note: The literature is unclear as to timing of the onset of glaucoma, especially in families in whom pathogenic variants have been identified. In this high-risk group, it may be appropriate to perform yearly glaucoma screening into young adulthood.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.